




















































Hansard: December 09, 1977


769 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 9, 1977 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Constitutionality of Bill 47 
 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Attorney General I 

would like to direct a question to the House leader opposite. Is it true that in order to prove the 

constitutionality of Bill 47 a decision of the Supreme Court, as to its validity, would have to be handed 

down and this decision would take from 12 to 18 months? Is it true that in the interim cash would have 

to be raised to repay the payments as they relate to Bill 42? 

 

MR. HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General is 

not now in the House. I think we would have to take the question under advisement. I don't have the   

that the member is asking for and perhaps it can be answered at a later date. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, again I turn this to the House leader. Why, 

Mr. House Leader opposite if you want speedy passage of this bill, as you have previously indicated, 

that is Bill 47, are you permitting as a group of individuals in this Assembly, in an apparent co-operative 

way with the Liberals, to adjourn debate each day after one short speech and thus delaying the bill from 

going to Committee of the Whole? The question I ask is, why the stalling tactics? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, we have not at any time, I 

don't think. indicated any need for a speedy passage of the legislation. To a question earlier asked of me 

in the House I indicated that our intention was to have the bill passed during this part of the session - 

that of course would hopefully be before the break for Christmas. With respect to the debate in second 

reading, I think it's our intent to give members an opportunity to debate, it's a very important piece of 

legislation. We have had some significant debate and I see indications of it picking up and I would hope 

the hon. member for Rosetown might join in the second reading debate. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I'll take the next question. The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

Shut Down Industrial Customers Re Power 
 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the minister in 

charge of SPC. With no sign of let up in the cold weather and with the power system of our province 

working at maximum capacity and with homes last night out of heat, will the minister tell the citizens of 

the province whether or not he is considering shutting down the industrial users of the province? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I believe all members know that during periods of time of adverse cold 

like we have been suffering from in the last few days and I guess will be suffering from for at least 

another several days, there is always an arrangement that can 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

770 

 

be brought into place in regard to large industrial customers so that we can cut back on their demands in 

order to assure the private citizens will have sufficient electrical power and gas in order to protect them 

from the adverse weather that we are suffering from at this time. 

 

MR. NELSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister tell us, did Sask Power export 

power from the province last week and did it export power this week and does it intend to export power 

from the province next week? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a difficult question to answer at this time. I 

could perhaps provide more specific information to the member at a later time. It is unlikely that we are 

exporting power during periods of time such as this because of the demand on our system. But we do 

have reciprocal agreements with especially the province of Manitoba where if we have a surplus of 

power, we are running at full capacity, and they are in need of it and our system is not using it we will 

transmit that power into Manitoba. If, on other occasions, we are in need of power because of a shortage 

of supply due to breakdown or extremely cold weather they will then return the power that we exported 

to that province. So that it's an ongoing situation in relation to peaking and demand situations. I again 

say, as I initially stated, that it is unlikely during these extremely cold periods of time we may be 

exporting power but there could be small sums of it going over to Manitoba and we may now be getting 

some of that back. 

 

MR. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If it is cold in Manitoba it 

would be difficult to decide which province the coldest weather was in. But has the minister taken any 

action to dim the lights in all the government buildings in this city and in the rest of the province? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect I don't think dimming the lights is really 

going to contribute very much to the kinds of demands that are being placed on the system. We have in 

place now a policy, an undertaking, to conserve power in government buildings and the buildings of 

government agencies. May I say, Mr. Speaker, that even though we have had some small outages of 

power throughout the province they have been very localized and it certainly hasn't emanated from an 

inability to produce sufficient power. It has been created because of short-term temporary breakdowns in 

the system, such as insulators and the like of that which are put under extreme stress under extremely 

cold weather and high delivery periods of power. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — To the minister responsible for Sask Power. Rate increases have 

been announced fairly regularly recently and in light of the problem raised by the member and the 

severe demands on power and gas in the province, at the time of the last rate increases you announced 

that it would have some hardship on say dairy farmers, would the government if this spell is prolonged 

consider implementing a special grant or rebate program to low income, senior citizens and those small 

businesses and small farmers that were severely effected by the latest rate increases? I think it's serious; 

maybe the Liberals don't. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is that we would like to be able to provide some of those 

people who are on fixed income with some means of assistance. We don't believe that is or can be a 

responsibility of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I think that in those instances there would have 

to be some other means of recognizing their problem and/or the deficiency and compensating for it 

through special programs 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

771 

 

administered by the Department of Social Services both at the provincial and at the federal level. It 

cannot be a responsibility of the Power company. Even if they were to undertake to do it there would be 

certainly an equitability in a great many instances. If I may use an example, for pensioners who are in 

apartments we don t really know what additional cost may be in relation to their rentals paid and how 

that pertains to heat and/or electricity. It is just a very, very difficult problem and I think it has to be 

done by agency that is responsible for that particular community of people. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I will take the next question - the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker. a question to the minister in charge of the 

Aware Program. 

 

The recently announced licensing of a drive-in fast food franchise outlet in Regina indicates an 

extension of government policy regarding the licensing of liquor outlets generally. Does the minister of 

the Aware Program, or is the minister aware, that present government policy as exemplified by the 

licensing of an A&W drive-in restaurant is an extension and presents a dangerous precedent to the 

licensing of drive-in liquor establishments all over the province? 

 

HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure of the aware of the 

licensing of the A&W restaurant which the member talks about. If it is being licensed the member in 

charge of the Liquor Licensing Commission could respond better than I. I would be very surprised 

indeed if it is licensed in a different way than it has been for other kinds of restaurants because it would 

have to meet certain pretty high standards in order to be able to qualify for a license. 

 

I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, and the general public recognizes that this government has made 

some very significant efforts in the area of creating better attitudes towards the consumption and the 

abuse of the consumption of alcohol. There are reasons, and there are supporting documents to indicate 

that this indeed has had some considerable impact. My discussions with people in rural Saskatchewan 

. . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Order, order! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am trying to answer the question. I have one more point I want to make. 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite will let me. In my discussions with people in rural Saskatchewan 

in my constituency particularly, certain beverage room operators tell me that in the last several months 

the consumption of alcohol in their premises has indeed decreased because of Aware and because of 

other efforts that we have made. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Supplementary question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, next question, member for Wascana. 

 

Rent Increases for the Coming Year 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

772 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I direct this question to the minister in 

charge of the Rentalsman. I ask the minister whether he intends to bring down any policy or guidelines? 

I note that last week he indicated that there would be no directions and no guidelines given in terms of 

increases for the coming year and I suggest to the minister that that is causing a total state of 

disorganization and does nothing more than encourage massive numbers of applications to the 

Rentalsman. 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I am not just sure what the question is but 

it's a long rambling preamble that I was trying to follow. First the review of increases that had been 

allowed indicate a variation from a small percentage to as high as 10 per cent. Many of the members 

opposite, I am sure, are aware of the fact that in British Columbia a blanket increase of 7 per cent was 

allowed recently so when the Rentalsman increases the rent to a point of 10 per cent, it's an indication on 

a comparable basis that some of the rents are lower than they should be. If I may, while I am on my feet, 

yesterday someone from the opposition. I believe the hon. member for Eastview asked a question about 

the financial statement. Well I would like to answer that if I could, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Can the minister inform me if this is related to the answer to this question 

as well? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Yes it is. It casts a reflection on the Rentalsman and his entire staff because of the 

sort of question that was asked. The proposition that he put to the House regarding the financial 

statement was erroneous, misleading, incorrect and ill-advised. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — . . . Yesterday's question . . . 

 

MR. WHELAN: — I am going to get to that. I'm glad you asked it again. The office of the Rentalsman 

is financed by an annual appropriation of the Legislature and therefore the financial transactions and 

financial statements of the Rentalsman's office are required to be included in the public accounts. The 

public accounts are audited annually by the provincial auditor and, therefore, this complies with the 

legislation of the Rentalsman's office, that requires the . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I believe the minister is out of order because that, in my view, doesn't 

apply to the question that was just asked with regard to guidelines. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister whether Leslie Shaw, when he resigned, 

indicated to you that he found his relationship with you an impossible relationship and I ask you whether 

he gave to you as part of his reason for resigning that he had little confidence in you and I ask whether 

you would comment on his quote about you that he found "that the passive indifference of the minister 

to the problems that are . . ." . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Is this related to . . . Is this a supplementary? 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Yes, it's about the Rentalsman's department. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The questions that the member asks as I gathered . . . I had trouble grasping it as 

well and I thought it was about the guidelines. It doesn't appear to be a guideline . . . 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Yes, it is. Yes, it is. I asked the minister whether part of the reason 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

773 

 

for the resignation of Leslie Shaw was that and to use his words ''he found that you had a passive 

indifference to the problems of the commission". I ask you whether refusing to set guidelines now will 

not mean that the Rentalsman is inundated in the coming year with applications because the government 

will not set guidelines? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we look very carefully at the operation of the Rentalsman and 

the Rental Appeal Board quite often and we didn't find any SkyShops or barn burning or harbor 

dredging of that sort but we did find that from an administrative point of view there were many things. 

This was indicated clearly the other day when we were discussing legislation. We were talking about a 

decision that had been handed down in which the judge of the court had found very clearly that the 

proper procedure hadn't been followed. Review of the entire operation of the Rental Appeal Commission 

indicated that the average . . . (interjection) . . . revealed very carefully that some of the decisions were 

as many as 14 pages in length and tenants, landlords, the law society, all these people said that they 

couldn't understand them. The judge's decision clearly indicates that. In addition it became quite evident 

that the hearings were, I think, caught up. We had got to the stage where only a handful of them were 

left to be heard. We felt that because of the fact - for instance, the landlord was asked by the commission 

to make an application that was 17 pages in length and we felt that this should be changed . . . 

(interjection) . . . well if they Appeal chairman wouldn't change it then the obvious thing for the 

government to do was to change the Appeal chairman and that's precisely what we would do. 

 

Licensing of Drive-in Restaurants 
 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — A question to the Attorney General. Since apparently 

the policy of your government is to increase the sale of liquor to the licensing of drive-in restaurants, 

could I ask the Attorney General whether he is aware of any correlation between this policy and 

donations to his party from Melchers and Seagrams and Labatts and London Winery and so on and in 

addition to this, could the Attorney General tell whether this is an explanation for the great Root Bear 

walking the way he does and the friends he hangs out with and so forth? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to make any comment on 

the question of the correlation because I think anybody who knows anything about the operation of the 

board and the commission would not put that question in the sense that he does. We'll just simply say 

that the question is whether or not it is the policy of the government to increase the sale of alcohol. The 

answer to that is clearly, no. The policy of the government is designed to warn the public about the 

effects of the improper and excessive use of alcohol. This is designed basically through the program of 

Aware. I think the hon. member would agree with me that outlets have been here, are here and will be 

here is a fact of life. Whether he and I agree that outlets should be closed as an attack on alcohol is 

another issue. The fact is they are here. What we have to do as responsible legislators is to communicate 

responsible attitudes towards drinking in dealing with those licensees. My point is that the policy of the 

government is definitely not to increase the sale of alcohol. The consumption of alcohol, outlets being 

available, I think, beg the question. The key question is changing attitudes and approaches to making 

sure that there is a responsible consumption toward alcohol. 

 

MR. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — In terms of an approach of taking a responsible use and in 

terms of the Aware program, I would congratulate this government for what it has done so far. My 

question is, does the Attorney General not feel that the licensing 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

774 

 

of fast food chains, is he not aware that this could lead to the responsible use because of the nature of the 

outlet? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to take check into what the situation in fact is. If, 

however, the licence if it has been granted — I don't know if it has or hasn't. if it has that's fine — if a 

licence has been granted it can very well be granted I could see under some circumstances to a dining 

room separate and apart from any of the (what you would categorize) drive-in operation of a restaurant. I 

think we all know that in the case of using A&W, or any other there is a change in the delivery system 

of foods. I know that when I first was acquainted and introduced to A&W it was strictly drive-in car. To 

serve alcohol under those circumstances would be absolutely ludicrous. However, we all recognize the 

fact that there has been over the years a change - I don't pretend to defend A&W because I don't know 

their situation - but a change in the method of deliveries to dining rooms to menu cartes, to a full scale 

course of meals unrelated to the drive-in operation. Now under those circumstances it may very well be 

proper for the commission taking into account the character, the financial, and the experience to do such 

a licence operation. If that's the case I would not say that that's a fast food drive-in with all of its 

negative attributes as the member would ascribe. 

 

MR. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Supplementary . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I'll take the next question. 

 

Colorability of Constitutional Law 
 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise an issue of some 

substance with the Attorney General. The Attorney General will be aware of the doctrine of colorability 

as it applies to constitutional law which prevents as it did in the AMAX case from the government using 

one provincial statute to deny the result which you attempted under another provincial statute, that is 

you can't effect a purpose with one provincial statute that you fail to effect with another that's gone 

down constitutionally, the Attorney General would be aware of that doctrine. Now in view of that and in 

view of the Premier's statement on television on Wednesday evening, that you as a government would 

pay CIGOL on the right hand its judgment, but on the left hand tax it away under Bill 47. I ask you, in 

view of that, how you propose to argue if the time comes that Bill 47 isn't a colorable attempt as it 

applies to CIGOL to simply retrieve what you lost under Bill 42? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, obviously my answer this morning will be that we will meet that 

argument if, and when, it should be raised and I stress the words "if it should be raised". Let me say very 

generally, and very briefly in response to the hon. member, what The Oil Income Tax Act represents is a 

new taxation scheme retroactively. If, under that taxation scheme the sums that are collected 

retroactively and prospectively, correlate, incidentally or otherwise, (incidentally those are collected by 

Bill 42 or any other taxation scheme) that is an incidental impact of the legislation. I think that in those 

terms the Premier's words must be weighed. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — By way of first supplementary to the question. 

 

Do you not agree that it makes it far more difficult for you to make the argument that you aren't 

attempting to do in directly what you have failed to do directly, with the Premier indicating that what 

you give to CIGOL on the right you propose to tax back on the left. Now I ask you seriously, isn't that 

putting in your way some very serious difficulty in view 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

775 

 

of that doctrine of colorability. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well quite obviously, Mr. Speaker, I cannot agree with the member's 

proposition. I don't recall the specific words of the Premier as quoted in the popular press but I think it is 

quite acceptable to say that a taxation scheme which is now presently before the House and presumably, 

or hopefully will get approval of this House, may collect X number of dollars. When asked 'how does 

that sum of X number of dollars relate to Y number of dollars, owing under a previously 

unconstitutional bill', if the answer is that there is likely to be very little change, very little exchange of 

hands, I do not believe that that raises the issue of colorability. All that it says is what presumably will 

be the fact, namely, that amount which is collected by The Oil Well Income Tax Act will approximate 

sums collected elsewhere constitutionally or unconstitutionally. I don't believe that that does fall in the 

area of colorability as the member suggests. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — An additional supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Attorney General be 

prepared to consider a suggestion and that's along these lines, that you take Bill 47 and split it into two 

parts, one part would apply to the retroactive period and a second bill would apply to the future period? I 

wonder whether you will consider that suggestion in view of the fact that the retroactive provision of the 

bill may be challenged and could bring down the entire bill and if you separated them in that way if 

there was a challenge with respect to the retroactive provision it could only bring down the retroactive 

portions . . . would you consider separating those two bills out, one for the future and one for the past, in 

view particularly of the doctrine colorability as it applies to the CIGOL situation. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not taken by that suggestion because off hand my first 

reaction would be that indeed, in some ways, the argument of colorability might be heightened by that 

particular proposal and how it might be heightened by that particular proposal to bring down two bills; 

Bill 47(a), if you will and Bill 47(b); Bill 47 dealing retroactively and that might be argued by some as 

to indicate colorability 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

776 

 

because it does seek to approximate the retroactive aspects. I, therefore, don't think that the suggestion 

has merit in that sense. I repeat again to the House, Mr. Speaker, that what Bill 47 represents - (a) and 

(b); what Bill 47 represents is a new taxation scheme and income tax scheme based on receipts less 

deductions and a tax on the net income and that is a retroactive scheme that’s got to be viewed on its 

totality. I believe that that is the most direct form of taxation that can be set up and I confirm my view 

on the advice that I have obtained that indeed it is a constitutional bill, therefore, in its present form. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Is the member for Estevan asking a supplementary? 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — No, a new question. 

 

PCS Financial Statement 
 

Mr. Larter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. In this year's financial statement under the notes at the back on Item No. 8, it states that 

the Potash Corporation has the option to purchase mineral rights at a cost of $2,300,000 and that this 

option expires on November 7 and it is being renegotiated. I wonder if the minister could tell us if this 

has been renegotiated? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister for the Potash Corporation): — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is, 

yes, it has been renegotiated. The cost would be $2.3 million if we exercised the option. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. What are the terms and did you say that they have 

been renegotiated at $2,300,000? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure of all the exact details of the terms. If the member wants 

to put a question on the order paper, I will certainly get that for him and I will respond to it in Crown 

corporations. My understanding is and I am reasonably certain, that the option has been renewed if we 

exercised the option and bought the rights, the cost would be $2.3 million and if you want to know the 

details of the agreement, I'm prepared to give you those. 

 

Colorability of Constitutional Law 
 

MR. CAMERON: — A new question to the Attorney General on the same subject area that I asked 

questions previously. If, in fact, you did separate the Bill 47 into two bills. One for the future period 

which I think is safe and one for the retroactive period which is questionable, could you not get around 

the difficulty that you recognize with the doctrine colorability as applying to the retroactive period, by 

getting from the oil companies written waivers from them not to sue or not to challenge it once you have 

negotiated a level of tax for the retroactive period? You could have the assurance from the oil companies 

could you not, not to sue, not to challenge the bill as it applies to the retroactive period? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I think that this obviously would be one way to solve the problem 

as the member suggests. I would point out to the member that presumably that option would also be 

available to the oil companies under the present wholly constituted bill if I can describe it that way, 

namely, waivers for any sums which are owing retroactively if there are bookkeeping and/or other 

problems which are tied into 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

777 

 

that. It seems to me that that doesn’t gain us very much in the end result. Of course what the oil 

companies do if anything with respect to the bill is something that is entirely up to the oil companies. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker. Have you — I should indicate to the Attorney 

General that of course, the oil companies have indicated that they are principally concerned about the 

future period of the level of taxation, not so much the past period and that makes sense; the future has a 

much longer term attached to it than the past. I wonder if you would in fact consider, in the course of 

your negotiations, the kind of suggestion I have given you to see whether you couldn't get written 

waivers from those people who are readily identified because those are the people you have taxed over 

the past four years. By way of additional supplementary, have you sought . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. We are getting near the end of time and one supplementary at a time. I'll 

take the minister's answer if he is prepared to answer. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — What's the question? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I was about to ask the question. The question is, have you sought co-operation 

with the federal government in having it possibly refer under its powers your bill, as it applies 

retroactively, directly to the Supreme Court for an early decision? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The answer to the question is No, have not sought the assistance of the federal 

government for an early reference to the Supreme Court for much the same reasons that the Premier and 

others have indicated in days gone by in question period. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Appointment to Rental Appeal Commission 
 

HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I would like to report to the House and the 

people of Saskatchewan regarding some appointments to the Rental Appeal Commission. A 

vice-chairman was named primarily to allow us the option of offering a chairmanship to the present 

vice-chairman when she returns to Saskatchewan from educational leave. Diane Pask has served as 

vice-chairman of the Commission and has done a good job. Mr. Paul Husulak has been appointed 

vice-chairman; he is a Saskatoon resident who was a school principal for many years in that community; 

he's a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan and a journeyman carpenter. Other commissioners 

named are Mrs. Patricia Adams who is a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan and presently holds 

a number of elected positions in the community of Saskatoon; Tom Banda who is a resident of Regina 

having recently retired after 30 years service with the city of Regina; Gilbert Eamer who has an 

impressive background in the housing field and a member of the senate of the university and for 25 

years a secretary of the Teachers' Federation; and Bill Sturby who recently retired after an outstanding 

career of 42 years in Saskatchewan's public service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think these people are excellent members for the commission. They are active and they 

are considering the appeals that are before them. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Just to respond to the Minister. First of all changes. I think, 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

778 

 

were long overdue and particularly as a result of the judgment that came down as was the suggestion 

that they be changed, a suggestion of the Conservative Opposition. I would hope that the relationship of 

the commission with the minister is considerably more amicable than the last situation. I hope that he 

new members appointed have he same independence of spirit that Mr. Shaw had when he was involved 

in the rental legislation and I hope that in fact the results are considerably different. I hope that the next 

time that the commission doesn’t have confidence in the minister that the minister looks inward instead 

of removing the people that he perceives to be his enemy. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to express on behalf of our caucus congratulations to the 

people who have been appointed to the commission. I doubt that if in the past few years any appointees 

to any commission have had a more difficult job to grab on to than they do in the Rent Appeal 

Commission because I doubt Mr. Speaker, that there has been any commission or department of 

government that has been more poorly handled than has this area. When one looks at the history of 

difficulties in the courts, difficulties in being able to handle its own legislation, to live by its own 

legislation I can only say to these people, Mr. Speaker, that I wish them good luck. They're going to 

need it. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. R. Romanow 

(Attorney General) that Bill No. 47 - An Act to provide for the Taxation of Income from Oil Wells 

be now read a second time. 

 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words with 

regard to Bill No. 47. My hon. member to the left said he would like to hear something new and I would 

like to say that it is time the Conservative Party stood up in this Legislature and just said something, not 

only something new. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, this particular issue has been misrepresented, misconstrued and completely taken 

out of context by the members in the opposite side of the House. Since they began speaking on this 

particular bill they have completely misinterpreted the real issue. Not at any time have they come to 

grips with the real problem. They are attempting to make an election issue of this entire fiasco. They are 

being completely dishonest with the people of the province of Saskatchewan. They are attempting to 

push the opposition parties into a corner and surprisingly enough they have already done that with the 

Tories to my left. 

 

Fortunately, the Liberal Party in this Legislature has enough principle and honesty not to jump at quick 

political gains just to be on the popular side of a difficult issue. Too often this entire Legislature takes on 

a particular stance because it might sound popular in the hustings in this province. Thank goodness the 

people who represent the Liberals in this Legislature have enough intestinal fortitude to decide not what 

is political expedience but to decide what is right and what is just and what is honest and for that. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very proud to be in the Liberal caucus in the Legislature of Saskatchewan on this day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — The real issue, Mr. Speaker, is not whether or not the people 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

779 

 

(This page is blank.) 

 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

780 

 

trying to bide their time until another election has passed. After that election they will do as they did 

with the potash issue, they will expropriate, they will take over and they will nationalize the oil industry 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell that group across the way, they will not ever have that opportunity. The 

people of Saskatchewan are on to them, they see what they are up to and they know they want control of 

the people. They know they want control of every possible business, every possible activity in this 

province, and this will not happen. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — The people of Saskatchewan have heard the message and they have seen 

that they are not fit to govern our province. The ruling of the Supreme Court proves this government 

was wrong. This government did not heed sound advice. They were given good advice by the Liberal 

Party in this Legislature, they failed to heed it, and for that folly, Mr. Speaker, they will answer to the 

people of Saskatchewan. After the election, whether it be in 1979 or before, they will be thrown from 

office for their lack of ability to govern, for the inept way the Attorney General pushed through Bill 42 

and for the way he is again attempting to rush Bill 47 through this Legislature, to again endanger the 

future of the entire province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Liberal Leader in this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, has asked the government to sit down, to negotiate, 

to talk to the oil companies, to come to a compromise so that they do not have to return any money. The 

government should have by this time admitted it was wrong and have begun arranging those 

negotiations. They should have set into motion the testing of the constitutionality of this particular bill 

but they have not. They have not, Mr. Speaker, because they do not really care. They do not care 

whether they are within the law or without the law. They rule by supreme power according to those 

across the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much more has happened than just the unconstitutionality of Bill 42. This government has 

crushed the entire oil industry in this province. In a time when energy is so important in the province of 

Saskatchewan we find the exploration has been at an all time low. We find that the oil companies have 

run from this province as though we had the plague. They have completely lost faith in this socialist 

government. They do not trust the Premier, they do not trust the Attorney General of this province. 

While I have no personal great feelings for the oil companies in this country, I do believe we need their 

expertise and we need their help in exploring our oil resources. This has not been happening nor will it 

happen under this social government. 

 

Now what is happening in Bill 47? The Premier and the Attorney General are asking us to give them a 

ticket to sit down with the oil companies behind closed doors. They are asking us to trust them to sit 

down with the big multinational corporations as they call them, so that they have Bill 47 over the heads 

of these companies. They want to make a deal behind closed doors to allow the oil companies to stay in 

the province and to allow this government to keep the money that they were to return because of the 

failing of Bill 42. 

 

They want us to believe that they will be honest and I say to you. Mr. Speaker, I do not believe and I 

will not buy that particular point. Had they proven their sincerity since 1974, we might have out some 

trust in their ability. They have proven to me and to the people of Saskatchewan they have not the ability 

to make an honest deal. they have not the ability to convince anyone that they will be fair. They will not 

be trusted in any 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

781 

 

negotiations and the companies which they deal with will not trust them. 

 

They cannot entice any outside oil industry to come to develop in this province. Bad as that may seem, it 

is also true that other industries have decided that Saskatchewan is out of bounds, that the socialists in 

Saskatchewan are not worth dealing with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tactics and the policy of this government, as they intend to follow in Bill 47, were 

made abundantly clear by the Attorney General in his opening remarks on this bill. It is being made just 

as clear by each and every speaker opposite as they stand up and follow the lead of the Attorney 

General. Their intention is to stand up and tell untruths, their intention is to stand up and tell that lie over 

and over and over again. They fully intend to continue telling that lie, hoping the people of 

Saskatchewan will believe it. Mr. Speaker, they are underrating the people of our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — They are underestimating their ability to size up this 

government. They believe that if they say it often enough that lie will sound like the truth to the citizens 

of Saskatchewan but that will not happen. I say to the Attorney General and the Premier, if you want 

support for this bill, if you are honest in your intentions on this bill, then bring in that bill in two parts. 

Bring in legislation that is within the law of the courts of Canada, legislation to collect, retroactively 

from 1974 to date, that money that rightfully belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the other part of that bill, spell out the taxation you intend to charge the oil companies of this 

province, spell it out loud and clear and you won't have to go behind those closed doors to make deals 

for the future. You show us that this bill in both cases is constitutional and you will get support from the 

Liberal Party on that bill, the only party in this Legislature that is above playing political games when 

the people of Saskatchewan are faced with such a financial fiasco . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. NELSON (As.-Gr): — The Minister of Mineral Resources has played in enough poker games to 

know that unless he puts all the cards on the top of the table the players will go home. The oil companies 

aren't going to stay just because it is the only game in town. They want to see the cards and if they see 

the cards for the future, they won't take back the ante they already have in the pot. There's a much better 

chance of keeping the game going and I recommend the government to look into this possibility. Mr. 

Speaker, this entire situation reminds me of a farm machinery dealer selling a tractor to a customer only 

to find out that back four years when he signed the contract, the contract was not filled out properly and 

was not legal. When the customer came back to the machinery dealer he said he wanted full warranty; 

he had used the best out of that tractor but he wanted his money back and that just isn't common sense, 

Mr. Speaker. Let us think about what that dealer would be wise to do. Would he be wise to take that old 

tractor and patch it up and send the customer on his way or would he be using more common sense and 

logic to say to that customer, bring in your old tractor, you've had good and full use out of it, it really 

owes you very little? I'll make you a deal on a new model and you'll be able to look after your future 

with that new tractor and we'll forget about that old deal. You won't get your money back but by getting 

a new model we'll both be satisfied. 

 

What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that it's time for honesty, for negotiation and for 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

782 

 

common sense and all within the law of Canada. If this government opposite shows us that that's what 

they are willing to do, Mr. Speaker, then we could support that legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that members of the Legislature 

get up and express themselves on Bill No. 47. After listening to the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

I can say one thing about the members of the Liberal caucus, they say where they stand on this bill and 

that's on the side of the oil companies and not on the side of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to voice my unqualified support for the intent and reasoning of this Bill No. 47. In 

doing so, I also want to voice my unqualified support for the resource taxation and management policies 

of this government. Since the Supreme Court announced its retrograde decision respecting Bill 42 on 

November 23, I have made a point of speaking to as many of my constituents as possible. I want to tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, and other members that I have met a good number of them since November 23 at 

various meetings and functions that I have attended. I want to tell you as well that most of these 

functions and meetings were not arranged by any political group and were non-partisan in nature. The 

Supreme Court decision came up in conversation with almost every one and almost without exception 

the advice I was getting from my constituents was that they wanted me to come back here determined 

not to give one nickel back to the oil companies, not one nickel! They wanted the government to act as 

quickly as possible to see that we get the revenues from our oil which morally belongs to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no doubt other members have done as I have done since November 23, talking to their 

constituents and to the people across the province. In the case of one member at least, the member for 

Nipawin (Mr. Collver), the Conservative Leader, the effect of public reaction couldn't be more obvious. 

I will have more to say a bit later in that connection because the double talk and backtracking which 

have become the trademark of the Conservative Leader were never more obvious than they are in this 

issue. I want people to compare his November 23 comments to his December 5 comments after he got 

the message from the voters. Time permitting, I may also want to comment on his harebrained notion 

that we go the Alberta route, the Syncrude sell out and the whole works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill before us, Bill No. 47 is central to the resource policies of our government. Our 

policy starts from the premise that this government, the provincial government, has exclusive 

jurisdiction over the natural resources of this province, not the Trudeau government at Ottawa and not 

the multinational resource companies. The premise is not unfounded, Mr. Speaker. Section 92 of the 

British North America Act lists as exclusive power of the provinces, "The management and sale of 

public lands belonging to the provinces and of the timber and the wood thereof." We have to remember, 

Mr. Speaker, that the BNA was written in the 19th Century and people's perception of the wealth of this 

nation was considerably different at that time than it is today. 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

783 

 

Further to that section of the constitution an agreement signed by the government of Canada and by the 

government of Saskatchewan in 1930 put into law The Saskatchewan Natural Resources Act and its 

intent. It stated in part, "All sums due or payable for such lands, mines, minerals or royalties shall come 

from and after the coming into force of this agreement belong to the people of Saskatchewan." That's 

pretty clear language. Mr. Speaker, that we say is unequivocal in granting to Saskatchewan exclusive 

jurisdiction in the taxation and management of our natural resources. Not for a little revenue, Mr. 

Speaker, it says all sums due or payable belong to the people of Saskatchewan. Based on that premise 

and our philosophy that people are capable of managing their own affairs without multinationals or 

high-priced management associates for that matter, our party has said in pretty clear terms that we would 

seek to develop or have developed these resources in such a manner that the people of the province 

would gain the maximum benefits in terms of revenue, in terms of jobs, in terms of good husbandry of 

the resources in question and in terms of protection of the environment. That was our policy, Mr. 

Speaker, that is our policy and that will continue to be our policy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BANDA: — This bill, in principle and in fact, is central to that policy. Now members opposite 

might stick to the view that the government that governs least, governs best. However, at odds with that 

sloganeering, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Leader came into this House on December 5 and stood in 

his place and said he would support the bill in principle. Perhaps we should, in good Christian charity, 

welcome this modern day Saul on his way to Damascus, Mr. Speaker. I, for one, would be more inclined 

to do so if I saw solid evidence of his conversion. Perhaps if I had it in writing, maybe I would be 

convinced. I am more inclined to think it is just Dick on his way back from Nipawin looking for a more 

comfortable political hole in the ground, used or otherwise, that he could crawl into while the storm over 

his first comments blow over. 

 

On December 5, the Leader of the Conservative Party stood in this House and said that he and his group 

would support the principle of this bill, that we really ought to, "get in there" and "really dig for what is 

ours, at least half of what is ours." I invite you. Mr. Speaker, to compare his sentiments of December 5 

with those he expressed on November 23, when he came into this Assembly and moved a priority of 

debate. On that day, hours after the Supreme Court had announced its decision, he was calling on us to 

decide, to announce a decision. The decision he recommended was that we ask Trudeau and Lang to fix 

things up, knowing full well that the kind of fixing in which these two gentlemen might be interested, 

had already occurred. In the course of his remarks in that priority of debate, the Conservative Leader had 

this to say and I quote from page 171 of Hansard: 

 

We, meaning the Conservatives. do not believe in addition, that it is possible for the government of 

Saskatchewan, no matter what legal technicalities they try and come up with, we do not believe that it 

is possible for the government of Saskatchewan to enact any legislation in relation to the half a billion 

dollars. 

 

That's what he said, "We do not believe that it is possible to enact any legislation." 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

784 

 

He said it more than once. And he said in more ways than one, which is his double-talk trademark. On 

December 5, after he put his finger to the wind he announces with a smug little smile, after his 

conversion, he will support Bill 47, in principle, a retroactive piece of legislation. 

 

Now on November 23, the Conservative Leader was seconded in his remarks by the member for 

Qu'Appelle (Mr. Lane), that Clarence Darrow of the Conservative caucus. He said, and I quote from 

page 180 of Hansard: 

 

The motion indicates as well the very great danger of retroactive legislation. The Attorney General, as 

a lawyer, the Premier, as a lawyer, know that it is a fundamental rule that government once ruled 

against on a matter such as this cannot do indirectly that which it could not do directly. 

 

That's what he said, Mr. Speaker. "A fundamental rule." 

 

Now on December 5, when his leader announced support in principle (and I underline in principle) . . . 

announced support for the concept and idea of Bill 47, he too sat with a smug little smile on his face. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, a few days ago there was a news item, the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) 

purchasing the prize lamb at the Agribition and he paid a handsome price for it. I think he and his 

Clarence Darrow have been busy fleecing that lamb in the hope that they will get enough wool to pull it 

over the eyes of everyone in this House and in the press and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BANDA: — They won't get away with it, Mr. Speaker, because the people are starting to catch on 

to this double-talk. He is going to have to content himself with the lamb knowing its the only thing he 

can fleece without winding up in trouble. 

 

If the press in this province was doing its job, Mr. Speaker, this phoney double-talk and political 

opportunism would be exposed for what it is. I guess that would be expecting too much from the press, 

dominated as it is by the Sifton boys who indicated their colors in the last election by donating to the 

Conservative campaign, completely in contravention of their expected non-partial role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Conservative Party went even further on December 5 in his endorsation 

of Bill 47. The record will show that he suggested Bill 47, retroactive and all, Bill 47 could have been 

used to solve the deadlock we faced with the potash industry in 1975. On November 23, Mr. Speaker, he 

was saying such legislation was not possible for the government to enact on December 5, and he tested 

the wind, Mr. Speaker. Everything was possible. It could even be applied to potash, an entirely different 

situation in its technicalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member for Nipawin isn't bothered by technicalities, legal, moral, or otherwise, Mr. Speaker. I 

suggest to you and to the members of the press and to the public, that this is a sign of his latest escape 

hatch. The Attorney General, in moving second reading of Bill 47, ably exposed the Conservative 

Leader's most popular harebrained notion regarding the Potash Corporation, when he discovered that the 

member for Thunder Creek was ready to become one of the fabulous fifty, perhaps even to serve as the 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

785 

 

chairman of that board of the fabulous fifty club. True to form, Mr. Speaker, later the same day the 

member for Nipawin was looking for a political hole in the ground, and he found it, Bill 47. Apply it to 

the potash says he with even the slightest second thought. The people of Saskatchewan weren't now nor 

will they be fooled by this political performance. 

 

On December 5 the Conservative Leader also promised an amendment to Bill 47, Mr. Speaker, 

suggesting we exempt small companies from The Oil Well Income Tax Act. He conveniently ignored, 

Mr. Speaker, the existing provision for the exemption from liability for tax of owners of producing tracts 

aggregating less than 1,280 acres. He completely ignores that provision, Mr. Speaker, in his political 

grandstandings. 

 

One is forced to ask - what is it he means by 'small companies'? Mr. Speaker, less than a year ago he 

was commenting on Bill 42 and the court challenge by CIGOL and Imperial Oil. The Leader Post of 

January, 77 quotes him, Mr. Speaker, as saying: 

 

Small companies such as CIGOL have nothing to lose by challenging the constitutionality of Bill 42. 

 

That's what he said. "Small companies like CIGOL." Now he wants to exempt small companies like 

CIGOL from the taxation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would tell you more about CIGOL, but I believe I told 

the House when I was speaking in the Throne Speech Debate, just who CIGOL is and who Norcen is. I 

won't tell this House again. All I want to say is that is the small company that the Conservative Leader 

was talking about in January, 1977, and I suggest that's the kind of small company he was talking about 

again on December 5 in this House. 

 

There isn't a better expert in this House than the member for Nipawin when it comes to one company 

setting up another and holding companies and the like and the transfer of shares and funds back and 

forth between them, Mr. Speaker. If he's not talking about CIGOL when he speaks of small companies, 

perhaps he is talking about an enabling amendment that would allow his friends in the resource 

development business to get into that kind of a game. And that is certainly not the kind of a game this 

government of the people of Saskatchewan want to see happening in regard to our natural resources and 

the legitimate return the people can expect from them. 

 

Before I leave the matter of CIGOL and the constitutional authority of Bill 47, I have one additional 

observation I wish to make, Mr. Speaker. 

 

December 2, 1977, the Leader Post carried a little story on page one. They had been talking to a lawyer 

well known to the members of the Conservatives and especially the member for Nipawin, a Mr. Bill 

Elliot, who is also a lawyer for CIGOL. Remember, Mr. Speaker, CIGOL are the people who attacked 

Bill 42 as unconstitutional along with opposition members opposite, aided and abetted by the Ottawa 

government. Elliot was being asked about Bill 47 and I want to quote the article. 

 

Elliot said whether or not the oil industry would again challenge the legislation depends on the intent 

and attitude of the government. Elliot said that speaking personally, if it appears the government is 

acting in a conciliatory manner, it is likely the industry will keep the proposed legislation out of the 

courts. 

 

And then they go on and I quote: "It all depends on the rates, Elliot said." 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

786 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the comment of the counsellor for CIGOL and the counsellor for the Member for 

Nipawin "It all depends on the rates" and "if the Government is conciliatory we'll keep the thing out of 

the courts." Nothing to do with the constitution, Mr. Speaker, nothing to do with direct or indirect taxes, 

nothing to do with interprovincial trade and commerce - the rates, Mr. Speaker, that's what it has to do 

with plain and simple. That's what the original opposition was all about and that's what any future 

opposition will be all about. 

 

As a member of this Assembly whose job it is to help make the laws of this province, I want to tell the 

mouth piece of conservatism that the laws are made here in this Assembly and not in the CIGOL board 

room with or without the member for Nipawin, or the member for Wascana or Lakeview or anyone else 

in attendance with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the original brain waves of the member for Nipawin said we should go to the 

Alberta route, Syncrude and all. It was pointed out to him that it would cost us roughly half of the 

revenue at stake. Like a scolded school boy he finally came into the House and said, Mr. Premier, please 

show me how you figured that out. Two years ago he was whining because he didn't get enough money 

for research, now he has a collection of rejected Liberal hacks around him and he calls in this House and 

cries for the Premier to get the figures for him. Surely, surely, Mr. Speaker, he has some responsibility 

as a member of the Legislature let alone to know the consequences of what he sees before he sees it, Mr. 

Speaker, I am disgusted and I am even more shocked at the weak-kneed press that has not exposed his 

phoney performance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset of my remarks, this bill is central to our resource taxation and 

management policy. I'd be surprised if the members opposite have undergone a real conversion. I don't 

think they have. Regardless, Mr. Speaker, this debate has helped the people of Saskatchewan to gain an 

understanding of the issues involved even if the members opposite haven't gained that understanding. 

That much at least has been accomplished. I believe this bill will retain for us the revenues from the 

resources which properly belong to us and I will be pleased to support the bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, on entering this debate I can 

think of no other time that I have had a greater feeling for support of a policy of a bill introduced by the 

New Democratic government of Saskatchewan. I say that especially, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of 

Mineral Resources who has had some opportunity to involve myself directly in the mineral 

development, the resource development of this province and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is this 

government that has kindled the kind of development, the kind of economic benefit and the kind of 

security that Saskatchewan people have demanded and long sought. They have that now and they see an 

opportunity for growth if this government continues to pursue and to implement that kind of forward 

policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we base that on a constitutional right, we base it on a moral obligation and a moral right 

and we know that the people of Saskatchewan say that is clearly, clearly the responsibility of a 

provincial government. Now that, Mr. Speaker, is what this debate, I think, is substantially about. Maybe 

what it is really all about, about resource development in the province of Saskatchewan, about 

development in this province, but development, Mr. Speaker, for whom? Who is going to gain from the 

activity that this 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

787 

 

government or governments encourage to take place in regard to resource development? Who, in effect, 

should ultimately benefit from those developments? Whom do the rewards go to? Whom do the benefits 

go to? Well, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the members to your left, the members from the Conservative 

caucus and the Liberal caucus we have heard them repeat time after time after time, that the benefits 

should go to the developers. The rewards and the benefits, Mr. Speaker, should go to the multinationals. 

Those rewards and those benefits should go to their friends, to their financiers, to their backers. The 

rewards and their benefits, Mr. Speaker, should go to their only real supporters. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, and I hear some static from the members to your left but they like to wiggle 

or wobble a little bit with the issue. They want to undertake to confuse and mislead the population and 

the electorate of Saskatchewan because they know full well once those people have a full understanding 

of what they are really saying in this Legislature in regard to Bill 47, their hopes of support are totally 

gone, totally lost. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let's just for a moment look at the Liberal Opposition tactics if I may start there. It is 

only a week or two ago, Mr. Speaker, that they were saying that this government was obliged to have an 

instantaneous, a spontaneous, an immediate resolution to the Supreme Court's decision. In fact those 

members of the opposition, both parties of the opposition, moved a priority of debate before this 

government even had the opportunity or the satisfaction of looking at the decision, the written decision 

of the Supreme Court of Canada. The Liberals were most ambitious to have the government display or 

convey to them what our resolution was. The only thing that was displayed to them was their inability to 

really be able to attain the debate that they wanted to take part in because they gave the member for 

Nipawin (Mr. Collver) the Leader of the Conservative Party the whole stage and the whole form to I 

think second another 15,000 or 20,000 votes from the people of Saskatchewan who might have been 

thinking Liberal up to that point in time. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, after that dismal performance and after think they spent several days out in 

the constituency talking to people, they realized that they had chosen the wrong strategy. Then they 

came back asking for delays, pleased the government should not move. It's doing this too hastily. Let's 

take three or four or five or six months or as the member for Regina South proposes, allow the Supreme 

Court to decide whether the legislation is going to be intra vires or ultra vires, prior to giving it Royal 

assent. It may go on for 18 months and we may be in a situation of jeopardy in relation to substantial 

incomes of the province of Saskatchewan should be collecting. Mr. Speaker, the member said he gave 

another idea this morning and it's like night and day comes and their is a different suggestion coming 

from them every time and everyone is left by the wayside because after it has been given the opportunity 

to be scrutinized, we find out that it is virtually worthless and that is consistent with Liberal and 

Conservative policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, they also undertook to attack and criticize the alternate legislation that we 

have brought forward. They criticize us for the right, the right of this government and its members and 

for that matter, the right of the people of Saskatchewan to criticize the Supreme Court decision. Now the 

member for Indian Head-Wolseley, and I am sorry that he's not in his seat at this particular time, was so 

concerned, so concerned about continuing the debate in the House in regard to this most important bill, 

that several days ago he moved to adjourn the House. I think that's an indication of how important they 

think this particular piece of legislation and this resolution is to the people of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, they are saying that 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

788 

 

they don't really know what they want to do. Every one of the members has a different solution. The 

member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, he's got a solution. The member for Regina South, he's got one; it's 

somewhat different. The member for Indian Head-Wolseley has a different solution; the member for 

Wascana, he's always different from all of the rest. Nevertheless, he advocates yet another and a 

different solution. Mr. Speaker, I think that whatever that solution is, regardless of what it is, the 

members to your left, Mr. Speaker, will vote against it. They will vote against it because they are not out 

seeking a legitimate correct answer to this problem that is in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let's talk a moment or two of reviewing what the Conservative members sitting to 

your left have said during this debate. They weren't substantively different, not substantively different 

from the Liberals initially. They were in a great rush to have this matter resolved within hours. It was 

absolutely essential that this problem be resolved by the time the week was over when the Supreme 

Court decision was made available to the province of Saskatchewan. Now, along with that, the member 

for Nipawin, the Leader of the Conservative Party, suggested that the answer was a federal government 

bail-out. Ask the federal government to make the payments on behalf of the province. It's not correct; it's 

not correct for the people of Saskatchewan to pay it back and I agree with them there. At least he's a 

little more political than the Liberal members are. He knows the mood of the Saskatchewan community. 

He thinks, well, I've got two masters to serve here. I've got the oil companies on one hand and on the 

other hand I would like to second or solicit a few more votes from the electorate in Saskatchewan. 

Hopefully, they will come from the Liberal, the dying Liberal party, so his alternative is to ask the 

federal government to bail out the province of Saskatchewan for its negligence. Now, Mr. Speaker, what 

amazing logic. The member knows full well that it has been stated in this Legislature before it was the 

federal Attorney General who intervened and not on behalf of the province or the citizens of 

Saskatchewan but on half of the oil companies. It's not very likely, Mr. Speaker, not very likely that the 

federal government is going to have much sympathy for the province of Saskatchewan when you've got 

that kind of an attitude in the Cabinet in Ottawa. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think the member, the MP, the 

only Cabinet minister for the province of Saskatchewan was then Attorney General when that decision 

was made. Attorney General for Canada and he's got quite a consistent record, quite a consistent record 

of being against everything that Saskatchewan requires. We only have to go back a few short years and 

the debates are still ongoing where he has 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

789 

 

demonstrated his opposition to adequate solutions to the transportation problem in this province; where 

he has demonstrated his opposition to corrective freight rate measures so that we have advantages for 

industry and agriculture in this province. His opposition to orderly marketing and now more recently, 

Mr. Speaker, his opposition to Saskatchewan’s rights to resource development and the money that is 

generated from those activities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the second recommendation that the member for Nipawin, the Leader for the 

Conservative Party gave was to simply lift, lift the Alberta legislation and apply it to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, the member knows full well and I have conveyed to him on a number 

of occasions, that that clearly is no answer to the problem because he knows full well that if we took the 

Alberta legislation and lifted it and applied it as it is applied in Alberta, that we would loose an excess of 

50 per cent of the revenues that we have collected and we would continue to lose 50 per cent of the 

moneys that should be accruing to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the key question to ask here is why does he make these proposals? I'll tell you 

first. because the money if it was to come from the federal government, it would go to the oil companies 

and virtually they would get away Scott free. They'd get their half a billion dollars or whatever it may 

be. Not from the taxpayers in Saskatchewan but from the federal taxpayer and from his point of view, 

he's achieved his purpose by being able to satisfy the oil companies, which he has to substantively 

represent in this House. In a second, Mr. Speaker, he was at least giving them half of what they should 

not get and that is by applying the Alberta legislation. Now, Mr. Speaker, we also have to ask them, 

where do they really stand when the crunch comes when they have to decide what has to be done in 

order to assure Saskatchewan citizens that they will be able to continue to enjoy the benefits from this 

resource? Where will they vote, Mr. Speaker? The member for Nipawin says call for the vote and we'll 

be getting around to that in the not too distant future and we're going to be interested in seeing where he 

is going to stand. I'll suggest, Mr. Speaker, even though what they have said. they are going to vote 

against this bill. They are going to vote against and they're 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

790 

 

going to vote against this bill, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals, because they've always been against change, 

they're against really acquiring a rightful benefit to the people of Saskatchewan; the Conservatives, for 

substantially the same reasons, only because as I said earlier, the Leader of the Conservative Party is a 

little more political than the Liberal Party. He recognizes that there has to be some reason for him, some 

reason for him to defeat the bill in third reading. So he has conjured up an amendment or two which he 

says they’ll introduce during Committee of the Whole. And because those amendments quite likely will 

not be supported by the government because of their obvious deficiencies, that will then give him the 

reasoning for voting against the bill in third reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I predict that both the members in the Liberal and the Conservative caucus, both caucuses 

will end up voting against this bill to resolve this dilemma that not only the province of Saskatchewan 

but the people of Saskatchewan are confronted with. They'll both buckle under to that same force to the 

intimidation that the companies have on them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it in fact I think proves one thing, this debate has proved one thing. The members 

opposite were sensitive several days ago when I referred to them as puppets of the multinationals and as 

I have sat here over the last four or five days since making that statement and listened to their debates, I 

think it proves that the statement that I made at that time was right, and it hit all and it hurt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I rise on the point of order because the minister has suggested that what we have 

stated in this Legislature that we would support the bill as Progressive Conservatives is untrue. The fact 

of the matter is, the point of order, Mr. Speaker, is, the point of order may not reflect . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: Order, order! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — You've asked me the point of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I don't want a speech from the member I just want the point of order. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Fine, the point of order is I understand it is incorrect for members to reflect on the 

veracity of what members say to this House. If we say we are going to support the bill he may not say 

that we are not. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I think it's sometimes very difficult to determine in this Chamber whether a 

member is questioning what some other person has said or whether a member is debating an issue. And I 

propose to say at this time that I was quite clear in my mind that the member was debating the issue and 

the member for Nipawin has had an opportunity to get into this debate and debate the issue as well. And 

I'm sure all other members will be taking advantage of that opportunity to get into the debate and, in 

fact, refute what they believe to be untrue about what any other member has said. Now I want all 

members to avail themselves to that opportunity, so we have the Member for Tisdale. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — The point of order is that you have said before in this Assembly that if a member 

. . . 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

791 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, you have said before in this Chamber that if a member rises to his 

feet and says, as a result of another member stating what the member said, which is what the minister 

has done. You have said that the minister or the member who has stated that, must take the word of the 

member who stands on his feet and says this is what our position is and this is what we state as fact. We 

have stated that we are going to support this bill, the minister has said today that we will not support the 

bill, he is, therefore, saying to us that we did not tell the House the truth. That's the point of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I think the member is correct in that he has stated, and I believe, I heard him 

state that he will support the bill. Now, apparently, the other member feels that there is some doubt 

about that and — Order, order. I said, apparently the other member feels there is some doubt about that. 

The other member who is speaking has to accept the fact that you have said that. Now he is questioning 

whether you meant it or not. That's permissible for him to speculate on that, but he has not said that you 

didn't say it. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. Speaker. And I've 

heard the member for Nipawin suggest that he may be supporting this bill in third reading, Mr. Speaker. 

I've heard nothing, nothing, Mr. Speaker, from any of the other members of the Conservative caucus. It 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that on such an important piece of legislation as Bill 47 we might at least 

hear a word or two from at least one other member in the Conservative caucus, but it is silence, Mr. 

Speaker. And I'm suggesting to you that because of that silence, the leader of the Conservative caucus is 

having trouble convincing his members that they should, in fact, support this bill, Mr. Speaker. And I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they may even have problems supporting this on second reading never mind 

during the Committee of the Whole or third reading. I think the ranks are beginning to break up I look to 

your left, Mr. Speaker, and I see absent two very important members of the Conservative caucus when 

we're talking about oil industry in Saskatchewan, the member for Estevan and the member for Swift 

Current. I wonder why those members are not now here. Have they lost control of those members, Mr. 

Speaker? Has he forbidden them to come in the House for fear that they'll jump to their feet and defend 

the oil companies, as we know they really want to do. Mr. Speaker, it's strange, indeed, when we sit in 

this house and seethe member for Estevan day after day trying to display a concern about oil 

development in his constituency. He's got the silliest questions of anybody in this house. But when we 

come to a real point, a real issue in regard to the oil activity in the development and the money, 

therefore, derived in this Legislature he's not here or he is solid. Mr. Speaker, the same applies to the 

member for Swift Current and I say that it is a shame and a sham for those members to pretend to 

represent those people in those constituencies and not utter one word in relation to this debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you again that's why the ranks are rumbling in the 

Conservative caucus. And we'll see when the vote comes, Mr. Speaker, as to who they are really going 

to support in relation to this legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they want to ask a question, Mr. Speaker, because I see the member for Estevan and 

the member for Swift Current are not here and I’ll be asking for questions too. 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

792 

 

My goodness, we're beginning to smoke them out. And I suspect that when he goes home this weekend 

that he'll have some constituents asking him where he stands on this issue. Mr. Speaker, and I hope he's 

got the intestinal fortitude, Mr. Speaker, I hope, he has got the intestinal fortitude when he returns 

Monday to tell this Legislative Assembly what his constituents told him and where he is going to stand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — On a point of Order. Mr. Speaker, is it in order, in my limited 

experience in the House - the point of order is this, for the government members to bring in a bill and 

ask for the opposition to support it? It doesn't seem right that they would bring in a bill and then ask us 

to defeat the bill. We want to support the bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — Is that standard procedure? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! I don't believe that is a point of order. I think all members 

understand that any member is free to support or not support a bill. Any member is free to call on any 

other member to support or not support a bill. It is not a question of a point of order. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Now I think it is even more imminently obvious why the leader of the Conservative 

caucus keeps his members silent. He may talk about limited experience but I think that is just a gross 

display of absolute stupidity in relation to how this House operates. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is another matter, there is another matter that members opposite have been 

raising in this House consistently. Mr. Speaker, they have been I saying in this Legislative Assembly 

and in the province of Saskatchewan that this government has no regard for the law - the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and I am going to get to some of the things that you addressed yourself to 

earlier, Mr. Member in a moment or two. 

 

They say that we are above the law, that we don't care about what the law is, what the laws of Canada 

are. Now I don't, Mr. Speaker, believe no matter how hard they try they will ever sell the people of 

Saskatchewan in regard to that position. I say that, Mr. Speaker, because our record speaks loud and 

clear in regard to law and order. But, Mr. Speaker, I have heard the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 

the member for Wascana, indeed the Leader of Liberal Party, the member for Morse, time after time 

after time say that this government has no regard for the law and they are trying to sell the people of 

Saskatchewan. The member for Regina South says the same thing. 

 

Well, let me quote a few things that the last Liberal speaker said, the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He said that the Liberals operate on principles and on honesty. 

 

Well I certainly wouldn’t want to go to the electorate of Saskatchewan if I was a Liberal on the platform 

of principle and honesty that's for certain, not if I was a Liberal. He says that they don't jump for 

political gains. This is a quote, Mr. Speaker, "We believe in what is right, what is just and what is 

honest." And then he goes on to say this matter that we are debating is not whether we pay back the 

money it is do we believe in the laws of Canada. If he said that once in his speech he said it four or five 

or six times and I won't dispute him. Do we believe in the laws of Canada and/or do we believe in the 

laws of 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

793 

 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Let's look and see who is showing a blatant disregard for law. Mr. Speaker, yesterday, December 8th 

was the day that all parties were to file their election expenses in the Pelly by-election. December 8th, it 

is a law in the province of Saskatchewan that on December 8th all parties who participated in that 

election provide the expenses. So I thought it would be interesting to see whether all of these parties 

gathered in this Legislative Assembly in fact submitted their election expenses and if so were they 

within the laws of the province of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party has 

filed its expenses and they are in order. There is a ceiling of some $10,000 and they are in order. We 

have a member here - Mr. Lusney who has displayed an amazing capability and potential as an MLA. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as of yesterday, the dead line, there was no return from the Conservative caucus, no 

return from the Conservative Party in the province of Saskatchewan, in spite of it being the law they 

have chosen not to abide by the law, Mr. Speaker. One has to ask, will they file a return? One has to ask 

if they haven't filed a return, why haven't they filed a return? 

 

I am sorry that the Leader of the Conservative Party is not here to hear this because he goes about this 

province speaking and preaching law and order at every opportunity but here is a distinct position that 

indicates that he has a disregard for that law. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals on the other hand filed a 

return. They met the deadline. But when one looks at how much money they expended on that 

by-election, knowing full well, Mr. Speaker, with three lawyers sitting in their ranks that the ceiling is 

$10,000, did they limit themselves to $10,000, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan will be 

interested in knowing that the answer is No. Did they spend $15,000? No. Did they spend $20,000? No. 

Did they spend $25,000? No. Did they spend $30,000? No, Mr. Speaker, they spent $31,000 or $21,000 

more than the law of Saskatchewan said they can spend. Mr. Speaker, $21,000 in excess. There, to your 

left, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party, a lawyer, the member for Wascana, a lawyer, the 

member for Regina South, a lawyer, and the rest of their colleagues are saying that this government has 

no respect for law and order and yesterday they filed a return with an expense in excess of $21,000. 

They broke the law, Mr. Speaker. They broke the law and they are quiet. They're not now saying the 

government of Saskatchewan has no regard for law and order because the obvious example is that they 

still showed no regard for law and order whatsoever and that is distinct proof of that. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I was in, I was in Pelly, I participated in that by-election and I suggest to you that if the Liberals spent 

$31,000, the Conservatives spent $50,000 and that's why there's no election return, Mr. Speaker. How 

much money did they spend and the member for Estevan said $5,000. Well, I'll be interested in seeing 

your return and so will the people of Saskatchewan. I suspect the Liberal Party will be interested in 

looking at your return as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why have they not filed that return? Because their expenditures are over? Because there are 

yet more gross irregularities that they're concerned about? Well I, Mr. Speaker, believe we should know. 

I believe we should know and I believe that the people of Saskatchewan should know. The Liberal Party 

say that they would like to know. They ask, Mr. Speaker. They would like to know what we have spent 

and they can go to the Chief Electoral office and they can look and they say they will and I invite them 

to and I am sure that the chief electoral officer will accommodate them because we abide by the law. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan should know and I think that it might be appropriate if I 

was to ask the Attorney General to undertake to investigate if they don't undertake to do it satisfactorily 

themselves. 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

794 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we have nothing to fear in regard to our expenses and I would 

suggest . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Would the minister permit a question? Would the minister put a motion on the 

order paper and the Liberal Party will support that motion. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, there is no motion needed. We know what the law is, they know what 

the law is and they have broken it and they are scattering now to try and find some smoke screen to 

cover their actions. 

 

The point I want to make is that it is their caucus that has undertaken in the debate in this Legislative 

Assembly and the discussions that are going on in this province that this government has no regard for 

the law, that shows a gross disregard for the law. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, we abide by the 

law. The evidence is there for them to contend with indicating that they have not, they have chosen not 

to abide by the law. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I said, if I may turn to another matter, that this debate is about resource development. 

Resource development should reap benefits. They should reap benefits to both the developer and the 

owner. Our task, Mr. Speaker, is to protect the owners' investment, and that is what we are doing. That is 

what Saskatchewan people want us to continue to do. I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have been leaders in 

the policy field and in achievements of resource developments. The people of Saskatchewan have a lot 

to be proud of because of those achievements. They want us to continue to pursue those kinds of 

objectives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Attorney General — and I believe the people of Saskatchewan would 

agree with me — has done an excellent job of outlining the contents of this bill and of explaining the 

reasons for its existence. I don't intend to go over the same area in my remarks today. What I would like 

to do is debunk a few mistakes and generally set the record straight on oil development in Saskatchewan 

today, in the recent past and in the future. No one could have predicted the events of 1973 and '74 and 

their impact on the world price of oil, no one! I hear a member from the Liberal caucus laugh. He has 

only to go back and look, it's a matter of record that oil companies and governments alike were not able 

to with any kind of accuracy predict what was going to happen in the way of oil prices. Oil had been 

selling for around $3 a barrel and most producing companies were making a nice profit at that price. 

They were making enough to continue to pay for exploring for oil in what looked like the best locations. 

They didn't need any more money in order to be treated fairly as some members to your left would try 

and convince us. That, Mr. Speaker, is an important point to keep in mind. 

 

It was at that point that the world price of oil jumped and it jumped dramatically. Canada tried to shield 

the consumers of oil by restricting the increase. But the increase was significant, significant nonetheless. 

It went from approximately $3 a barrel to $6.50. The question immediately arose, who was to get the 

increase? There seemed to be two choices, the companies or the owners of the resource, the people of 

Saskatchewan. This government believed the increase belonged to the people. After all . . . 

 

MR. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — I wonder if the minister would permit a 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

795 

 

question? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to permit his question . . . 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: - What is your point of privilege. 

 

MR. LANE: — The point of privilege is that the member states that the Conservatives have not 

submitted their electoral expenses for the constituency of Pelly. The member should be aware that the 

chief electoral officer has given her permission on account of weather conditions to have that 

information in today. I would ask him if he is not aware of that, that he make himself aware of that and 

not misrepresent our position and thereby my position from where I sit in this House. He knows full well 

that that information is coming in today on the instructions of his chief electoral officer. I would ask him 

to withdraw that comment now. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I have no such information and as of yesterday the deadline for the 

filing, the Conservative paper was not there and they have had six months in order to file it. I think it is a 

pretty flimsy excuse to now come up with a delay because of weather. I think it is a debating point. The 

fact of the matter is it was not there at the deadline. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of privilege . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I must inform the member that he cannot make appeals on behalf of 

the Conservative Party. He can't stand here and raise points of privilege on behalf of the Conservative 

Party. If he has a personal point of privilege, he may raise it. Otherwise he has no point of privilege. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker. surely, if a reflection of breaking of the law is cast on all of the persons 

sitting in this particular caucus . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: —Order, order! Member for Tisdale Kelsey. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, again may I say that as of last night the closure of the chief electoral 

office, and as of this morning a.m., there was no paper filed by the Conservative Party in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The deadline was yesterday and that gave them six months. I don't know whether they 

are delivering one today, I don't know what they have conjured up during the dark hours of the night in 

the back cigar smoke filled rooms of their headquarters, but it was not there at the dead line. As far as I 

know it is not yet there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may return to my remarks. The question, (I'm talking about oil price increases) Mr. 

Speaker, the question immediately arose in relation to those price increases who was to get that increase. 

There seemed to be two choices, the companies or the owners of the resource, the people of 

Saskatchewan. And this government believed that the increase belonged to the people. After all, it was 

their depleting non-renewable resource. And the companies were making a fair return at the old price. 

This wasn't a normal price increase, Mr. Speaker, this was a pure windfall, a genuine unexpected excess. 

World actions have made our resource more valuable and we had to recover that value while we were 

able. So new taxes were imposed to keep the windfall in the hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

796 

 

That might have been it right there, Mr. Speaker. The companies were still making a fair return, the 

people of Saskatchewan were keeping the rewards for the development of their resources, but then, Mr. 

Speaker, then the federal government moved in. And it used its all encompassing tax powers to try and 

take some of the extra money. It took it from the province by reducing its transfers of money. And it 

took it from the companies by not allowing them to deduct the royalty payments in calculating income 

for federal tax. In fact, the tax collected by the federal government because of that non-deductibility 

attitude acquired for them something in excess of $55 million. They also imposed an export tax between 

the years of May 1973 to July of 1977, they accrued $469 million, almost $470 million. For a period of 

time, yes, and I do not dispute that, and there was supposed to be some sharing of the money from the 

excess from the export tax, moneys which no province in Canada will agree was fairly shared with the 

provinces. And the answer to that by the federal government was that it went into the general revenue 

and they weren't able to really identify it. And their excuse when all provinces went to them asking for 

some of the money which was supposed to be shared from that export tax, the federal government's 

excuse was that they couldn't identify it. They then undertook to try and identify moneys that were 

already committed for ongoing agreements between the federal government and the provinces with 

some of those moneys and that simply wasn't the case and there isn't one province that agrees with the 

understanding that the federal government now operates under. The federal government in fact, 

collected in excess of $500 million, Mr. Speaker, — I'll be more than happy to listen to the member for 

Regina South when he gets up enough nerve to talk. But for the time being, I'd appreciate it if he'd let 

me finish my remarks — He knows full well, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government has acquired in 

excess of $500 million of which a significant percentage was to be shared with the provinces. The fact 

of the matter is that there isn't one province in Canada that agrees that they have got a fair share of that 

$500 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister was here a few days ago and he's reported in the Leader Post of 

December 7, 1977 saying that Ottawa won't try to profit from the ruling. Now, Mr. Speaker, and I don't 

deny that he said that, he may even think he's sincere in saying it, but I say, Mr. Speaker, that he's a little 

bit late because when we look at these figures and we look at the ten cents per gallon tax at the pumps 

and the other taxes that were assessed in relation to oil in the consumption of oil, it's a little bit late 

because they had already extracted hundreds of millions of dollars from the oil industry in the province 

of Saskatchewan directly to the federal coffers, money that should have been accruing to the province of 

Saskatchewan by one means or another either by direct taxation or by returns or credits that the federal 

government left us with the impression with would be coming to us when they collected those moneys. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other, I think, significant concern when we look at the attitude and the statement 

of the Prime Minister and I agree with him I would like to hope that he would be able to deliver the 

goods, so to speak. But when I look at other press statements, statements of the Leader Post, November 

26, statement from Mr. Lang with regard to the CIGOL Supreme Court decision, he certainly doesn't 

leave the impression that the federal government shouldn't undertake to prosper by this. The headline is, 

or the first sentence in the paragraph is, "The Federal Treasury probably does stand to gain from the 

Supreme Court of Canada's ruling on Saskatchewan oil taxes". And he goes on to say that he has little 

sympathy with the province of Saskatchewan. That's certainly not consistent with the attitude of the 

Prime Minister and it's a disgrace to see a senator from the province of Saskatchewan stating and I quote 

"politically I have to say it would be rather nice to see the Government of Saskatchewan sweat it out". It 

certainly doesn't appear, Mr. Speaker, that senior members of parliament, and cabinet ministers from 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

797 

 

the Province of Saskatchewan and members of the senate are in agreement with what the Prime Minister 

says when he quotes in the Leader Post that Ottawa won't try to gain in the way of profit from the 

Supreme Court ruling. Mr. Speaker, that is truly unfortunate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may return to the companies which are involved in this whole dilemma. There 

were negotiations when the federal government announced that it would not allow the deductibility of 

royalties. There were negotiations instigated by the companies with the federal government. And those 

negotiations failed and certainly suing Ottawa would be hopeless because of its tax powers, so one 

company in sheer frustration and, I suspect, with the support from some of the rest of the industry sued 

the government of Saskatchewan. As we all know, Mr. Speaker, they lost at the first instance and no one 

was too surprised. They appealed and the five judges in the Court Appeal were unanimous in rejecting 

the appeal. But the company appealed again to the Supreme Court in Ottawa. And it was no longer just 

the company against Saskatchewan. The federal government had joined the company in fighting against 

the people of Saskatchewan. We waited a year for a decision and finally it came not unanimous, but in 

favor of the company and Ottawa. And many people were surprised and a few were even appalled, yet it 

is of little purpose to do nothing but criticize the judgment now. I suspect law review articles for years to 

come will do that. Yet the judgment is a fact of life with which we all have to contend and that's what 

the bill before you now is designed to do. It's not designed to give money back, as members of the 

opposition would suggest, it is not designed to impose a lower tax so the companies can keep some or all 

of the windfall gain, as other members in the opposition would suggest. It is designed to keep for the 

people of Saskatchewan the money that is rightfully theirs, the windfall, the excess profit on the 

development of their resource, their resource oil. And it is designed to do it in the most direct and 

constitutionally valid way we can find. Why didn't we do it this way in the first place? Because we didn't 

think we had to, Mr. Speaker. Just as the judges at different courts at different levels all the way to and 

including the Supreme Court thought our approach was valid. So did we. And by using the taxes as we 

did we were able to manage the development of our oil resources in the most effective and efficient 

manner possible. We continue to believe that a royalty is a better tool for resource taxation and 

management than as an income tax. Thus, we're continuing to collect the royalty imposed on the 

production of oil from Crown land since November 1, 1976. Payments of this royalty can be deducted 

from taxes payable under the new Oil Well Income Tax so that producers are not doubly taxed as some 

members would suggest. However, production from freehold land will be subject to tax under the Oil 

Well Income Tax Act when proclaimed instead of being subject to the tax currently being paid. 

 

Let me correct one more misconception perpetrated, I might add, by a member of the opposition, the 

member for Regina South. The farmers and other small freeholders of oil producing land in 

Saskatchewan were getting a fair share before Bill 42, were completely protected in their rights under 

Bill 42 and continue to be under the new legislation. Any taxes producing companies might have had to 

pay to the government of Saskatchewan in no way impinged on the right of the freeholder to get his 

share, usually 12 1/2 per cent of value of production, full value, I might add, Mr. Speaker, right off the 

top. That was true, is true, and will continue to be true and I challenge anyone to show otherwise. 

 

It is not the intention of this government or this bill to impose new higher levels of tax on oil companies. 

We believe, as do many of the producing companies, that the current tax levels afford a fair return on 

investment for producers, at the same time earning an 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

798 

 

excellent return for the people of Saskatchewan on the development of their resources The facts speak 

for themselves, over 480 wells drilled so far this year as against 230 the year before, over $36 million 

spent on drilling this year compared to $18 million a year ago, record prices bid for prospective 

Saskatchewan oil land at the last two land sales including over $7 million worth of bids at the last sale 

alone. Don't let anyone tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the oil companies need more incentives to come to 

work in Saskatchewan. They're not here for the give-aways and paybacks that the Liberals and 

Conservatives would have us negotiate. They're not here for the half price tax scheme that the member 

for Nipawin would like us to implement or impose, they're here because they respect the responsible 

approach of this government and the management of its oil resources. They're here and they know that 

that approach will continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I began my remarks by saying that the key to this bill in the most important aspect of 

this debate was resource development and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite have 

displayed a disregard for the resource development, a development that would take place in 

Saskatchewan only if it was in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, a disregard, a 

disappointing, Mr. Speaker, disregard, and I say, Mr. Speaker, that when we arrive at the opportunity to 

finally vote on this bill I predict that the members opposite will vote against it and by their actions, Mr. 

Speaker, will be a display, a very distinct display, a very obvious display to the people of Saskatchewan, 

that they in fact, are not acting in their best interest but are acting in the best interest of the companies. 

And I don't, Mr. Speaker, want people to interpret from those remarks, that this government believes 

companies should not benefit from the development of resources in this province. We believe they 

should and we have policies and taxes and royalties in place that allow them to benefit, but a benefit in a 

fair way, benefit in a way which does not in any way allow a rip -off of the moneys that should be going 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said these few words with regard to Bill 47, I suggest to all members, I plead to the 

individual member of the caucus opposite, the Conservative and the Liberal caucus that they are duly 

representing, the constituencies that they are here to represent, that they give second consideration to 

supporting Bill 47 which is a bill for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to participate in the debate . . . 

(tape inaudible) . . . my next colleague fifteen minutes ago the minister was attempting to make some 

sense the people of Saskatchewan gave prior to Bill 47 are hollering question. They'd love to have the 

question put. They'd love to get off the hook. They don't care, Mr. Speaker, whether the Premier of this 

province speaks to a bill that is probably as significant as any bill that has been before the House or that 

other members of the Cabinet get on their feet and represent the feeling of the government toward an 

extremely significant bill in principle or that members of our caucus have the opportunity to stand up 

and represent the people that have elected us to be here. As a matter of fact, they don't care, Mr. 

Speaker, whether they get up and say anything at all about the people that they represent. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that soon after the CIGOL decision came down the Leader of the Conservative Party got on his 

feet and suggested that we have priority debate. And he hasn’t been heard from since, and neither have 

other members of his caucus been heard from since, Mr. Speaker, except when some of 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

799 

 

the more experienced members get on their feet with regard to points of order and points of privilege 

and don't understand what either means, who are not prepared to stand up and debate in substance a 

significant bill which is before this House and before the people of Saskatchewan but want to stand up 

on points of order and points of privilege that are neither and it shows simply their lack of understanding 

and I agree with the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland when he said he's a new member and he doesn't 

understand and it's obvious, every time he speaks, that he's a new member and that he doesn't understand 

what the business of the House is all about. Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I was amazed to 

hear from the minister who just took his seat, when he began his remarks was something to the effect 

that what the government was doing kindled the kind of security for the people of Saskatchewan. And I 

couldn't help but chuckle, Mr. Speaker, because I have to say what's security, Bill 42, what's security. 

For the people of Saskatchewan, what's security? No security. A bill struck down because it was 

unconstitutional. The minister talks about benefits for whom. He didn't say for whom, he said for who, 

but if he were a school teacher he'd know it should be for whom. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it's 

interesting because it's again another attempt by the government to muddy the water. It never has been 

the question of who the benefits are for, the key question is a government that has had the inability to 

protect the people of Saskatchewan the resource benefits that are rightly theirs. That is what the question 

is. That is what the debate with regard to bill 47 is all about. One of the things that the minister did say 

that was correct, Mr. Speaker, was the statement that Liberals are ambitious and I want to say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and through you to the members of the government, that's why we're standing up and 

speaking in this debate, because we're ambitious enough to be certain that Bill 47 is not simply going to 

be a repeat of the problem that Bill 42 presented to the people of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, if 

we're going to fully comprehend the issue, tracing the government as a result of the Supreme Court 

decision, we must cut through a number of matters that have been raised which serve only to muddy the 

waters and divert attention from what I've just indicated to be the real issue. You might ask, Mr. 

Speaker, what has been said to muddy the water. And my response would be, what hasn't been said by 

members opposite that doesn't muddy the water. 

 

Let's go through some of the things that members of the government have said in the last few days. First, 

that the problem we face is caused by the attitude and philosophy of the Supreme Court. Attempts by 

government members to use this excuse is blatantly wrong and is a calculated attempt to discredit the 

highest court in our country. It's an argument void of logic. 

 

Second, the reason that the decision came down as it did was because the federal government came 

down on the side of the oil industry. Government members who feel that they can fool Saskatchewan 

residents with this argument would do well to remember an editorial in the November 26 issue of the 

Star-Phoenix, an editorial which the Attorney General so skillfully attempted to misrepresent when he 

spoke in defence of the bill. The editorial says in part "although Ottawa opposed Saskatchewan in the 

court action, that was because of the constitutional issue, not because it sympathized with the oil 

companies, and the argument of the government can be likened to that of a youngster who claims the 

reason he gets into trouble is because everyone gangs up on him, rather than recognizing that the real 

reason he is in trouble is because of his own actions and his own attitude. The fact that government 

members resort to this type of argument demonstrates clearly their unwillingness to accept responsibility 

for their own actions.'' 

 

Third, the government parades the myth that they are for the people of Saskatchewan, 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

800 

 

while we are not. This simplistic untruth is beneath the sophisticated thinking of the voters of 

Saskatchewan. The government's own actions in this case are the best proof to Saskatchewan people that 

the government has abdicated its responsibilities to the people. With regard to the petroleum industry in 

Saskatchewan, what have they done? 

 

Well, through attitude and policy they have decimated the industry. Production has dropped from 80 

million barrels in 1973 to 59 million barrels in 1975. They have failed to protect the rights of 

Saskatchewan residents to a fair return on the profits which accrued to oil companies in Saskatchewan as 

a result of the international market change in 1973. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the attempts of the Attorney General when he introduced Bill 47 in second reading to 

discredit all and sundry is a typical example of government arrogance and government irresponsibility. 

The Attorney General in his two and one-half hour harangue blamed CIGOL, the federal government, 

Otto Lang, the oil industry, Senator Buckwold, the Supreme Court of Canada and the list could have 

gone on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, neither the Attorney General nor any member of his government is prepared to stand up 

and recognize that the blame for our present predicament rests in one place, and one place only - 

squarely on the shoulders of the government of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PENNER: — This government has betrayed its responsibility to the people of the province 

through Bill 42 rather than guarantee a fair and substantial share of the windfall profits which should 

have accrued to the people of this province as a result of those off-shore oil price increases in 1973, it 

made certain that we received nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an error can be excused but when a mistake is made by a particular group, a mistake which 

is conceived by that group, given birth by that group, sustained and nurtured by that group, brought to 

fruition by it, when that group all the while believes that their mistake is a beautiful and sound creation 

and then realizes that the creation is in fact a non-entity, that the creation is null and void, that the 

creation is a result of an illegal process, and despite all of this can't accept responsibility for their 

creation, then, Mr. Speaker, we have a group that deserves only contempt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PENNER: — . . . a group that runs to hide behind every possible wall, every possible shadow. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it would do well for the government to do what our party did in filing 

the return that the minister spoke of a few minutes ago. It's true we made an error, but we had the 

intestinal fortitude to admit that we made the error and to be honest and through everything that I have 

heard you people say about Bill 42, not one of you has had the gumption to get on your feet and say, 'it's 

our fault.' Every opportunity you've taken it has been to blame somebody else. That, Mr. Speaker, is 

exactly what this NDP government has done and they do not possess the intestinal fortitude individually 

or collectively to stand up as a man would do and say we made a mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this mistake isn't the only error made by this government. It is no wonder 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

801 

 

they are the only government with a socialist philosophy left in this country. Their record is dismal and 

speaks for itself. Economic mismanagement will no doubt be the phrase used by historians to describe 

this period in Saskatchewan s history. Let's look at some examples, Mr. Speaker. No province in Canada 

has been hit harder than Saskatchewan in the inflationary spiral. The economic growth rate in 

Saskatchewan is much below the average for the nation. The provincial income tax has risen 245 per 

cent in dollars collected to the Treasury in five years. Today Saskatchewan residents pay the highest 

provincial income tax rate of any province in Canada. Despite huge increases in revenue from income 

taxes and from federal provincial revenues this government cannot or will not live within its means. 

 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in its first annual report attempts to show a profit in excess of 

$800,000 when it is clear that it has a large and heavy deficit position. Other Crown corporations in the 

past few years have strangled Saskatchewan taxpayers with exorbitant rate increases. Nationalization of 

the potash industry and the result in lack of credibility in the investment climate of this province, Bill 42, 

is an act of irresponsibility perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan by the Blakeney government. Mr. 

Speaker, if we were to supply a short title to this one like we did to the bill the other night, it might very 

well be 'we're sorry folks but it's only your money'. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fear with Bill 47 which every thinking person in Saskatchewan recognizes is that the 

short title of this bill could become, 'oops, we're sorry for this one, too'. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 

there is a better than 50 - 50 chance that this bill will be as unconstitutional as was Bill 42. If this is not 

the case, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Premier to indicate to the House exactly what opinion he has been 

given on this important aspect of the question. It is his responsibility to indicate to the people of 

Saskatchewan that his $500 million mistake is not going to become a billion dollar bungle. He knows, or 

ought to know, that Bill 47 in its present form is open to attack because it attempts to do directly and 

retroactively what the Supreme Court said the government could not do indirectly. The portion from 

today or from the time the bill receives assent until back to 1973, and I am sure the Attorney General 

would agree, is open to serious challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has indicated its intention to negotiate with the oil companies for a 

substantial amount of the taxes owing. It is our view that the key to solving our problem is the 

negotiation process. The Attorney General and his colleagues know how to bargain. If they know how to 

bargain hard, if they know how to bargain fairly. then they can solve the problem that they and they 

alone have created. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I take my chair I would like to recapitulate. First of all, this government 

through its own mismanagement, incompetence, irresponsibility has cheated the people of Saskatchewan 

out of what is rightfully theirs. Secondly, there is no question but what Bill 42 was unconstitutional. 

Thirdly, there is a strong possibility that Bill 47 is unconstitutional. There is a strong possibility that you 

will turn a $500 million mistake into a $1 billion mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in the Liberal Party support the right of every province in Canada to tax resource 

industries in any way they like but we think that provincial governments, like individuals, have a 

responsibility to do so within the law. We believe also that any government who taxes in any manner 

whatsoever outside the law is stupid. Mr. Speaker, in his closing remarks the Attorney General gave 

three reasons why the opposition members might not vote for the bill. The first reason that he gave can 

be found on page 608 of Hansard. You will quite rightly see that the first reason that he 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

802 

 

(This page is blank.) 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

803 

 

in this debate It has taken us a week to flush them out and when we discovered that they have got 

somebody over here who is prepared to stand up, who has enough guts to stand up in this debate for a 

change, not to do the kind of thing that they did during the potash debate when they didn't have enough 

gumption or enough knowledge or enough understanding of the issue to get on their feet, we are finally 

going to get them on their feet today and were going to find out just what that Tory party is really made 

out of. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in a few minutes I am going to sit down and I am not going to adjourn the 

debate, and I am going to watch, as every member of this House is going to watch, to see who over here 

has enough guts to get on his feet, to see whether or not the goading of the member for Kelsey-Tisdale 

(Mr. Messer) has been sufficient to get those people who represent oil seats over here up on their feet 

and off their seats to speak about the issue. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting when you stop for a few minutes and you think about what this 

party has done in two and one-half years. You talk about political gainsmanship, you talk about points of 

order and points of privilege, you talk about insecurity and paranoia as I said in my opening remarks, 

you talk about gum chewing, you talk about decorum, you talk about filthy hospitals that they can't 

prove, you talk about bringing all kinds of things into the issue, Mr. Speaker, that indicate the kind of 

petty, small, insecure group of people that we've really got. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we were of the view that that party had folded up. The kinds of things that 

we're hearing in the country is that it's the rise and fall of the PCs; they've risen and they've peaked and 

they are beginning to fall and there could be no better indication of that today than the kind of 

performance this party again has shown in this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PENNER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, it's taken us ten days to flush out the 

so-called Tory, taken us that long to get these people to stand up on their feet and say something that is 

significant in debate in principle of a bill that is one of the most significant bills this House has seen. So, 

Mr. Speaker, inviting the Tory and especially the member for Estevan who represents a Tory seat, an oil 

seat, who has a speech prepared and sitting on his desk, I am going to sit down and give him an 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to rise in this debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — I think, Mr. Speaker, that a lesson has been learned this afternoon 

that we are party to no deals or arrangements in this House no matter how slipshod and how childish that 

the member for Saskatoon Eastview wants to be. Every day we have seen in this debate an arrangement 

serving the people of Saskatchewan no good whatsoever, wherein two members go and one member 

there speaks up and adjourns debate. They have every right, Mr. Speaker, to arrange or make 

arrangements, whatever situation they want to develop, whatever arrangements the government opposite 

is to try and get the Liberals off the hook because they can't make up their minds which way to go on the 

bill. One member gets up and says - 'it's a lousy bill, it's unconstitutional, it will not get beyond the 

Supreme Court, we must have a guarantee, a guarantee of constitutionality.' 'But we may vote for the 

bill.' The next speaker gets up and says, 'we want guarantees and we want assurances of the Attorney 

General that 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

804 

 

this bill is going to be constitutional because we don't think it is constitutional.' 'But we may support the 

bill.' The next speaker gets up and says, 'we want guarantees, we can be forced to vote on this bill unless 

there are guarantees of the constitutionality.' So then the hon. member gets up and says, 'but we may 

vote for the bill.' 

 

They have taken the classic position as defined by Dave Steuart years ago, the position of firm flexibility 

and that is the Liberal position on Bill 47. They're not going to vote for it, hoping that perhaps they have 

another filibuster, that we take this bill all the way through to next May and maybe they won't have to 

take a stand. Maybe by that time a year and one-half from now when we have a vote maybe we will 

have a constitutional guarantee or a validity guarantee. Perhaps we will if we wait long enough. Why, 

why are we hanging on on this crucial issue for the people of Saskatchewan? Why are we taking the 

time of the people of this province, when the Attorney General himself has said in the debate that this is 

one of the most crucial issues ever to face the people of this province? The Attorney General has said in 

debate, that without this bill and I think that this is crucial, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Attorney 

General has hit the issue right on and we agree with the Attorney General. The Attorney General has 

said that this bill is designed to prevent paying back to the oil companies a potential loss of $500 

million. He asserts speedy passage. The Attorney General asked all parties in this House to support the 

bill and I think all members of the press know it. I don t think the Attorney General asked for the party 

on the right to stand up and say, oh we've got to have guarantees. You must get down Mr. Attorney 

General, on your knees and say I guarantee in writing that this is constitutionally valid. That's what 

they're asking for. I have never heard of a more stupid, inane approach to a crucial issue, you can ride 

the fence, you can ride the fence, but make no mistake members to my right, that the fence you're 

standing on has got some pretty sharp pickets and you better take one side or the other than fall down in 

the middle, because you will hurt yourself and you will hurt yourself seriously. The fact is the Attorney 

General pleaded and I think all members on the press side saw it and all members on the opposite side. 

He pleaded for this support because the issue was, and the Attorney General made it clear, the issue was 

whether or not we are for or against you and I am quoting at page 608, but the key issue in the eyes of 

the people of Saskatchewan will be, are you for or are you against giving back this $500 million. Make 

no mistake about that member for Wilkie, make no mistake. That's what the Attorney General said, and 

we make no mistake. We have told you that we support this bill and we support it in principle. We have 

taken an unequivocal stand, an unequivocal stand that may upset you politically, that may irritate you 

politically understand it may make you angry politically, understand it may take your issue politically, 

but we are the only opposition party that has made a stand, the only one and the fact is we join with the 

government in making sure that the people do not have to pay back $500 million. We said it. We are the 

only opposition party that has said it. We agree with the Attorney General, the people can't afford to pay 

back $500 million. We know that. That is why we have endeavored in this House to take the wishes of 

the cabinet opposite to get speedy passage of this bill. Let's get in the committee. We have what we 

believe sound and constructive amendments. You may or may not agree with the amendments and that's 

fair for you to take that position in committee. We have given you what our amendments proposed. The 

fact is you know that eventually this bill is going to be passed, so why are we taking the long road. If the 

Attorney General is honest when he says that the reason for this bill is to make sure that we don't run the 

risk of having to pay back $500 million and he want speedy passage then why are we going through all 

this great exercise of day after day, the same thing all over, one party daily telling the public they can't 

make up their mind. They've got a split in caucus, they've got a split in caucus and they don't know 

which way to go and that's the real reason for the holdup. We agree with the Attorney General, we agree 

with the government that in fact, 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

805 

 

that in fact the principle is as the Attorney General has said, whether or not we are going to pay back the 

$500 million. I don't know how clear and how many times I have to repeat this thing. We agreed that the 

province shouldn't have to pay and the public should not have to pay back $500 million. Right. So we’re 

supporting the bill. We've said it. Now, for some reason an unequivocal stand in support from the 

Conservatives is subject to question, where the Liberals of all people can't even make up their own 

minds. The fact is a second reason for the stall from the Liberals is the fact that they didn’t get a position 

first so now they are embarrassed. Now they are hoping that the two or three Liberals left out in the 

country will show a unifying stand and give a position to take, and they have not yet heard and that's 

why, and that's why. Never, never, you know in the history of this Legislature have we seen on a $500 

million potential liability against the people of Saskatchewan, a political party which can’t make a stand. 

It doesn’t know which side to take. It’s inconceivable, it’s inconceivable that the people will accept that 

and I don’t think they will. The fact is the way to guarantee it, the way to at least put the government in 

a negotiation position is let’s pass this bill. Let’s get on. Let’s do what the Attorney General says in this 

case and let’s not put at risk $500 million. That’s what we’re supposed to be doing. We’re supposed to 

be looking after the moneys of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re attempting to do. We’re 

proud of doing that. We do not intend to get into a long harangue. It’s a nice simple position. Even the 

members opposite, some of the backbenchers can understand it. As I say it may not be politically 

palatable for the government opposite but that’s our stand and we say it with pride and it’s unequivocal 

and that’s where we stand. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, that’s an amazing flip flop. I have to say. I 

think that member stood in his seat in 1973 or 1975 and voted against Bill 42, spoke violently against 

Bill 42, said how rapacious that government was. Now he wants a supportive bill to restore the position 

of Bill 42, now he wonders, well what position I ask you is that. How did he come to his decision so 

readily? I’ll tell you how he came to it, because he didn’t get beyond a narrow, small political question, 

that’s how he got to his position so readily. He asks himself a simple question, “What is the NDP going 

to make of this?” The position the NDP is going to make of this is this. It’s going to say, you either stand 

with the oil companies or you stand with the people. He knows how effective the NDP is at making 

those simple kind of emotional arguments. He says, therefore, that we better be with the NDP on that 

one because they do such an effective job of that, so we shouldn’t go beyond the narrow simple politics 

of the issue. Well I tell that member, I tell that member that has always been his approach. It now still is 

his approach and he is going to have to go back to his constituents in Qu’Appelle and tell them why four 

years ago he voted against the policy of which today he wants to vote for. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Tell them how he arrived so simply at his decision. He asks why? Mr. Speaker, 

why it is taking us some time to analyse the bill. Well, the answer is threefold, one is that we are 

concerned gravely with the bill itself. The member himself has said that it’s a bill of fundamental 

importance to the province. He said, that the Attorney General indicated to us that while I always take 

the Attorney General’s word, he said apparently, that it’s of such fundamental importance that we ought 

to listen to the Attorney General. Now if a bill in fact is of such fundamental importance, has such 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

806 

 

grave and complex ramifications, surely to God it is incumbent upon members particularly the 

opposition to spend some time analysing those complex ramifications instead of coming to that very 

simple political first solution and that's where that member stood and that's where his party stands, 

because it hasn't got the courage, doesn't have the political courage nor the confidence in itself as a 

political party to stand in respect to this bill for what ought to be on principle. I ask the hon. member to 

take a look at the act and tell me whether it's a fair taxation system. The hon. member says yes, it's fair. 

Does the bill have a fair taxation system? Do you know anything about business? You have a gross 

income set up with the bill, that you have a mechanism to come at a net income. 

 

How do you arrive under this bill at that net income? How does the member for Nipawin and his 

sometime legal advisor, the member for Qu'Appelle, support this concept, the tax net income on an oil 

well? How do you arrive at your calculation of net income. Usually of course, members will know that 

you deduct your usual expenses in accordance with usual accounting experience and rules. This bill 

disallows the deduction of operating expenses of capital costs. There's no capital cost allowance 

provided for in this bill, unless you get some special exemption under regulation, but it begins by 

excluding expensing the capital cost allowance so that you can't expense the cost of your capital. It 

excludes from expensing taxes paid to other jurisdictions, so that if a producer has gained a certain 

amount of income and he has already paid federal income tax, and provincial income tax in respect of 

that income he is not permitted to expense those items of tax in calculating his net income for taxation 

purposes here, clearly an example of double taxation. 

 

Now I ask the member for Qu'Appelle if he can begin even to understand the most basic and embryonic 

concepts of accounting, how can he stand so readily and say, why, the Attorney General asked us to do 

it, therefore we are going to do it. A whole series of other items come under this bill that one is not 

permitted to expense in arriving at your calculation or computation of the net income, whole series of 

them and there is a time for debate when we get to the committee stage of the bill and indeed as the 

debate goes on to debate those at length. But what I put to those people over there seriously if they look 

at the bill in its detail is that there are all kinds of difficult concepts here and tough ramifications. Well, 

the member says it's not difficult, we want to give their money back and of course, that again reflects the 

sort of simplistic approach to this bill, the same kind of simplistic approach that those members took in 

the absence of that particular member of the potash legislation which we referred to earlier. They didn't 

want to take the position, they never want to take a position that's at all difficult, because they know how 

effective the NDP is at reducing it to simple motions and they want to be sure and be on that same side 

principled and respected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill has in addition to that and I appreciate the member from Qu'Appelle will know 

this, but the member for Saskatoon might, some difficult, constitutional ramifications. The member for 

Nipawin may not know that either, the Attorney General certainly does know it, and the Premier has 

described the situation as grave Members will understand, some of them, not the member for 

Qu'Appelle, that there are constitutional issues here before this House now, which in the perspective of 

our history we haven't seen before. We have had in fact in the last two or three years of the 18th 

Legislature, bills come before us on issues of a constitutional variety, the likes of which people don't 

generally see in their generation. We haven't had so many constitutional issues before us, since Aberhart 

in the 1930's in Alberta, with all the legislation there that was testing the limits of the power of the 

provincial government. We have had in these past three years the same exercise testing by a government 

again 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

807 

 

and again its limits of power. Constitutional brinkmanship is what we have seen in the two and a half or 

three or four years by the government. That s the period we're in. I don't know how the member for 

Qu’Appelle can set aside all that perspective of the important era that we’re in in history here and come 

to that simple little conclusion that he has come to without examining these things, particularly since he 

purports to be a lawyer and ought to be interested in this aspect. 

 

One look, Mr. Speaker, at the constitutional issues before this province today and those have been 

before us in the past two or three years, you see the enormity of government's effort to push its 

constitutional authority to its ultimate limit. The potash reserves tax is under challenge before the courts 

on it constitutionality. That situation will likely soon be determined by the courts, that too is a 

fundamental question of the limits of the power of this government, as it applies to the reserve tax in 

potash. The pro-rationing scheme which was altered so radically by these people when they came to 

power and they wanted to use that scheme as a taxing measure as well, was challenged, has gone 

through the courts, is today before the Supreme Court. That too, will determine whether or not this 

government had the constitutional authority to pro-rate in the way they sought to do and to tax under that 

act in the way in which they sought to do, the second action of fundamental importance to the limits of 

power of the provincial government, that one is before the Supreme Court. Bill 42 has just gone through 

four years of being rocked around in the courts and that essentially is the government's whole oil policy, 

reflected by Bill 42. Now we have the judgment from the Supreme Court, just recently indicating and a 

major constitutional decision indicating that the policy as reflected in the bill and the bill is 

unconstitutional. Again, a testing of its power, that one and in respect to that particular act it went 

beyond its limits. 

 

There are constitutional questions of a similar variety in respect of other issues. The Minister of 

Municipal Affairs has been testing his constitutional authority vis-a-vis the trucking industry and he's 

finding on occasion that he doesn't have the power that he would like to have there because that power 

under the constitution rests with another level of government. So he's having trouble in trying to deal 

with CN trucks and CP trucks and that issue, too, was before the courts in terms of the constitutionality 

of his actions. And he knows that that one is a tenuous position. He is pushing that position perhaps 

beyond where one reasonably ought to go if one wants to maintain the jurisdiction, another issue where 

government is pushing its power to some constitutional limit. 

 

There are others around as well, Imperial Oil has an action before the courts challenging oil taxation as 

well. That matter, likely, is going to come to trial and in due course will result in some constitutional 

decision as well. The Minister of Communications will know that his communication's policy as applied 

to cable television was also challenged by the national government in terms of its constitutional validity. 

The Provincial Government says we have the authority to legislate in respect to cable television; the 

national government and others elsewhere tell them they don't. Irrespective of that, following the same 

pattern, testing the limits of its power, this constitutional brinkmanship that the government is engaged 

in is it brought in a policy and legislation to control cable television which was and now is shown to 

have been unconstitutional. The Supreme Court of Canada . . . the member says stand up for the people 

of Saskatchewan. What do you suppose I am doing in having spent the time in analyzing where this 

government is going, and what sort of government we have? I find it interesting that when I say to the 

member for Prince Albert, looking across the aisle, and I'm telling him what an incompetent government 

this is, he tells me would you please speak for the people of Saskatchewan. Well, I thought I was doing 

that and I 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

808 

 

thought you would have agreed with me that, in fact, the government has been on a hazardous and 

treacherous course these last three or four years. Now I would have thought you would have agreed with 

that. You too, apparently, have been persuaded easily by the Attorney General as was the member for 

Qu'Appelle because, of course, the Attorney General has been saying all the while we're engaged in a 

competent exercise. But you see again a pattern here developing in respect of all these issues, patterns of 

moving with your power, challenging your power, sometimes failing, sometimes drawing it very close 

to the line and backing off, and in never once to this point in time having succeeded. Members have to 

ask themselves in connection with this bill where we are going as a province in doing this. What are the 

risks that we are visiting upon our people in testing our power in the way in which you people are doing 

this? We get a good example of the kind of risk you get in respect to this particular bill. You thought in 

'73 you said you had the power to do it. You were told you didn't. You persisted nonetheless. You didn't 

refer it to the courts as you had a chance to do to get it tested early. You tested your power. Four years 

later you were told you didn't have the power. Questions members ought to consider is why you pushed 

in that way to have that kind of test of your power. Another question is what risk are you prepared to 

visit upon the people to test your powers in that way. What is the risk? This one, clearly, you have risked 

$500 million without question. The Premier has indicated rightly that the situation is grave and the 

Attorney General, I think, agreed with him that it is grave, and that this bill which is now before us is not 

without some very real problems, and the Attorney General knows that. He knows as we discussed it in 

question period earlier of the day about the doctrine of colorability as it applies to constitutional 

interpretation. In its simplest terms the doctrine simply indicates to governments that they cannot do 

indirectly what constitutionally they couldn't do directly. Let me explain that a little bit. That doctrine 

arose and was applied in a case that you yourselves precipitated in testing your powers, the AMAX 

potash case. The Attorney General would be familiar with it. The background of that is the AMAX 

Potash Corporation challenged the validity of one of the government's potash taxation policies. It sued. 

AMAX said the tax is not constitutionally sound. So it went to the government and it said, look, we 

think your act is not sound, it's unconstitutional, we will pay you the tax, we will give you the money in 

the meantime, on the undertaking by you to repay it to us in the event it's proved in the end to have been 

collected unlawfully, a pretty reasonable request. The government said No. They were not prepared to 

do that. Then AMAX applied to the court to pay the money, the tax money, into court, wanting an order 

to permit it to recover the money out of court in the event the taxing statute was found unconstitutional. 

The government resisted that decision, saying, "incidentally" along the way, that even if our tax is found 

in the end to have been unlawfully collected we are not prepared to return it, which drew some comment 

from the Supreme Court. I'll remind the Attorney General of the morality of that kind of a decision. So 

what did AMAX do? AMAX appealed then to the Supreme Court of Canada eventually and it got a 

ruling from the Supreme Court and the provincial government sought to avoid having to repay the 

potash taxes that it collected, in the event the act went down as unconstitutional by relying on another 

provincial statute the Proceedings Against the Crown Act under which it said, under which the 

provincial government said the AMAX Potash Corpoation was not entitled to have the illegal tax money 

back. Now what the Supreme Court of Canada said to the government, and the Attorney General is 

aware of that case and the obstacle it places before him, is that if you can't establish the constitutional 

validity of your taxing statute, you can't keep the money under another statute. In other words, if you 

can’t pick it up lawfully on the right hand you certainly can't retain it with the left hand, the doctrine of 

tolerability. Now I ask the Attorney General and I ask those members there if they were prepared to 

listen to anything, beyond that simple little emotional political slogan and that stupid little hazy political 

decision they made, to get into some detail of things that 



 

December 9, 1977 

 

809 

 

they can see the problems that that case has given us. That insofar as Bill 47 applies retroactively, and I 

don’t comment on its constitutional validity as to its future, insofar as it is enacted to apply to the period 

behind us. I ask you how you can argue that that isn't merely an attempt to retain what you lost under 

Bill 42. Now members are, in fact, saying that that's what it s designed to do. The member for 

Qu'Appelle says that's why he's going to support it. But you know that you can't by Bill 47 retrieve what 

you've lost under Bill 42 constitutionally. If you said that's what you were trying to do, that's a guarantee 

you'll lose the case before the Supreme Court of Canada. That's why we were amazed, Mr. Speaker, to 

see the Premier indicate the other day on television that while he is going to pay CIGOL, his judgement 

of three and one half or four million dollars, he will pay that out of his right pocket, but under Bill 47 he 

will sort of tax it back into the left pocket, hand them a check with the right hand, tax it back under 47 

with the left hand and I say that is almost exactly what the Premier said. Now what I found 

unfathomable about that is that he knows the difficulty of the doctrine of coverability. He knows the 

problem with trying to retrieve a situation when you have lost it constitutionally and he says on 

television for the whole world to see that what we're trying to do with 47 is to recover what we lost in 

the Supreme Court decision on 42 and then the Attorney General is going to have George Taylor argue 

three or four years down the pike because I can't get him to refer it. George Taylor will rise in the 

Supreme Court of Canada and say, "No my Lord this isn't an effort, this isn't an effort to retrieve Bill 42 

at all. That's not what we're doing. We're not trying to retain the $500 million we collected. No, my Lord 

that's not at all what we're doing." We'll ask it again. We'll ask him what he is doing by the way. You 

may ask him along the way too why he uses 10 words when one would suffice as he did the last time 

when he argued your case on Bill 42. Mr. Speaker, I see it’s about 30 seconds before the hour so I'll call 

it 1:00 o'clock and I look forward on Monday to speaking at some greater length again and hoping to 

persuade among other things the Conservatives to show a little courage to put some principles before 

easy politics to examine the complexity of the situation which are here clearly and to take the decision as 

a responsible opposition. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:00 o'clock p.m. 


