



















































Hansard: April 13, 1977


2002 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

Wednesday, April 13, 1977. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

WIAAS STUDENTS 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina Elphinstone): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, the 

Member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen) who is unfortunately not able to be here at this moment, I 

should like to introduce to you and the other Members of the House, a group of 15 adult students from 

the Wascana Institute. They are studying occupational English. They represent nine countries, with six 

different alphabets. They are here with their instructor, Ms. Marian Beaglehole. My colleague from 

Rosemont proposes to meet them at 2:30 if they are available and to have a chat with them on that 

occasion. I know that you, Mr. Speaker, and all Members of the House would wish to welcome them. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

EXPROPRIATION OF FARM LAND BY CITY OF REGINA 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier some time ago I raised a question in the House concerning the expropriation of farm land 

by the city of Regina and that was tossed off by the Premier as an unlikely hypothetical situation. This 

morning it has become a reality since last night the city council in Regina has indicated that they intend 

to expropriate 16,200 acres immediately adjoining the city of Regina. 

 

Would the Premier tell this Assembly today whether his Government will allow such an expropriation to 

occur and whether or not they have a definite policy in this regard. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make clear that I have no knowledge that the city of 

Regina proposes to expropriate 16,000 acres or any acreage. I am not prepared to admit that the 

annexation of land amounts to expropriation since everybody knows that it does not. I am not aware of 

any proposal to expropriate the land. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. If for the Premier’s benefit I may hold 

this up and I will be happy to send it across to him, which is reported in the reliable chronicle known as 

the Regina Leader-Post. I think it is there rather clear and decisively. 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2003 

 

Mr. Premier, I am sure you are aware that in Canada this is a major problem that we lose 250 acres per 

day to our cities. It is a problem that I am sure you will agree must be dealt with. Does the Premier and 

his Government have any plans to establish a clear, a definitive position in regard to this situation? And 

specifically are they prepared to tell this Assembly today, their reaction to this expropriation or 

annexation or whatever you care to call it by the city which the Premier is now reading about? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the headline reads, ‘Council Approves Plan to Annex 16,200 

Acres’. That means that the land, if the city has its way, will be within the city of Regina. It does not 

mean it will be owned by the city of Regina. I own some property within the city of Regina. At last 

check at the Land Titles Office it was owned by me and not by the city of Regina. And accordingly, the 

mere fact that it is incorporated within the city of Regina, in no way means that it is expropriated, nor in 

fact, does it mean that it is taken out of farming. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Premier you know full well that if this becomes . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I ask all Members to direct their question through the Speaker, 

please. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Premier once 

again that if he is aware of the problem, when will you tell this Assembly exactly what your policy will 

be in regard to this farm land which is probably going out of agricultural production forever, when will 

you tell the policy of your Government to this Assembly? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, as the newspaper report makes clear, nothing will happen in a 

definitive way until there is — in the words of the city manager, Bruce Smith — ample opportunity for 

groups and individuals opposing the annexation to make their objections known to the province. Then 

there will be an opportunity for the Minister of Municipal Affairs to consider the proposal put forward 

by the city, and proposals or views put forward by any opponents of the proposed annexation, including, 

presumably, opinions voiced by the Department of Agriculture and other appropriate agencies of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. When all of that information is in hand, we will be in a position to make 

a decision and to announce what our policy is with respect to this proposed annexation — not 

expropriation — by the city of Regina. 

 

STUDY RE SUPPORT SERVICES FOR SUPERIOR COURTS 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. 

 

I understand Mr. Huggett, your Director of Court Administrative Services conducted a study of the 

functioning of the Superior Courts in the four western provinces in the various levels of support that we 

give those courts. I ask you if in fact such a study was done by him, whether such a study is 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2004 

 

complete, and whether the study indicated that Saskatchewan’s performance in this respect, in providing 

adequate support services for the Superior Courts was rather poor in relation to that provided by the 

other three western provinces. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any detailed information 

before me, so that if I am in error I will have to correct myself at some later date. 

 

Working from recollection by memory what Mr. Huggett did was review the support facilities which 

were available to the Court of Appeal. I don’t believe the study extended to the Queen’s Bench or other 

Superior Courts. He did that at my request as a result of certain discussions that I have had with the 

Chief Justice of the province. Again, my recollection is that the report indicated the need for additional 

stenographic and/or administrative staff. I think it is in the same category because of the particular 

set-up of the Court of Appeal, personnel, clerical, stenographic, I am not sure of the title. I believe 

subsequently there have been two or three additional positions approved. This was some months ago, 

now. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — By way of supplementary, did the study show that Saskatchewan’s performance 

in this respect was as I said earlier relatively poor in relation to the kinds of services that the other 

western provinces are providing that court? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this matter can be reviewed in Estimates in detail when I 

have all my officials and will be able to answer more particularly. This is a very subjective opinion I 

received basically my recommendations and my advice from the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal. I 

try within the budgetary restraints to accommodate any kinds of reasonable requests. I believe that the 

courts have been functioning very well. I believe we have a good court obviously, a judicial court and 

not a bad administrative set-up there as well. So far as I can tell the situation is certainly not as the 

Member would categorize it. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Last supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I would ask if the Attorney General is prepared 

to table the study that was done so we can then determine whether or not, as I am informed, the study 

indicates Saskatchewan’s performance is not flattering to the Attorney General’s Department in this 

respect. Are you prepared to table the report? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I am not sure what the Member means all the time by 

the words “flattering to the Attorney General’s Department.” 

 

If the Liberals continually suggest that what should be “flattering” is to give more positions without any 

kind of any objective analysis as to the purpose and the work of the positions, if they argue that we 

should be pumping in all kinds of personnel regardless of the functions, as far as I am concerned I will 

accept the description that it is unflattering to the Attorney General. The test is whether or not the Court 

of Appeal does the job it is supposed to do. I say the test 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2005 

 

has been met. With regard to the report I would have to check with Mr. Speaker before I agree to tabling 

it. 

 

EXPROPRIATION OF FARM LAND BY CITY OF REGINA 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Questions have been asked of the Premier with regard to the proposed annexation. The proposed 

annexation must obtain the approval of the Minister, should it obtain the approval of the Minister it then 

must obtain Cabinet approval. The Premier has indicated that there will be ample opportunity for the 

public to make their concerns known. In fact in the past the opportunity for the public to make their 

concerns known has been a total failure . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Kindersley. 

 

POSSIBLE WATER RATIONING 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister 

of the Environment. In last night’s Leader-Post an article was written regarding water restraint looming 

in Regina and Moose Jaw cities. I brought this to the attention of the Government several weeks ago and 

in view of the fact that the two cities mentioned, Regina and Moose Jaw, are faced with possible water 

rationing or restraint this summer as a result partially of the excess pollution of Buffalo Pound Lake, I 

would like to know what action the Government is planning that might possibly alleviate some of the 

pressure this coming summer? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, the Environment Department which is 

responsible for the management of the province’s water resources is aware of possible shortages of 

water particularly as they relate to urban and farm community supplies throughout the province and we 

have identified those communities that are likely to experience water shortages first and consideration is 

being given as to what action can be taken within the capability of the province to assist communities 

that may experience water shortage. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well, a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I asked the Minister what action his 

department might be contemplating to alleviate this particular problem and I think you are probably 

aware of what it is now. It has already taken two weeks. This problem refers to the Buffalo Pound 

filtration plant and the exceedingly high amounts of pollution in the water that has to be treated. Has 

your department studied that specific problem and what conclusion have you come to? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, the question which the Hon. Member poses today was put before this 

Chamber by him as an undebatable question on the Order Paper for Private Members’ Day last week 

and I agreed to provide him with the information. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Speaker, a final 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2006 

 

supplementary. In view of the fact of the length of time involved in providing the information and the 

fact that there is some scepticism about how worthwhile the information is going to be and I was under 

the impression that your department might have taken some steps . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Estevan. 

 

MANAGER OF SYLVITE MINE 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to ask the Premier a question. Could the 

Premier tell me who the new manager is of the Sylvite mine that the Government is in the process of 

taking over and what was his starting date? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I cannot. We have made no final arrangement to acquire Sylvite. We have as 

you know made an agreement in principle with Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting. There are details to 

be concluded, one of them will be the takeover date on the assumption that a takeover is arrived at which 

I expect it will be and so far as I am aware the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has made no 

selection of a manager for the Rocanville mine. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Party): — Mr. Speaker, on the day before 

yesterday in Question Period the Minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan did in 

fact state that a manager had been hired. We ran out of time and I ask the Premier again, has the 

manager been selected for the potash mine of Sylvite and if not, why not? If the takeover date is as 

proposed, the 20th or the 22nd of April as we are informed then how in the world can a new manager 

possibly take over the mine without having at least a week or so prior to the takeover to be available to 

sort out the necessary problems that he is going to be faced with after the date of takeover. We asked 

that question of the Minister. The Minister suggested to us that a manager had been hired. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Wascana. 

 

CABLE TELEVISION — NUMBER OF CHANNELS 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina-Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct to the Minister in 

charge of cable in this province and if I may, Mr. Speaker, it takes some preparation. The Minister will 

be aware that there are 13 spaces in the spectrum, 13 channels on the dial and the Minister has been 

saying that bringing pay television and trying to bring pay in at the same time as cable will not delay the 

advent of cable. In fact, Mr. Speaker, cable would take three local channels, it blanks three channels 

because of the fade over of the locals who are on the air. There are three American channels and then 

there are three so-called community channels. Mr. Speaker, the problem is, and I ask the Minister 

whether he would not agree with me, that if pay television is to have four channels on the spectrum, four 

channels in the VHF spectrum as the Minister has indicated it would, does that not mean that cable 

television will not have the number of channels that the CRTC has licensed it to have and be providing 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2007 

 

the service that it must provide if it is to proceed with CRTC licence. In short, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister’s position means that as long as he argues that pay must come at the same time we are not 

going to get cable in this province. 

 

HON. N. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services): — I thought for a moment, Mr. 

Speaker, it was going to be necessary for the Hon. Member to summarize the summary. I also thought 

initially that the Hon. Member had been fed the question by one of the cable licensees, however, after 

hearing the question I doubt that, because I am sure that cable licensees are aware that there are more 

than 3 channels on the TV, there are really 13 spaces on the ordinary dial. It is a relatively simple, 

inexpensive matter to add more channels since it is simply by changing the dial. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister not agree with me that the converter that he 

mentions, the converter which allows you to get more than the 3 channels costs about $99, $100, $101 

and that’s really the question whether people getting cable will face the initial expense of the $99 

converter or whether people getting pay television will face the $99 converter costs. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, if the people getting cable are to face the additional costs it means that cable becomes 

uneconomic. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Souris-Cannington. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister not agree that every 

TV set in . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Member for Qu’Appelle. 

 

EXPROPRIATION OF FARM LAND BY CITY OF REGINA 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — The groups that are affected by the annexation as announced last 

night at the outside of the city, were not listened to on their previous applications. Now the Premier said 

there will be an ample opportunity and my question simply to the Minister is, prior to approving or not 

giving the approval to the annexation, would the Minister be prepared to have a public inquiry or a 

judicial inquiry into the following questions: (1) the proposed annexation and removal of prime farm 

lands and (2) into the question generally of the urban encroachment upon fine farm land in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I can add 

anything further to this issue than has already been provided by the Premier. The policy of the 

Government has been to review each application for annexation on its own merit. Certainly with this 

particular issue we have had a number of people visit me in my office expressing their concerns. I 

suspect now they are fully aware of what the city is proposing, they will be returning to my office to 

express their opinion and we will welcome that opinion. Whether we go beyond that is something that I 

can’t 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2008 

 

say at this time. I was not aware of the city’s proposal having not seen the newspaper and certainly 

having not received anything at my office and I will be inclined to wait until I do receive something 

specific in my office from the city of Regina. 

 

MR. G. LANE: — Supplementary, the indications are that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is 

preparing plans in the south-east sector of Regina, drawing up plans for a subdivision, expecting to 

house approximately 38,000 persons. Is it not really, are the rural residents not really faced with a fait 

accompli and, in fact, they are wasting their time fighting any more because government plans are 

already made for a massive subdivision, that the Government has already approved a massive 

encroachment upon prime farm lands for urban development? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in 

co-operation with the city of Regina have embarked on some land assembly programs surrounding the 

city. These are not large in comparison to the proposal for annexation and there has not as yet been any 

request come forward, up until this point with respect to annexation surrounding that land assembly 

project. 

 

MR. G. LANE: — Last supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister. Does the Minister favor the 

proposed annexation of approximately 10,200 acres for industrial growth? That’s annexation of farm 

land for industrial purposes. And if he does favor such a policy and a proposal, what compensation 

proposals is the Minister considering for compensation to the Sherwood Rural Municipality for the 

reduction in their tax base. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I simply can’t respond to the Hon. Member until I know what 

specifically the city is asking for. Once we have that, once we have an opportunity to consider it, the 

Government policy will be announced. 

 

CHANGE TO SEDCO REGULATIONS 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of SEDCO, Mr. Vickar. 

In light of the recently announced success of the program by the Alberta Opportunity Company, the 

comparable agency to SEDCO in Alberta, I was wondering if the Minister would consider making 

changes to current SEDCO regulations to bring forth a preference towards smaller companies, towards 

their establishment in smaller centres and would the Minister also consider changes that would result in 

lower lending rates for SEDCO loans going to smaller centres, since our larger centres and larger 

companies have a superior access to conventional lenders? 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I’m not really aware as to 

what happened in Alberta and as far as making changes in SEDCO policy at this time, I have not been 

involved with SEDCO long enough to be familiar with what their past policy was and what the new 

changes would be, but if the changes that the Member is 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2009 

 

suggesting are beneficial to the province as a whole, then I am sure we would definitely look at it. 

 

MR. WIEBE: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister consider, once he has had 

an opportunity to familiarize himself with the regulations and policy of SEDCO, that he also consider 

the lead of the Alberta Opportunity Company in this regard to moving the SEDCO head office outside 

of the city of Regina? For example, head office for AOC in Alberta is a small town by the name of 

Ponoka and perhaps the head office for Saskatchewan could be located in a centre such as Swift Current 

or Herbert, which would indicate to the people of Saskatchewan, the Government’s determination to 

develop businesses in our smaller centres throughout the province. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll take the Member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

SPECIAL PERMITS FOR GRAIN TRUCKING 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs. Mr. Minister, some time ago your executive assistant, speaking in Winnipeg 

suggested that the Highway Traffic Board which is under your department, would be initiating special 

permits for grain trucking in certain areas of Saskatchewan. Is the Minister prepared to repeat the 

statements of his executive assistant to this Assembly at this time? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of my 

executive assistant speaking in Winnipeg. I will check with him and respond to the Hon. Member at a 

later time. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The executive assistant indicated, Mr. Minister, that 

there was really a policy and exemptions would be made in certain areas and if this, in fact, is the policy, 

would the Minister not agree that there is a dangerous precedent which could be set here, in that you 

would be showing discrimination in certain areas of the province where farmers would also want to haul 

under the same permit limits? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated I would check this. I think with respect to the issue of 

the load limit policy, I announced a proposal to SARM, which I think is pretty familiar to all Members 

and I think that that is what should be under consideration. I will, however, check with my executive 

assistant and respond. 

 

SCHOOL BUS OPERATION 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if while I’m on my feet I could respond to a question 

that was asked by the Hon. Member for Rosetown-Elrose the other day related to the Highway Traffic 

Board, making statements and issuing warnings prior to regulations concerning the issuing of warnings 

before being passed by the board itself. It related to school bus operation and, in particular, the panel 

buses and the removal of the rear seat. 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2010 

 

I have the answer to the question now, Mr. Speaker, and I can provide it for the Hon. Member. 

 

Back in August 31, 1976, regulations were passed, changing the bus standards. The particular one that 

relates to the question raised is this one. 

 

No person shall drive and no school board or owner of a vehicle registered as a school bus shall cause 

or allow a person to drive a vehicle registered as a school bus unless the vehicle is equipped with a 

door or exit available for use in an emergency, passage to which is clear of any obstruction and which 

may be readily opened from both the inside and the outside of the vehicle and which is located at the 

rear of the vehicle or near the rear on the left side of the vehicle. 

 

What the Highway Traffic Board officials have been doing is sending warnings to the smaller van type 

buses, so that they arrange their seating in order to accommodate to the regulation. What is required is a 

passage way at a minimum of 12 inches to that rear door. 

 

I might report also to the Hon. Member, that these regulations were checked with the School Trustees 

Association and they approved of the regulations. 

 

INCREASED HANDLING CHARGES — HOG MARKETING COMMISSION 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. About two months 

ago the Hog Marketing Commission increased their handling charges. The increase is based on each 

head consigned to the Commission. Can the Minister tell this House what the increase amounted to? 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — The increase I think was 30 cents per hog. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. This seems to be a substantial increase. In view of 

the fact that the Commission showed a profit last year, was this increase subject to the provincial price 

and wage controls? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — I think, Mr. Speaker, the Member will well know that the increase was put in order 

to accommodate the extra cost of transportation which was incurred when the Regina plant was closed. 

The Commission, in order to provide a proper transportation assembly for the hogs in the southeast and 

the eastern part of the province, found it necessary to incur some extra costs. This extra 30 cents is 

supposed to cover that cost. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, two days ago, the Member for Moosomin 

asked me a question with respect to a constitutional case and the possible intervention by the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I am now advised by my officials that there apparently was recently a decision out of the 

Ontario Court of Appeal in this area, but that as yet the province has not received any formal notice and 

accordingly, the question of the Member is premature. We can make no decision on this until we receive 

the formal 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2011 

 

notice. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

JUVENILE CAMPS IN THE NORTH 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Before Orders of the Day I beg leave under Rule 17 to move a 

motion asking for Priority of Debate for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public 

importance and I state the subject to be; the need for this Assembly to urge the Government immediately 

to commission an inquiry of knowledgeable, responsible, Saskatchewan citizens including members or a 

member of Ranch Ehrlo who have done an outstanding job since the program’s inception, with the focus 

being to devise ways for the concept of wilderness camps to be preserved, since they can serve a useful 

and worthwhile social need and to that end (1) to establish guidelines for the proper operation of 

wilderness camps for juvenile delinquents; (2) to recommend procedures to avoid improper delinquency 

procedures; (3) to suggest appropriate levels and nature of education and training required of persons in 

supervisory positions in wilderness camps and (4) to demonstrate the need for persons not to 

irresponsibly criticize publicly the operation of wilderness camps and thus bring them into disrepute 

when on balance they deserve encouragement and support in their efforts to teach delinquent boys 

acceptable social values. 

 

I so move, seconded by Mr. Cameron. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I have the Motion before me, upon which I have a statement. 

 

A notice regarding this matter, proposed for Priority of Debate was received in the Clerk’s office at 12 

noon, for which I thank the Hon. Member. The matter raised is one which has been before the Assembly 

on many occasions since the latter part of March. Any Member has had several weeks in which to give 

proper notice in order for the Assembly to debate this matter in the usual way. The notice today has not 

raised a new matter, nor does it develop out of new circumstances. 

 

I refer all Hon. Members to Rule 17, sub 6 which states that a Priority of Debate may take place if the 

matter is of urgent public importance. The fundamental principle underlying Rule 17 is to provide an 

opportunity within a proper framework of parliamentary procedure where none otherwise existed for the 

immediate discussion of any matter deemed to be of such urgency and importance that all of the normal 

or special business of the Assembly should be put to one side in order to provide complete right of way 

to a discussion of one specific, particular subject. 

 

I refer all Members to the Speaker’s Ruling of Tuesday, February 23, 1971, on page 35 of the Journals 

of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, Session 1971. I therefore, rule the Motion 

out of order on the grounds that this matter could have been introduced under a motion and given proper 

notice and, therefore, it is not a prima facie case of urgency, because the situation has been continuing 

over a period of weeks. 



 

April 13, 1977. 

 

2012 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — VOTE 32 cont’d. 

 

ITEM 1 cont’d. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Perhaps, Mr. Chairman, I should respond to some of 

the criticisms levied last night by Members in the Opposition. The first comment I would like to make is 

referring to the former Leader of the Opposition, whom these people claim couldn’t get crutches from 

the SAIL Program. I checked at the Plains Health Centre and found that Mr. Steuart was supplied with 

the proper set of crutches when he left that institution. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I am disturbed by some of the allegations made in this House last night by Liberal 

Members opposite. Before dealing with these I must say that I find it strange indeed to see the Liberals 

posing as the champions of health care in this province. These are members of the same party that has 

loudly criticized every new health plan introduced in this Legislature by CCF and NDP governments. 

 

Not only have they resisted every innovative health scheme proposed, but they failed when they were in 

office, they failed to introduce a single . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order please. I wonder if we couldn’t get off to a good start today and let me 

mention to the Hon. Members that I certainly think that we have to be lenient enough to give you ample 

time to discuss the Estimates that are before you, but I think you are sent here to do a responsible job, in 

a responsible manner. You have people who are watching you responsibly in the galleries. Let’s try and 

conduct ourselves in that way. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. They resisted every innovative health scheme proposed 

and they failed when they were in office to introduce a single new program. Criticism — lots of it! 

Achievement — none at all! 

 

They don’t like the Drug Plan. In their words it is just a frill. A program that has been of interest to 

several other provinces and states in North America, and it is reasonable to forecast, Mr. Chairman, that 

eventually the Saskatchewan type Drug Plan will be copied by all other governments. It is a Drug Plan 

that includes a formulary, thus ensuring that only effective drugs are dispensed and paid for by the 

taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Hon. Members opposite have asked why don’t we study the Manitoba plan. I can assure 

you that the model which is used in Manitoba was thoroughly studied before a decision was made in 

Saskatchewan. There is no formulary — any prescription drug is available no matter how ineffective it 

may be and many of them are very ineffective. The patient pays the first $50 in each year, anything over 

that the patient pays 20 per cent. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is Manitoba’s choice, it is not ours. We refuse to throw away tax dollars on drug 

products that aren’t really helping the patient and we don’t think there should be a financial barrier. We 

are convinced that our approach of 

 

 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2013 

 

levying a nominal consumer charge, a prescription fee, is a fairer way of having the patient participate in 

the cost of prescriptions. 

 

The Members opposite us suggested that our staffing is excessive compared to the Manitoba plan. The 

fact is, of course, that we are comparing apples and oranges. In Manitoba, with a $50 charge to users 

before they become eligible, there will be many prescription claims that are never submitted. In 

Saskatchewan every eligible claim under the Drug Plan must be processed. 

 

Furthermore, the administration expense for 1976-77 is a good deal less than the savings in the purchase 

of drugs as a result of Saskatchewan’s use of a formulary and standing offer contracts. I want to 

comment on the Liberals’ suggestion that instead of drug plan benefits being available to all our citizens, 

that they be available only to the poor and handicapped. Mr. Chairman, I hope the people of this 

province hear what has been said in this House last night and today. It is clear that if the Liberals ever 

become the government in this province they will categorize our citizens with labels such as “poor” and 

“handicapped”, in order to get benefits from health programs. The New Democratic Government does 

not agree with the Liberals that there should be second class citizens which would be the result of the 

labels the Liberals would put on them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We believe it is much fairer to make these benefits universally available without 

prying into the private affairs of our citizens and then make adjustments through the progressive income 

tax route. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the people in this province appreciate how long they waited in vain for a 

Liberal drug plan. In the election of 1964 they promised one. They were surprised when they got into 

office and found they were expected to deliver on the promise. So they then announced that the drug 

plan would be a catastrophic program. In other words, if you were a catastrophe you could then pry 

some money out of the Liberals for your drug costs. But they decided even that was too generous so the 

late Premier Thatcher announced that in spite of being elected on a promise of a prescription drug plan, 

he really did not have a mandate for it and so he said he would only bring in a drug plan after a province 

wide plebiscite to find out if the people of this province were in favor of the plan. They got themselves 

off the hook by never holding the plebiscite. The lesson, Mr. Chairman, is quite clear, the Liberals 

couldn’t deliver one single prescription in this province but they are prepared to be hypercritical of our 

program, even though it is widely accepted and generally a success. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want now to turn my attention for a brief few moments to the criticism of the 

Children’s Dental Program. 

 

It’s a well known matter of record that the dental health of our population in Saskatchewan is poor. 

Apart from the Province of Newfoundland, Saskatchewan consistently has one of the lowest dentist to 

population ratios in all of Canada. When the Liberals were in office they did literally nothing to alleviate 

this situation. Our earliest attempts when we were the Government were to provide bursaries and 

establishment  

 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2014 

 

grants for the training of dentists and assisting them to set up their practices. These moneys were given 

to them on condition that they would set up in under dentally served areas in the province. These efforts 

had a degree of success but were not enough to attack the enormous unmet dental needs of the 

population, particularly in the rural areas. 

 

To meet this challenge our Government took an initiative that had not been taken anywhere else in 

North America. We trained a new dental worker, the dental nurse, not only to provide preventive 

services to children, but to be able to perform curative services under the supervision of a dentist. And 

most importantly, we didn’t locate them just in the large urban centres. We have moved them out into 

the most sparsely populated rural areas of this province. We are convinced that this approach will have a 

dramatic impact on the dental health of our population. 

 

On the other hand the Liberals again want to put money before people. They say the plan costs too 

much. They ignore the extra cost of taking this vital service out to people in our rural areas. They ignore 

the fact that there are usually additional costs during the start up period of any program. They ignore the 

large component of preventive services that is included in our children’s dental package. 

 

That’s their answer, Mr. Chairman. They would have the Government turn over millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars to the dental profession in this province and have them run the program. Do the Liberals really 

believe that the dentists would take this service out into the far reaches of rural Saskatchewan? I don’t 

believe it and I don’t believe they believe it. Do they really believe that it would cost less? I doubt that 

very much. Do they really believe that, after dumping all the dental nurses that have now been trained, 

they would be able to attract sufficient numbers of dentists to this province to meet the needs of children 

in rural Saskatchewan? I doubt it very much. 

 

I’ll tell you what would happen, Mr. Chairman. The costs of the program would skyrocket and 

furthermore there would remain a tremendous pool of unmet needs in this province, particularly out in 

rural Saskatchewan. I mentioned last night some of the other provinces that have tried to meet this need, 

using dentists only on a fee for service basis. Their costs are rising rapidly and only a fraction of the 

eligible children are being covered, less than one-third. 

 

The basic problem in our province, Mr. Chairman, is we have never had enough dentists. It is only by 

being innovative and using dental nurses that we can cope with this problem. The Liberals are 

misleading the public when they try to indicate otherwise. 

 

In summary, Mr. Chairman, I want to make sure that the message isn’t being lost to the people of this 

province. What do the criticisms of the Liberals mean to the health care of our citizens? 

 

If we are to take the criticisms of Members opposite seriously, then if a Liberal government were to be 

elected, we would see the dismantling of the present health care system and obstacles placed in the way 

of health services. Deterrent fees would likely again be reintroduced. The reintroduction of premiums, 

maybe as high as the $384 that they charge in Ontario per family. The closure of small hospitals across 

Saskatchewan. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2015 

 

And finally, Mr. Chairman, doing away with frills, as Liberals describe them; the Drug Plan, the Dental 

Plan, the SAIL Program. 

 

I hope the people of this province will not be fooled. The Liberals have no love for health plans and 

would do their best to eliminate them or handicap them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

address myself, first of all to the Minister, with reference to what seems to be or appears to be an attitude 

of his and of his Government, pertaining to the provision of health care services in Saskatchewan. That 

is, that he seems to be hung up on the word, programs, systems, statistics, analyses, numbers, but he 

seems to forget that each of us, as MLAs in this Assembly, not only on this side of the House but on that 

side of the House, on a daily basis are receiving from our constituents, complaints, from our individual 

constituents, that they are not able to be treated in hospital, for needed hospitalization. In other words, I 

believe, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister and his department are forgetting the very individuals for 

whom the systems, programs, statistics, analyses, bureaucrats and others are there to serve and that’s to 

serve the individual patient. That’s what a health care system is all about. That’s what health care 

professionals are all about. That’s what we’re all here for, is to serve individual people. Yet not once, 

either last evening or today, have I heard the Minister, or, in fact, Members to my right talk about 

individual people, individual citizens who are not being served today by our health care plans in 

Saskatchewan. They are not obtaining the necessary hospitalisation that they need to meet their needs as 

individuals. People waiting six, nine, ten, eleven months for a hospital bed for orthopaedic surgery in 

Saskatoon. 

 

With deference to the Minister’s statistics, these are facts, stated by not only one doctor, but many 

doctors in Saskatoon. Not only by one patient but by many patients in Saskatoon. They are not able to be 

treated by a hospital care system. We hear individual cases throughout the province all of us . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Name one. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — No, we will be happy to table the documents, table the letters, you have got them 

as well, so has every Member across there got letters from his individual constituency. About receiving, 

for example, from the Pharmacare Program that the Minister boasts about, about receiving drugs that 

perhaps are as good as officials might possibly be able to determine, but on the other hand are not the 

choice of the doctor necessarily. And about receiving, for example, a prescription from the doctor for 

valium and having the valium replaced with the generic drug and side effect created as a result of the 

generic drug that is substituted for the valium. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You can’t support that by one instance. 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2016 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it has been suggested that I can’t support that by one 

instance. I will give you an example. I will suggest that the Minister of Health (Mr. Robbins) write today 

to Mr. Glen Millar, a pharmacist at White Cross Drugs. I suggest that he write to him and ask him about 

the instances that he has heard also in Melville, Saskatchewan. Also he may write to the other 

pharmacist, and I am sorry I don’t recall his name just offhand, in Melville, Saskatchewan and ask him 

about instances of the same kind and nature reported to him by patients whom he has prescribed for. 

And where I think we are falling down, Mr. Chairman, is that we are forgetting the one, the ultimate 

control over the medical care system, and that is the patient himself or herself. There your systems are 

falling apart. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Come on . . . pay. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — No, it has nothing to do with pay. It has nothing to do with pay, Mr. Chairman. It 

has to do with understanding. Individual patients in this province today have absolutely no idea what it 

costs for their treatment. They have no idea what it costs for their drugs. They have no idea what it costs 

for their hospitals. Why? Why will the Government of Saskatchewan not issue to the patients, not on an 

audit basis, or instruct or inform the medical profession and in fact the hospital system and in fact the 

pharmacists in the province to provide to each individual patient the bill as to the true cost of service. 

Where we are falling down in this province is that individual citizens and individual patients no longer 

understand how much it costs for them to run to the hospital for factitious things. To run to the doctor 

for factitious things. And the patient may run to a doctor, for example, with a pain in his arm and the 

doctor treats him as an overall patient, and it costs $300 for something that the patient might think would 

cost only $10 or $12 or $15. We are not suggesting that the patient should pay that but at least the 

patient should be aware of what the medical care in this province is costing for the demands that he or 

she is placing on that system. 

 

Now perhaps in that way you might possibly gain the benefit of individual people recognizing individual 

costs and complaining to the Government of Saskatchewan that they thought those costs were exorbitant 

or in fact complaining to the provider of the service when they thought the costs were exorbitant. 

Perhaps that might be a check on the tremendous increases in cost that you have faced, and perhaps in 

that way you might come to grips to a certain extent with the overutilization in some areas of our 

system. Where we are falling down Mr. Chairman, is we are not allowing individuals to be aware of the 

cost of treatment and therefore many individuals are overutilizing the service, not Mr. Chairman, 

because they are crooked, not because they are in any way believing themselves to be overutilizing the 

system, but because they don’t know what it costs for the very services that they are asking for. Now we 

are convinced, Mr. Chairman, that we could come to grips with the utilization of the system without 

bringing in the kinds of rules and regulations and deterrent fees that were suggested by friends to our 

right in the past. Without bringing in those added costs we are convinced if the patient knows what the 

service costs that he will not overutilize the system as they are at present. And if the overutilization of 

the system, that is presently in operation in our medical care system in the Province of 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2017 

 

Saskatchewan were in some way brought into line you would have the additional funds available to see 

that needed hospital beds are able to be maintained; that needed surgery staff would be able to be 

maintained and that long and lengthy waiting lists for needed surgery and for needed hospitalization 

would not be the order for the day in the Province of Saskatchewan. It is our judgement that somehow 

we have lost sight of that individual and if you can give the individual a feeling, if you want from these 

vast programs and statistics and analyses of your current medical care plan, if you can give the 

individual a feeling that he is taking part on an individual basis in this system then he in turn will help 

you to control the costs so that you may provide on behalf of everyone in the province the necessary 

hospitalization to meet their individual needs. It is not enough Mr. Chairman, it is not enough that you 

answer individual complaints about your system with statistics. It is not enough that you answer 

individual complaints about what lengthy waiting lists, with how much better we are in Saskatchewan 

than they are in Alberta, or Ontario, or anywhere else in Canada or in the world. What the people of 

Saskatchewan expect and have come to appreciate and in this regard I must say we have congratulated 

or paid compliments before to the CCF for the introduction of some of these plans and we do so again. 

And we will do so again and again and again. We think they are good plans. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Of course they are. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — That is right, but why not make them better. Why not make them not only the plan 

and programs and statistics but make them relate to the individual. Well, perhaps the suggestion to make 

the individual aware of the costs of the plans may be only part of the solution. Perhaps another part of 

the solution is to involve patients more than we are presently involving them in the kinds of decisions 

that have to be made by the Minister and his department as it relates to the priorities that he establishes. 

For example, did the Minister of Health (Mr. Robbins) approach the people of Saskatchewan and ask 

them whether they wanted to have the kind of cutback in hospital care that has occurred in the last six 

months to a year in the Province of Saskatchewan. The answer is no. The answer is no. Did the Minister 

approach the people of Saskatchewan in any meaningful way and give them a choice and say look we 

have so much money, we have so much demands on our money, we have to make a choice whether we 

cut back hospital beds five per cent whether we try to meet national statistics on hospital care in order 

that we can meet the rules and regulations set down by Ottawa so that we can get the maximum amount 

from them in terms of our grants from them pertaining to hospitalization and medical care. Did the 

Minister present these choices to the people of Saskatchewan. The answer is no. What he presented to 

the people of Saskatchewan was a fait accompli. He said that is it, we are cutting hospital beds back five 

per cent. Perhaps by involving individuals in Saskatchewan in our decision making process, by at least 

giving them a choice and then trying to determine what kind of a reaction they will have to that choice, 

perhaps in that way we might involve them as individuals more and we might get a better quality of 

medical care in the province than we are presently getting. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Give us some specifics. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Some specifics of what? Mr. Chairman, the Members 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2018 

 

opposite ask for specifics. I challenge any Member opposite to go into his constituency and talk and 

really talk to the people and ask them what they think of the hospital care system as it is presently being 

provided in the Province of Saskatchewan. The people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake told you what they 

thought of the hospitalization system. The people of Saskatoon Sutherland even told the Member for 

Saskatoon Centre what they thought of the hospital system as it is in Saskatchewan. Individuals, they 

voted, not in favor of your party and that is for certain. And in Saskatoon Sutherland they caused you to 

lose your deposit. I hope you put it up for the candidate there. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I think we could do with a little less assistance from the Members on 

both sides. You will all have an opportunity to rise to speak and I would ask the Member for Nipawin, is 

he ready to carry on. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Yes, thank you, I was ready before, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman there are many 

people in the province who are not being served by our system. If we bring the individuals back into the 

system again they will be served. We are making a suggestion to the Minister of Health that perhaps 

there may be a way to involve the individuals in our province without coming out with statistical 

answers as to how great the system is. If the Minister is prepared to listen to the suggestion, fine. If the 

Minister is not prepared to listen to the suggestion then you will listen to the people at the polls in the 

next election. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I would listen to suggestions if I got any that made any sense. I have 

to respond to the Member and I will do so briefly, Mr. Chairman. He talked about the drug plan and that 

there were drugs that should be on the plan presumably and he talked about officials in the department 

with regard to the drug plan. Well, who sets up the formula of the drug plan? If he would read the report 

on page 11 he would find out, Dr. McFetridge from the Saskatchewan Medical Association, Dr. Robert 

Johnson from the Saskatchewan Medical Association, Dr. Jim Blackburn, the College of Pharmacy at 

the University, Dr. Gordon Johnson, Department of Pharmacology at the College of Medicine. These are 

the people who make the decisions with regard to therapeutic drugs. It is not a case of officials in the 

department making that decision, it is the case of the medical people involved, and they are pharmacists, 

medical doctors, and pharmacologists who make that decision. He talked about hospital beds and he 

talked about the fact that we talked about statistics. These are facts. We should be able to face those 

facts. In 1976 there were 4,849 beds approved in this province and according to information received to 

date only 4,635 of those beds were used. The difference would mean a treatment of 9,000 more patients 

if they were utilized. A good number of those unused beds were in Regina and Saskatoon. Enough to 

treat approximately 3,400 cases. That approximates the waiting list in Regina and Saskatoon and there 

are very few patients waiting in other areas for the pressure is on Saskatoon and Regina. The 4,849 beds 

approved in 1976 allowed 5.1 beds per thousand and that is higher than it is in Alberta, and higher than 

it is in Manitoba and higher than it is in Ontario and New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and 

Newfoundland and I can go through the works. Now the Member shakes his head and says you should 

think of individuals. These are the beds that are available. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2019 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD: — Not available if you don’t have any money to pay staff to operate them. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We can answer that one too. We will get around to that. The Member raised a 

question of sending statements to patients. We look at that periodically, of course we do. We look at the 

probable cost but if we were doing it these people would be yelling about the cost, no doubt about it. 

SHSP used to send out statements and there is no evidence that the utilization was affected at all. None 

at all. British Columbia used to send out statements, they quit it. Why? Because they could see no 

evidence that it was effective. The Member talks about overutilization by patients but he doesn’t 

mention anything about overservicing by doctors. Who puts people in hospitals anyway? Only medical 

doctors and obviously it has to be based on medical decisions. He said that we didn’t consult with the 

people about a five per cent reduction. Did the Conservatives in Alberta consult with their people, did 

the Conservatives in Ontario consult. They didn’t go out and ask the people questions with regard to 

closing ten hospitals and shutting down 3,000 beds. Actually governments are elected to govern and 

they have to make some decisions. They can’t run around and take plebiscites on every single thing that 

you think the public might be interested in. I think I have dealt with the three major points that he talked 

about. He talked about getting back to the individual. Obviously the system works for the individual, 85 

per cent of the people in Saskatchewan last year had medical attention under the health programs that 

exist. They are not all perfect because we are imperfect individuals, but the fact remains that most of the 

statements made by the Leader of the Conservatives, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) are just 

sheer generalities and mean nothing. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the Minister of Health, he suggests who sets up the 

formulary and he read off some very well known names but he would also be aware that the medical 

profession generally for individuals within the medical profession don’t necessarily agree that maybe 

three or four or five or ten doctors sitting together, or pharmacists sitting together can determine what is 

the best drug for any particular course of treatment. They can’t decide. The fact of the matter is that it is 

up to the individual doctor to decide what is the best treatment for his patient, and in this instance it is a 

group appointed by the Government of Saskatchewan that is making that decision on behalf of that 

individual doctor. In many instances in our province, and I have given you names of people to call if you 

want to check out just who, in many instances in our province who suggested treatment by the doctor is 

not being followed because of the setup and establishment of a formulary and therefore the best possible 

treatment in the opinion of that individual doctor is not being provided to his or her patient. Now the 

Minister suggests that in some way that is a good thing. That is a great thing because that individual 

doctor who is making that decision as the best possible treatment for his patient that that individual 

doctor is better off by having all these experts decide on what drug is best for his patient or what generic 

drug is best for his patient, when, in fact, the individual doctor should be allowed to make that kind of a 

decision himself. The individual doctor in Manitoba can make that decision and the fact of the matter is 

in the Province of Saskatchewan the only reason that is apparent for the present system in Saskatchewan 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2020 

 

which costs more than the province of Manitoba and which is less satisfactory to the people, to 

individual people, than is the one in Manitoba, by far less satisfactory to the medical profession and to 

the Pharmaceutical Association in Saskatchewan than it is in Manitoba. The only possible reason for the 

plan that we have in Saskatchewan is the fact that under this plan the Government of Saskatchewan is 

able to push a button, buy it by computer and find out what drugs are prescribed for every patient in the 

province. And what drugs are prescribed by every doctor in the province. That is the benefit to this plan 

over the one in Manitoba. Even over the one in Manitoba, even though individuals are better served in 

Manitoba, even though pharmacists are better served in Manitoba, even though medical doctors are 

better served in Manitoba and even though taxpayers are better served in Manitoba, we have to have a 

plan in the Province of Saskatchewan that brings about a situation in which the Government can push a 

button and find out what drugs are prescribed for what people, what total amount of drugs are being 

used by the individuals in our province. That seems to be the only possible reason for the present plan in 

the Province of Saskatchewan and yet the Minister says that he studied the plan in the Province of 

Manitoba. Well surely he hasn’t talked to patients in Manitoba. He certainly hasn’t talked to pharmacists 

in Manitoba; he certainly hasn’t talked to druggists in Manitoba. It costs more here to provide for the 

same number of people as it does in the Province of Manitoba. 

 

What kind of drivel are we getting from the Minister today? Absolute drivel that you have studied the 

plan in Manitoba, yet everyone there is more satisfied with the plan in Manitoba than they are in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Yet somehow, we, in the Province of Saskatchewan are supposedly perfect. 

Your plans in Saskatchewan are perfect. Well I say nonsense, they are not perfect and neither is the 

Minister perfect and neither is the Government perfect and neither am I perfect. There are places to 

improve. Everyone has places to improve and one of the first places to start in the Province of 

Saskatchewan is with the Health Care Plans that we are presently offering. Let’s look to the possibility 

of improvement. 

 

Now the Minister suggests that in the Province of Saskatchewan we have far more beds per population 

than they have in the Province of Alberta. Yet individual MLAs in the Province of Alberta are getting no 

letters complaining about the patient’s inability to get into hospital; they are getting no letters from 

patients who are not being treated. They are getting no complaints from their constituents about having 

to wait months and months and, in fact, many of the patients in the Province of Saskatchewan who have 

to wait for months and months for needed treatment, are in fact travelling to Alberta to be treated in 

Alberta. Yet we have more beds! Certainly statistically we have more beds, but are the beds meeting the 

needs of individual patients or of individual doctors. The Minister suggests that it is doctors who put the 

patients into hospitals and he is right. The Minister suggests that it is doctors that may be overutilizing 

the system, and he is right. But what better check could there be on a doctor that is overutilizing the 

system than a patient who understands what it costs for a particular treatment. 

 

The Minister suggests that sending out by the central system, the bills for particular hospital or medical 

care is extremely costly and he is right. He has failed to recognize that by the 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2021 

 

individual provider of the service it is not costly because a mere copy of the bill that goes into the 

Government of Saskatchewan can be provided to the patient by the doctor. A copy of the bill that is 

provided to the Government of Saskatchewan can be provided by the hospital. A copy of the bill that is 

submitted to the Government of Saskatchewan can be provided by the druggist. A copy of the bill can be 

handed to the patient, one copy on one form. That is not a tremendously high expense, yet the patients 

would then have an idea of what it costs for their individual treatment. If, in fact, in order to get 

collections from the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan or from the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission, the medical practitioner or the hospital has to put confidential information on the bill, the 

copy of the bill could be blinded in that area. If they want a morbidity code, for example, but I don’t 

know whether the Government is presently accepting a morbidity code as a means by which it pays the 

various hospitals and pays the various medical doctors in our province, certainly not the ones on global 

budgeting, I realize that they are paid in a different fashion. But the ones who are submitting fee for 

service, perhaps they are submitting the morbidity code. Well, that area of the bill, which is allotted for 

the morbidity code can be blanked on the copy that is given the patient. 

 

We believe that it is important to bring the individual back into this system again. You do so by making 

him aware of what it costs for his treatment. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Then you provide them an . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Well, the Member who is afraid to stand up on his feet and wants to talk from his 

chair, is making suggestions beyond which we are. We are suggesting that a copy of the bill be provided 

to each patient. That is our suggestion. We think that that would, in a very great measure, cut back on 

the overutilization. 

 

The problem, Mr. Minister, for what it is worth is 25, 30 or 40 years ago, or even 10 years ago, when 

little Johnny skinned his knee, little Johnny was given a kiss by his mother, a plaster put over the knee 

and sent out to play again. Today what is happening because the patient isn’t aware of the cost of the 

service, little Johnny is thrown into the station wagon and dragged to the emergency of the hospital, seen 

by two nurses and three interns and whatever doctors are on staff. He gets a plaster on his knee, he is 

given a kiss by his mother and he is sent out to play and in the meantime we have gone through a couple 

hundred of dollars worth of services. 

 

Now certainly that is the right of the patient, as you say, if they believe that little Johnny needs to be 

examined by a doctor that they run to the hospital and meet their doctor at the hospital and be seen. But I 

suggest to you, Mr. Minister, if the patient realized how much that kind of service costs and what they 

have to give up as a result, what they have to give up is the right to get into hospital when they are sick; 

is the right not to have to sit on some doctor’s waiting list for nine months. That is what they have to 

give up on the one hand when they are sick, on the other hand they might recognize that if that cost $200 

or $300 they might not run so quickly to the hospital, or run so quickly to their doctor for that small item 

that perhaps they could have fixed by themselves. 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2022 

 

We think that that is what is causing the dramatically skyrocketing costs in health care over and above, 

not only from the patient point of view, but from the doctor’s point of view. The medical profession, 

unfortunately, over the last few years, has become used to the practice of when a patient comes into the 

office with a sore arm of saying, well, we may as well do a ECG, we might as well do an x-ray, we 

might as well have some lab tests and some blood tests, because you are here we might as well check 

you over, when in fact the patient wants to be treated for his sore arm. We might as well give you a 

broadly based general medical. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is what is causing the pressures on your hospital care system today. The tremendous 

increase in the utilization of lab, the tremendous increase in the utilization of x-rays, so what was your 

answer? Cut off the number of x-ray units in the cities and in some smaller centres as well. Cut them off 

and give the x-ray unit over to a community health clinic, for example. We will support them but we 

won’t support the one at the Lloydminster Clinic. We will support this group of people for an x-ray but 

we won’t support this, but we will cut back so that we will make the patient have to go into their doctor, 

have an x-ray ordered, have to leave their doctor’s office, go to the hospital and get an x-ray and get 

another appointment with their doctor to get the results of their x-ray. 

 

That is what we have done with the system that you have suggested. Instead of putting the onus on the 

patient, where it belongs, to check the doctor to make sure that the doctor is not over ordering for that 

particular illness. Traditionally that is what the patient did. The patient can still do that if he realizes 

what it is costing him for that particular service. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I am sorry but the Minister may be rather angry about 

this, but I am interested about a number of things that the Member for Nipawin has said and also what 

he and the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley were saying yesterday, but more particularly just the little 

exposition that we have heard from the Member for Nipawin and his arguments respecting the sore arm, 

where he indicated that the costs, the reasons for the tremendous costs, is that he described the doctor 

doing the full test on the patient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to know whether the Member for Nipawin is saying that the medical 

profession is widely abusing the medical care and hospital system? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Well, unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t know that was in order in Estimates 

but I am certainly prepared to answer the Attorney General. 

 

No, I don’t believe the medical profession is widely abusing the system. We are not suggesting that the 

medical profession is widely abusing the system, we are suggesting that it has become fashionable, if 

you want, by all medical doctors to utilize the facilities of the lab and the x-ray far more than they have 

in the past and that, perhaps, this fashion . . . 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Choose your words carefully you are being taped. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Oh, we realize that. Perhaps this fashion or 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2023 

 

fashionability as it were, might possibly be brought under control by allowing individual patients to 

realize what it costs for this practice to continue. I am suggesting that it is necessary, that not only the 

doctors be controlled, if you want, the doctors’ incomes be controlled from the top down, but I suggest 

to you that it would be of advantage to the Province of Saskatchewan if the doctors’ incomes were 

controlled from the bottom up. You would then have a double check. You would have a check, not only 

from the MCIC and SHSP, you would also have a check by the individual patient for the service that 

was provided. We are not suggesting that it is necessarily an abuse of the system. It has merely become 

fashionable for the medical practitioners to increase the amount of use that they have had of lab and 

x-ray facilities and, or in some instances, certainly not in Saskatoon and Regina today, but in instances 

in the past, perhaps it was fashionable to utilize the emergency service at the hospitals in the cities 

especially, but also in some rural areas, to utilize those rather than a doctor’s office. It is more expensive 

to treat a patient in the emergency hospital than it is at the doctor’s office or at the home. To a very large 

extent many medical practitioners have suggested that they don’t have the facilities at their office or 

their home so they use the emergency hospital. 

 

I suggest to you that this kind of practice, this kind of fashion is what is causing, among other things, the 

skyrocketing costs in medical care in our province and, in fact, in Canada and North America. It seems 

to us that where we have pioneered by the CCF the kind of plans that we have to help people get into 

hospital and to help people be treated for medical care, perhaps we could pioneer the kind of plan that 

would enable us, not only meet their needs, but also to come to grips with the tremendously increasing 

costs of the program, so that we could continue to provide necessary services as opposed to those that 

perhaps are not as necessary as others. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say on this point and I thank the Member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley for allowing me to get into this briefly. 

 

I quite frankly despair of the whole democratic process when I hear the kind of logic and the kind of 

debate that I have been hearing this afternoon. Really what the Member for Nipawin has said is this: it is 

fashionable to do the things that the doctors do; it is unnecessary for the patient to have anything else 

examined other than what he asks to have examined — the arm; the costs are skyrocketing as a result; 

that somehow that does not equal to abuse of the system. That is what he argues. He says that it is not 

necessary that when that man comes in for an arm check — using his example — for the doctor to go 

through the whole routine of ECGs and everything else, all these terms that I don’t understand, it is not 

necessary and he says that is what is burdening our system down, but somehow that is not an abuse. 

 

I despair of it, Mr. Chairman, when I hear that argument. I despair when the Member for Nipawin says, 

like the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley says, we have no hospital beds in Saskatchewan. That is 

overstating it, that is the argument. 

 

The Minister of Health has been giving us the statistics with respect to Alberta or Conservative Ontario. 

The Member for Nipawin says, don’t bother me with the facts. Somehow we are getting these letters 

from individuals. Now we have here 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2024 

 

before us, Mr. Chairman, supposedly a democratic forum, for the rational disposition of political 

disputes that are before us. They argue that there are no beds, we argue that there are beds. We try to 

meet that argument by supplying the figures, they resort to a collateral argument that says, forget about 

the figures, you have to put this back somehow to the people. 

 

We say that the doctors, while there may be individual instances of abuse, don’t abuse it. The Member 

for Nipawin says it is not abuse but it is fashionable to the point of being destructive of the entire 

medicare and hospitalization system, but it is not abuse. 

 

Mr. Chairman, to my way of thinking I think that those are two examples of the basic contradictions and 

the despair of anybody trying objectively to look at this debate and try to arrive at, with respect to their 

criticisms of the Department of Health, at any conclusions made by the two opposition parties. 

 

I simply say, Mr. Chairman, to the Members of this House, that I suppose out in the country you can 

make a great speech about having this people oriented health care and hope that somehow the people 

would overlook the fact that the Conservatives, many of them oppose medicare and hospitalization as 

they did in 1962, in an unholy alliance with the Liberals. 

 

I am going to make one other comment. The Member for Nipawin says, we are not for deterrent fees. 

We are for making sure that people know that they are participating in their own recovery, make them 

more responsible. 

 

The Member wasn’t here but that is exactly the line that was used by the Minister of Health of the 

Liberal Party when he introduced deterrent fees. Just a little bit of responsibility has to be built into the 

hospitalization and medicare scheme. It is a perfect system, he said, nothing wrong with it. Everybody 

can afford two dollars and fifty cents a day. It helps them to know that they are participating in their 

recovery, that is all. We are going to keep the costs down, we are going to do away with all these frills. 

The Member is just one step away from that. He is saying that we have to know that we are participating 

in our recovery by being sent a big bill, not pay, yet, just to get the big bill. 

 

What is the next step in the participation of recovery route? The next step has got to be something called 

a participation in recovery fee, or utilization fee, or whatever you want to call it. The Member that the 

Leader of the Conservative Party said should participate on his feet, I was in this House and your 

colleague the Member for Elrose either stated flatly, I won’t accuse him of doing that but certainly 

suggested by implication that people would be better off if they paid $10 a day and knew that they had 

entry into a hospital than under the present system. The Members shake their heads, I have a meeting at 

3:30, I am going to leave because I have to go to it, but I will dig up the exact words. If this thing is still 

on Item one, if you deny this, I will come back with the exact words. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have heard some very contradictory remarks and poor debating. I despair of the debate 

that is taking place with these kinds of word games, these kinds of political statements which don’t 

acknowledge the facts, which try to obscure the clear implications of their policy in the attempt to get 

votes. I close, Mr. Chairman by saying it would be a frosty 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2025 

 

Friday when the people of Saskatchewan ever put the medicare and hospitalization plans in the trust and 

care of the Conservatives and Liberals in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — We have been stung by you boys before. I simply say that is why this whole 

debate has no credibility from both sides, no credibility whatsoever. You may pick up the odd story 

headline on it, but the people in Saskatchewan know what the Conservative Party were for in “Keep Our 

Doctors” and what the Members of the Liberal Party were for in “Keep our Doctors.” They know the 

track record of deterrent fees, they know the track record of closure of hospitals, and they know if it is at 

all half way decently reported, of which I also despair, if it is, they know that the arguments that you 

enunciate today are so contradictory and confusing as to be meaningless. Mr. Chairman, thank you very 

much. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — As usual, no, not usual he speaks and runs and that is unfortunate today. 

 

First of all the Attorney General said he despaired of the arguments of the Member for Nipawin. It is not 

very often I take the Member for Nipawin’s side, but in this one he is right. What he is really saying and 

he certainly didn’t articulate it as well as perhaps he could have, is that the NDP had removed from the 

citizens of Saskatchewan, both patient and doctor any personal responsibility in the medical care plans 

and hospitalization in Saskatchewan. They have run around the province in election campaign after 

election campaign and educated the people of this province that medicare and hospitalization is free. 

Believe me to look at these Estimates, it is not free, it is costing $404 million this year. 

 

You people take great pride, we are not going to charge anybody, but it is costing all citizens in this 

province a million dollars a day plus to operate these schemes and they are not free. As a result, the 

people of this province — and that is what the Member for Nipawin is trying to say — is they have no 

personal responsibility or obligation. The NDP says it is free. Those dirty rich people are going to pay 

for it. The doctor has also been removed from all personal responsibility. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — What about . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — You made a fool of yourself yesterday, don’t make one today. Don’t make one 

today, Mr. Member for Saskatoon Centre. Just listen for a moment and see if you can respond in an 

intelligent fashion. I would love to hear you stand on your feet and make another fool out of yourself 

like yesterday. 

 

Let’s take a look at the doctors. All of a sudden the doctor has no more personal responsibility. First of 

all he collects all his bills, all he does is channel them to the Minister of Health and the Department of 

Health. He knows it doesn’t make any difference what kind of service he provides, the extent of the 

service, as the Member for Nipawin indicated 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2026 

 

he can give him a complete medical check-up and that may be doing the patient a service but it certainly 

is in no way controlling costs or in no way having any personal responsibility so all he does is bring it in 

and funnel it through the system. Send the bill to you, and that is why the costs are going up. 

 

The Member says he despairs of the argument about hospital beds, about you providing the facts and we 

say they are not available. Unfortunately it isn’t that simple. I can take you to a hospital in Saskatchewan 

where you can’t get hardly any of the services, and very limited. You might be able to be looked after 

for the flu, you might be able to be looked after for a broken toe, or get some stitches, but if you just 

have anything wrong with you, what happens? First of all your own rules say there have to be two 

doctors. Go to Pangman and try and get some treatment. Where are they going to ship you? If there is 

anything wrong with you, you go to the doctor in Pangman who puts you in the hospital, he charges you 

for that, and the next day he phones an ambulance and you are wheeled to Regina where you can get the 

treatment you need. That is why we are short of hospital beds. It isn’t the fact that there are statistics on 

hospital beds. The statistics are in Elrose, Lampman, Pangman all those little hospitals which are limited 

function hospitals and you know it. That is what they are named because they can’t provide medical 

service. Don’t say hospital beds and statistics. The Attorney General Says “I despair at the argument.” 

They, the Government, say there was a surplus of hospital beds, that they didn’t even use all the beds. 

Of course they didn’t because you have cut their pay, so they had to cut their staff and they had to close 

beds . . . of course, they could approve more beds than the Minister gave money to pay the staff to 

operate the beds. Read what they say, this isn’t what I am saying, it is what the hospital people are 

saying. “Hospital Care Cut Backs Shock Hospital Officials,” “Hospital Funding Cuts To Be Topic of 

Talks.” Listen to this: 

 

A letter from the SHSP stated the reduction in approved patient days and we required a re-assessment 

of the hospital’s approved staffing complement. The funding for six registered nurses, three certified 

nursing assistants, three ward clerks, two dietary aides will terminate June 30. 

 

What in hell is the use in having the beds if you have nobody to operate them? That is what happened, 

Mr. Minister of Health, and that is why there is a surplus in Regina. That is why there are surplus beds 

that weren’t used. You could go on and read what all the hospital officials say. 

 

Let’s be realistic and honest. That was a pretty intelligent speech. I didn’t agree with the idea of sending 

out the bill. I don’t agree that that makes that much difference. But don’t ridicule. The lack of personal 

responsibility and health care in this province which is all that the Member for Nipawin was trying to 

say. Don’t come back with statistics and say that is all the answer in relation to hospital beds because the 

Minister is an honest man. I guarantee you that he will get up and agree with me that a hospital bed in 

Pangman is not the same as a hospital bed in Regina and doesn’t provide the same services and therefore 

that can’t be the same kind of bed. All I am saying is when the Attorney General gets up we could go on 

and on. The Member for Nipawin made an intelligent comment and it is not worth the ridicule and the 

nonsense that you people are throwing out. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2027 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to go back if I might to the Member for Nipawin just 

very briefly and point out that he says the drug formulary committee cannot devise a plan which will 

satisfy all doctors. If a doctor wants to prescribe something outside of the plan it is perfectly legitimate 

for him to do so. Nothing wrong with it. He surely doesn’t expect us to have 860 doctors to sit on the 

committee to make a decision with regard to the formulary, does he? Those people come from the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. They suggest them to the committee and obviously they represent 

the doctors on that committee. Pharmacology is a very complex field. It is just ridiculous to think that 

every individual doctor can keep on top of all the new developments in that field. It is just not possible. 

He knows that. 

 

The other suggestion he was making was, if we just got information out to the individual, if the 

individual knew that it cost a hundred dollars for the last lab and x-ray he had through that doctor, then 

comes the next time he is ill, he will say to the doctor, don’t give me lab and x-ray now, I can’t afford it. 

Baloney! He knows it is baloney. That isn’t the way it is going to work, that isn’t the way it is going to 

happen. The Member for Indian Head-Wolseley talks about not having the same services in Pangman as 

in Regina. Does he really expect them to be. Obviously he doesn’t. Obviously the whole system has to 

be set up on the basis of community, regional and base hospitals. 

 

The fact remains that the beds in Regina and Saskatoon were not used up to the average daily census last 

year. You can argue I suppose, endlessly. If we want to face facts, you have to face the fact that — the 

Member for Indian Head talks about costs are going up every day because of these things. What about 

the United States, they don’t have a universal plan, but their costs are three and four times as high as 

ours, $400 a day for some hospital beds. How do you answer that one. We get bills from people who 

have been in the States, you should see them, they are catastrophic. That is all I have to say. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I just have two remarks. I am sorry that the Attorney General is not 

here. I despair at his attitude in fear, fear of allowing individual patients in the Province of 

Saskatchewan to know what the treatment for their services actually cost. Why are you afraid to let 

individuals know what it is costing for that treatment? The answer is, that you want to continue to let 

people believe that somehow the hospital care system and the medical care system in Saskatchewan is 

free. Surely, there is nothing wrong with allowing individual citizens to know what that treatment is 

costing them. 

 

The Member for Indian Head-Wolseley has suggested today that he wanted to help, and I really wish 

that he would leave his help for himself. We were not talking about an individual sense of responsibility 

in this instance, we were talking about an individual sense of participation. 

 

The Minister suggests that the formulary as established by this Committee is going to meet the needs of 

the individual doctor, the answer is that it cannot and it will not. What he won’t answer for us is why not 

the Manitoba plan. In Manitoba there is no formulary. In Manitoba the individual doctor decides on the 

proper drug, on the drug which he wants to prescribe 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2028 

 

and the pharmacist prescribes exactly what the doctor prescribed. That is the plan in Manitoba, and it 

works, and it costs less than it does here. All parties associated with the plan in Manitoba are happy with 

it and parties in Saskatchewan are not happy with the Saskatchewan plan. Individual doctors do not like 

the idea of some so-called experts telling them what they must prescribe. They would rather be given a 

choice. And perhaps that is the best word to use in the entire description of what I have been trying to 

say today, a choice. Patients want a choice, as individuals, they want to be able to choose, surely, 

whether their government should cut back on hospital beds or whether they should run with little Johnny 

to the hospital for something that could be treated at home. They want to know that that choice is 

available to them. Surely as individuals they are entitled to make that choice. 

 

The Minister suggests that somehow the system will provide. What the system will provide is a grey 

service for everyone. A grey service for everyone without any input at all from the individual. The 

individual will only be faced with the kind of system that the Minister is talking about, will only be able 

to obtain that service that the Minister and his appointees and his deputy minister decide is right. 

 

The Minister suggests, for example, that in the creation of the formulary, that those individuals whom he 

has described as listed as being members of the formulary committee are there somehow because of a 

right. The answer is, they are not there at his behest. If they decide on an extended formulary or if they 

make a decision adverse to what the Minister wants, the Minister will fire them and put other people on 

the formulary committee. 

 

So it is the Minister who makes the decisions and the Minister’s appointees who make the decisions, not 

the individual doctor with reference to the pharmacare program in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This choice the people want to be able to make we hear all over the province, you must be hearing it too. 

Surely there must be a way that we can stop these waiting lists in the hospitals. Surely there must be 

some way that we can make a contribution of some kind. I suggest to the Minister that that contribution 

isn’t even necessary. I am suggesting to the Minister today, that if you put in the hands of the patients 

information about what their treatment is costing, certainly not despairing in terms the way the Attorney 

General placed it, but if you put that information at their finger tips, they will make responsible 

decisions. 

 

It seems to me that what the Minister is suggesting, what the Attorney General is suggesting that 

individuals are incapable of making the kinds of complicated decisions that need to be made in modern 

technological society. Nonsense. 

 

I heard a member of the NDP executive at one of the northern seats in Saskatchewan during a recent 

SUMA meeting stand up and say — we were talking about real revenue sharing — stand up and say, 

well those people out in some of those communities don’t know enough to govern themselves. That is 

the attitude of your Government. People don’t know enough to govern themselves. You are so much 

better than they are that you can tell them, this is the system that is best for you. I suggest to you, Mr. 

Minister, and Mr. Chairman, that individual 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2029 

 

people in Saskatchewan want a choice. They don’t want you telling them what is the best system for 

them, then forcing them to take that best system. They want to be able to choose between options. 

Surely in creating a system you can come up with some options for individuals without destroying the 

system. 

 

How would it destroy the system to let individuals know how much their treatment is costing the 

Government of Saskatchewan? How would it destroy the system in any possible way? How would it put 

any burden on any individual in the province by letting him individually know what their doctor is 

prescribing? And perhaps in that way they might have a check on their doctor. Maybe. 

 

And that’s where the doctors themselves want the responsibility to belong, is with their patients. The 

doctors themselves want to be controlled, if you want, by the individual patients. Wouldn’t this provide 

an added means by which that individual doctor could be controlled by his patients? We think it would. 

We think it would. Wouldn’t that provide a means, by which the patient could control his own choices? 

We think it would. We think individual people in Saskatchewan are responsible and are capable of 

making the decision, that look, if this service is going to cost us $300 for something that we thought was 

going to cost $20 or $30, maybe we should opt for not going after that particular service, so that if we as 

a group, if we as a province, want to be able to get into hospital and not have these lengthy waiting lists, 

we’ll be able to do so. Why not allow it, why not try it? Is there some reason why you are afraid to allow 

individual patients to have the information at their disposal? I think that you are afraid to let people 

know how much these individual services cost. That’s why you have suggested the idea is no good. 

That’s why you have run it down, because you are afraid to let people know what it costs for the health 

care system. 

 

We’re not talking about, as the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley seems to suggest that individuals 

have got to pay for individual services. They’ve got to pay for the services one way or another whether 

they pay for it through their taxes or whether they pay for it individually. We don’t think that 

particularly the individual payment is meaningful, in terms of how they pay for their services, but 

they’ve got to be brought back into the system as individuals. Because until they are, they won’t get that 

choice and you will be deciding for them, that what is best for them is a lengthy waiting list in hospital 

in Regina and Saskatoon because that’s the decision you made a year ago, Mr. Minister. And you would 

be deciding, we say we ought to make decisions. We are supposed to be representatives of the people. 

We are not their dictators, we are their representatives. We are supposed to listen to the people. We are 

supposed to provide the choices to them, the options to them and then listen to them and find out what 

they want. But if we don’t provide the information for the options then we have no way of listening to 

them. None whatsoever. At the moment those options are not available to the people, because they don’t 

have this information at their disposal. 

 

We believe it is a step forward. We believe it’s a positive step forward. As I said before, if you don’t 

come to grips with this situation now, you’re going to face it in 1979. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Chairman, I am interested 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2030 

 

in the remarks of the Hon. Leader of the Conservative Party. I never thought that I would, we’d come 

back to the days where people will be saying, but it’s interesting to . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — On a Point of Order! Mr. Chairman, is the Minister allowed to answer for the 

Minister of Health in these Estimates? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Sure, I’m allowed to participate. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The Minister is not answering necessarily, he’s taking part in the debate. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Might I remind all Members that I’ve tried to work this out on a fair 

basis. Might I also remind you that yesterday evening we spent an hour and a half and I think there were 

just the two parties who spoke. Today I’ve been trying to even things off in the way in which I think it 

should be and I am sorry if I have missed someone, but your Hon. colleague was on his feet ahead of 

you and talk to your Hon. colleague. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I never thought we’d get back to the days when we were going to 

hear in this House, the old argument that I thought has been dead and buried, right across Canada, that 

somehow people will get well quicker and better by participating in paying their health bills. Here we 

are today in 1977 after all these years we hear the Leader of the Conservative Party saying that the 

people will get well quicker and better if they participate in paying their bills. 

 

It’s interesting that he decided to run away at that point, but that’s what he told us. 

 

I am one that is committed to the principle and idea of a publicly financed health service. I think that has 

been established in most of the civilized countries, that that is the way to run a health service. Where 

health services are available to all people, regardless of their means and then to use your tax structure to 

pool the money to pay the bills, so that all people have an equal access and an equal opportunity to good 

health services. That’s the belief that we have, that’s the commitment that this party has and that’s the 

program we are trying to carry out and I think we’ve done a pretty good job, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I was interested in the Leader of the Conservative Party telling us that somehow people 

should have the right to make a choice. He was talking about drugs. You tell me, that as a lay person, 

what do I know about making a choice about what drug to use? Yet this is what he was telling us. Now, 

as an individual do I know what drug to use? I certainly don’t. I think that those are the responsibilities 

of physicians and those are the responsibilities of pharmacists. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we had decided on a particular drug plan. A drug plan that is going to ensure a high 

standard and high quality of drugs. We established a formulary committee, a committee of highly 

reputed and respected physicians and 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2031 

 

pharmacists and pharmacologists. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I yesterday and today, was interested in hearing both the Conservatives and the 

Liberals attack the idea of the formulary. It is based on a formula that only high quality and therapeutic 

drugs are going to be made available to the people. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I am prepared to place my faith and trust in people like Doctor Johnson, the 

pharmacologist at the university, Doctor Johnson from Prince Albert, a medical doctor, Doctor 

McFetridge from this city, a highly reputed physician, who I think know and who are concerned about 

the kind of drugs that are prescribed and the kind of drugs that are made available. In case the Members 

are not aware and I’m not currently up-to-date on the number and varieties of drugs that there are, of 

different mixtures, something and I’m sure that you can’t even get the exact figure from any doctor or 

any pharmacist, or even from the Department of National Health and Welfare, because you can get a 

figure of 10,000, 12,000 and 20,000. No doctor, no doctor can possibly know the therapeutic value of 

these thousands of drugs that are on the market today. In fact, the vast majority of the doctors today, 

think it is a blessing that we did devise a formulary and for the information of the Conservative Party, 

who are critical of a formulary, let me invite you to go outside, go and look at Ontario. I can also inform 

you that the Department of Health of Saskatchewan and Department of Health of Ontario are working 

very closely together with the federal Department of Health and Welfare, of devising a formulary of 

only those drugs that have been proven of therapeutic value to put on the formulary. Ontario has a 

formulary. They don’t give the chance and the choice of these 20,000 drugs available to the individual, 

because the individual can’t possibly know. 

 

If this is the kind of nonsense the Leader of the Conservative Party is telling us, that an individual 

patient should have the choice to select from the 20,000 drugs of what is going to be good for him and 

what is going to cure him. What stupidity. What nonsense, Mr. Chairman. 

 

They made reference to Regina hospitals, Mr. Chairman. I know the Hon. Member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley is attacking the hospital system of Regina and the hospital system of Saskatoon, saying 

that the hospital system in Pangman and the rural communities is a bad system. Well, I know the 

Liberals believe it to be a bad system. They closed 11 or 17 hospitals, small hospitals, one after the 

other. They were falling like dominoes, during their administration. 

 

We believe that small hospitals perform a very useful and valuable service to the people in rural 

Saskatchewan and we propose to maintain them Mr. Chairman, at the same time as regional and base 

hospitals. I invite you to take a look at the capital expenditures, since 1971. Never before in the history 

of Saskatchewan has so much money been spent for improvement and expansion of large hospitals. 

Let’s take a look at Regina. 

 

This Government made a commitment and made a decision that we are going to renovate the two major 

hospitals and bring them to the 1977 or 1980 levels, because that’s what is needed. It’s going to cost us 

$66 million and perhaps more if the inflation continues. But we made that commitment, because we 

believe that places like Regina and Saskatoon should, those hospitals should be made available to serve 

the total community 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2032 

 

of Saskatchewan. We believe that the number of beds, based on all the advice from physicians, from the 

experts that we’ve been able to hire, that their decisions are worth considering, about the number of beds 

that are needed, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I might advise the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, just a few weeks ago I ran into an official, very 

senior official officer of the Saskatchewan Medical Association. I don’t want to bandy names around. I 

asked him, because I do know quite a few doctors in this city and in this province. I asked him, doctor, 

how are things in the Regina hospitals? He happens to be a very senior official of the SMA. He says, 

Walter, the situation in the Regina hospitals, and the bed availability and the service has never been 

better. Has never been better. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — He’s the only one in Regina. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — No, he’s not the only one. He’s not the only one. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Name him. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I do not propose to bandy about names, because it’s a useless 

exercise, particularly when you have made a decision that you want to play games with . . . 

 

MR. CAMERON: — How do we know you didn’t make it up? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, I am prepared to do this, Mr. Chairman, of taking the Hon. Member for 

Regina South and meeting with that particular doctor. I’m prepared to do that. I don’t want you to be 

checking, but I’m prepared to try and arrange a meeting. Mr. Chairman, because I’m not trying to tell 

tales. The same thing applies whether it be Moose Jaw or Regina or whether it be Saskatoon, Yes, from 

time to time there are problems, there are problems. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I wonder whether the Hon. Members ever realize the kind of a situation we face in the 

whole question of provision of hospital beds in this province? You take during the months of July and 

August and I recall this very distinctly three years ago, where there was the so-called waiting list and we 

got all the hospitals together and we said, during the months of July and August, generally a slack 

period, how about cleaning up that waiting list on elective surgery and elective procedures. You know, 

Mr. Chairman, that starting with the first week in July, the hospitals started phoning the patients because 

there were beds available. Out of every ten patients that they phoned, only one would agree to be 

admitted to the hospital. They said, look, during the summer months, we don’t want to be in a hospital. 

We want to be on holidays with our children, with our families at the beaches or on holidays. In elective 

surgery that is the fact. Our hospitals during the months of July and August, in this province, are 

virtually empty. The same thing happens in the months of December and January for about one month 

during the holiday season. It doesn’t matter what political party is in office. That’s the fact of the 

situation and yet we have to provide for staff payments for 12 months, not for nine months. But you will 

find that during those periods we do have a problem and we can’t force the people to come into the 

hospital. On the basis of the Leader of the Conservative Party, he would 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2033 

 

almost make us believe that we drag those people into the hospitals against their will. The fact is that 

they do have a choice. They do not have to be admitted into the hospital when they don’t want to. That’s 

why we have some of the problem that there are waiting lists. 

 

Mr. Chairman, even if we doubled the number of beds in Regina and Saskatoon, we would still have 

some waiting lists. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I really regret the kind of an approach that both Opposition parties have taken in 

attacking the whole health service that has been built up over the years. Through the co-operation of 

people at the community level, the hospital boards, the nurses, the professionals, the hospital workers, 

the doctors, who I am convinced believe in providing a good service for the people of Saskatchewan and 

are committed to do it. This good service comes from the kind of people whom we have in the 

Department of Health, from the kind of services in every branch and every area of health that we have 

developed, whether it be hospital or medical care or psychiatric services, or today in the provision of 

dental care for children. This is an innovative program, unique and different and is doing a tremendous 

job in the whole area of preventive dental care as well as curative care for children, so that they will be 

able to develop good teeth habits and that when we are able to preserve those young teeth, that they will 

be able to then live their lives with better teeth, than our current generation have. 

 

Now, the same thing in the case of the Drug Plan. I believe that that plan, Mr. Chairman, is going to be a 

plan that is going to be copied by other provinces and by people in the total North American scene over 

a period of time. We see what is happening south of the border. President Carter has come out with a 

commitment that he believes there has to be a public health service because the free enterprise has failed 

the people of the United States in providing health services. They are not able to afford them. 

 

I think in this country we should be fortunate in what has developed. We should be fortunate that we had 

in this province, in particular, people with vision and with courage to innovate both at the political level 

as well as at the level of our public servants who have been imaginative and that this province today is 

unquestionably the leader in the health field in the North American scene. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. N. McMILLAN: — Mr. Chairman, my comments I think will be fairly brief. I am not convinced 

of the merits of arguing with the Minister of Finance about a portfolio he no longer holds. I suspect it is 

fitting that Members on this side of the House thank him for his lecture, however inaccurate or 

misguided. 

 

I should like to direct a few comments to the Minister of Health about the health care program. I was 

tempted to direct a few comments to the Member for Nipawin who has probably given the worst speech 

I have ever heard in this Legislature since I have been here, the worst speech ever delivered by someone 

who concocted it himself. Continually lending new meaning to the words of useless diatribe. The 

Minister of Health though is perhaps in many ways just as much at fault as the Member for Nipawin 

when it comes to his approach to the problems that medical 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2034 

 

services and health care in Saskatchewan are faced with today. I know that the Minister is quick to crawl 

out of his paranoiac rut and admit that things are not at all well with the health services in Saskatchewan. 

Immediately he falls into another defence, waves another flag, I am sure he would dearly love to spend 

the entire health estimates period arguing about the frill programs, the denturist program, the pharmacare 

program. I am not convinced you have any solid ground on which to stand there. 

 

I think, though, that realistically, you have got your head buried in the sand. I say that seriously. You 

come to this House with your ridiculously statistical defences for the failures in Saskatchewan’s health 

program. If you would replace those transistors and diodes that so obviously have been your ears with a 

little common sense, you might be well aware that the people of this province are not happy with what is 

going on in health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t say that things today are any better than they were or worse than they were 30 years ago or 20 

years ago or 10 years ago when the entire medicare dispute was on, I was 11 years old and I wasn’t very 

actively involved in it one way or another. But we have got problems in our health care today. 

 

Members of this Opposition have told you that. I am sure Members of your own caucus have brought to 

your attention the fact that some of their constituents have pointed out to them the problems that they 

have run into in trying to get what they feel is adequate health service in Saskatchewan. 

 

We come to this House and we have tried to bring to you the basic thrust of the arguments that people 

throughout Saskatchewan have brought to us, that is the argument that the basic health care provided in 

Saskatchewan is not what it could be. And the reasons given are many. Some people say it is because 

there are not enough beds. Some people say it is because the beds we have aren’t being properly utilized. 

Many people feel it is because the staff reductions in this province brought about by reductions in bed 

utilization or whatever have meant that we can’t utilize our facilities to the maximum extent. I am sure 

there are a myriad of problems. The fact of the matter is the basic health care is not being adequately 

met and every day you spend in this House defending your frill programs is another day lost when we 

could be trying to do something about our basic health care. 

 

The Members of this House have brought to your attention on several occasions, correspondence from 

individuals. You dismissed the brief from the Saskatchewan Medical Association as too general and 

therefore not to be taken with any degree of seriousness. 

 

I should like to read to you two letters that were sent to me and were sent to you and the Premier. A 

copy was also sent to the Member for Wilkie. They get fairly specific about some of the problems faced 

by the Kerrobert Union Hospital. But more importantly the problems pointed out here are problems that 

are general to the medical profession throughout Saskatchewan. These problems are part of the reason 

people in Saskatchewan don’t feel they are getting adequate health care. I will preface my comments by 

pointing out that this particular hospital has 30 beds, I believe, and serves an area of population of 1,251 

people. Tremendous number of beds per capita in that area. Four medical doctors I believe. The 

potential is there to provide good medical service to the people in that 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2035 

 

area. The Member for Indian Head-Wolseley has pointed out to you that there is a real problem in rural 

hospitals serving as referral centres to any severe problems that come in. There seems to be a real 

bottleneck with the kind of specialist care demanded in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Kerrobert Union Hospital administrator on behalf of the people at the hospital has sent this letter to you 

and I should like to read it to the rest of the House. 

 

Dear Mr. Robbins: The Kerrobert Union Hospital Board recently received a directive from SHSP to 

the effect that our staff complement would be reduced by one nurse’s aide and one-half dietary aide, 

effective June 1, 1977. 

 

That is an interesting aspect in itself if you are going to get rid of 50 per cent of the dietary aide I hope 

you release the bad half or I hope they do. 

 

This matter was discussed at some length at the hospital board meeting along with the letter from the 

hospital staff. The main problem is that we do not feel that the formulas used for allocation of 

approved patient days is at all realistic . . . 

 

Here is a hospital board that finds another problem that is maybe creating some of the problems in our 

medical health care. 

 

In that the need for care in the Level IV area has increased significantly. 

 

It goes on to outline their problems there. It says as well: 

 

Our maternity service and surgery have increased, yet we are expected to reduce our services as a 

result of the cutbacks in staff. 

 

That is the kind of problem that is coming to the attention of the people in the medical profession. A 

very basic problem. They go on to say: 

 

We also feel that the hospital system which is the basic or original service is now suffering because of 

other health care programs which are great if we can afford them. 

 

As Members of this Opposition have pointed out to you before. 

 

The day this province can afford to bring these programs in when it is not at the expense of basic 

medical health care, then we are prepared to sit down and give you some suggestions about how to 

improve them. We hope that these fields, drug plan, SAIL, dental program could be cut back rather 

than hospital service. 

 

A point we have made for some time. 

 

We would hope that you and/or Members of the Government of Saskatchewan would see fit to review 

our situation. We would welcome you and members of your staff to visit our hospital in order to assess 

the type of services we are attempting to provide 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2036 

 

for our area. 

 

I suspect that is only one of many letters you have received from local hospital boards or administrators. 

It very adequately points out the problem in a general way. 

 

Here is the problem in a specific way. A letter from the staff of that same hospital, submitted to the 

hospital board. It says: 

 

We, the undersigned workers of the Kerrobert Union Hospital staff, respectfully request your 

consideration of the following in the respect to the recommended reduction in staff, that is, one nurse’s 

aide and .5 dietary aide. Kerrobert Union Hospital serves an area of 1251 population etc. 

 

The 30 bed hospital contains an intensive care unit, emergency unit, laboratory and x-ray department, 

labor room, case room, operating theatre and a nursery. We have four medical staff serving our area. 

 

It says: 

 

We are a 30 bed hospital with staff for 16 beds. Our nursing staff consists of, on days — two 

registered nurses and two nursing assistants plus the matron. Evening — one registered nurse and one 

nursing assistant. Nights — one registered nurse and one nursing assistant. With this staff we have to 

cover ICU, emergency, labor and case rooms and nursery for 24 hours, plus the remainder of our 

patients in the hospital. 

 

That is a particular problem in that area. I suspect in many other areas. 

 

At present we have five long stay patients Level IV which require complete care for feeding, bathing, 

etc. Two of our long stay patients are retarded girls. 

 

That brings up the whole question of special care homes. 

 

In 1976 the actual patient days were 6766 and the actual average daily census was 18.5. 

 

It goes on to list the different functions this hospital provided. It goes on to list that: 

 

In 1975 they had 49 maternities and in 1976 they had 71. 

 

They point out that the level of service demanded by the people in the community has increased. It goes 

on to explain the problems of upkeep of these special services they offer, the operating room, etc. 

Request — underlined at the bottom: 

 

That we would be allowed to retain our present staff as we are concerned to give adequate nursing care 

to each and every patient. 

 

A very basic problem that is being raised in the minds of Saskatchewan people. Recommendations — 

this is not from the Liberal caucus, these recommendations I read out to you. You have read them 

already. I don’t know what politics these people are on the staff of the Kerrobert Union Hospital. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2037 

 

Recommendations: (1) The Department of Health be approached to look into our situation. (2) 

Utilization fees if necessary. 

 

That is not the Liberal Party talking, that is professionals in the medical care field who are so concerned 

about their inability to provide service as a result of financial cutbacks that they are prepared to institute 

utilization fees. 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Where do you stand? 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — We will maybe get to that in some other argument. If you are prepared to get in it 

at the same time I will maybe take a few extra minutes and give you my statements when I am done 

here. Here is another one: 

 

SHSP premiums. There again a hospital staff that is that concerned about the reduction in their ability to 

provide service that they would call for the re-institution of premiums. These are the people who know 

best what is necessary, what resources we need to provide adequate health care service, basic health care 

service. 

 

Establishment of a tax requisition is necessary. 

 

I will tell you one thing, fine Member for Moose Jaw, this Government has a commitment and a 

responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to provide in an immediate sense two basic provisions or 

functions. Number one and the first reason and I spoke in this House some time ago about this and 

apparently you weren’t listening, neither were the rest of the Members of your Cabinet. Your first 

responsibility in this province is to provide law and order, some social order for the people of 

Saskatchewan. There is some evidence today to indicate the Attorney General’s Department is unable to 

do that because of staffing problems. That was your first responsibility one which has been generally 

easy to maintain for the past hundred years. One that you may even be having problems with. 

 

Your second responsibility is to provide that care for the people of Saskatchewan that is necessary, the 

basic health care for them. What you are doing you are denying them that care. Not because I am sure 

you feel that it would be a nice little thing to do to deny people of Saskatchewan necessary health care. I 

will tell you what I believe and that is something that I would speak widely and strongly about were I 

sitting on that side of the House. And that is that I would be prepared as a Government Member to do 

anything I could to see that the people of Saskatchewan got adequate health care. If that meant 

re-instituting hospitalization premiums and a utilization fee, I would do it. Your answer to the basic 

problem of health care in Saskatchewan is to introduce three or four frill programs that maybe will 

appease some of the concerns of the people. I say you have had your head buried in the sand, Mr. 

Minister of Health, because you seem to be able to go glibly on convinced that basic health care in 

Saskatchewan is being met. Each day I am sure you get numerous cases across your desk of individuals 

in Saskatchewan that can’t get adequate health care. It is not an administrative problem, it is not a 

bureaucratic problem, getting them assigned to the right place at the right time. It is problems faced by 

people who, for example, are blind and need cataract operations, wait eight months and end up going to 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2038 

 

Edmonton to have them done. That is the problem we have been talking about. That is basic health care 

service. Your Government may be making a feeble attempt, might be making a sincere attempt. I 

question that, if you think you are. I think you are fooling yourself. 

 

The fact of the matter is that today you are not providing the kind of basic medical care that the people 

of Saskatchewan are demanding. I suggest that you take the steps necessary whatever they are to put 

yourselves in a position to provide that care. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — First of all I have to point out that the Kerrobert Union Hospital and the approved 

beds in that hospital are related to the population served in the area, adjusted as to age and sex. There is 

nothing unusual about it, it is the same that is used everywhere else. He talked about a 30 bed hospital 

and 16 approved beds. The 16 approved beds are based on the population served. Obviously you have to 

use a formula of that type. Across the province more beds and more staff has been approved than 

actually was used by the hospitals last year, that is a fact of life. You can always find exceptional 

individual situations. I can tell you that I was in the town of Tisdale on May 11, last year when there 

were nine patients in a 65 bed hospital. There is no way — there were 31 on the staff at the time. There 

is no way you can meet all those peaks and valleys in terms of those hospitals, it is an impossibility and 

he knows it. The Member for Indian Head knows it. He talks about social responsibility as the Member 

for Nipawin did. I hope now they will quit smoking so they won’t end up as emphysema cases in the 

hospital, that is evidence of good social responsibility. Start accepting some social responsibility. 

 

MR. H. LANE (Saskatoon Sutherland): — Mr. Chairman, it seems unfortunate that we are now back 

into a debate that should have been and I think historically most people in Saskatchewan view as having 

been concluded some number of years ago. Debate isn’t any longer whether or not there will be public 

delivery of a health care system in the Province of Saskatchewan. So I don’t think it is cogent to this 

argument to talk about free enterprise systems, whatever that means, of delivery of health care. Debate, 

surely, at this point in time, is how under a public delivery of health care in Saskatchewan do we do that 

most efficiently and most effectively. 

 

We have heard a lot of argument from that side of the House about how we have spent a lot of money, 

we spend more money than any place else in the world. I think that is right. I have been convinced by 

the statistics which the Minister brings before the House and which the Attorney General and the 

Minister of Finance bring. We probably do spend more money than anyone else in the world trying to 

provide health care. But the point is for all the money that we spend are we getting some sort of 

effective delivery of a health care system for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Finance takes the statements from the Member for Nipawin and says, he says choice in 

drugs means the individual, that is not what he said. That is pure nonsense. What he said was, individual 

doctors should have some input into the system. He says that the argument is that people will get better 

more quickly if they pay for their own care. That is not what he said. Weren’t you listening when he was 

talking, that 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2039 

 

is not what he said. 

 

That, Mr. Chairman, is the whole problem over there. There are two ways, it seems to me in which we 

can get the Government to have a good in-depth look at the kind of health care they are delivering in the 

Province of Saskatchewan; one of them — and the Attorney General — there have been one or two 

issues that have come before the House in which he says, why didn’t you come to me personally and 

show me and we could have talked about it. We could have made suggestions and then I would have 

listened to you and you would have done something but you made a public issue of it. Now what we 

have been trying to do and I think it is fair to say for all Members of the Opposition on this side of the 

House is put forward comments, constructive criticism, some new plans. The Member for Nipawin, says 

here is a suggestion but do they try it, do they say, well, we’ll take that and see if it works and if it 

doesn’t we will give them a good thumping here in the House and say it just didn’t work? But what does 

he get in return? Cheap comments from the other side of the House, personal attacks from people who 

wouldn’t be prepared to stand up to a mike or outside of this House and go on public media and make 

those comments. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that what has to happen over there because that’s the first 

alternative, either they listen and try some of the suggestions and comments or there is a second way, we 

could embarrass the Government. We could bring documentation to this House showing that hospitals 

which are supposed to be the holy sanctum of cleanliness are filthy because of the lack of money being 

put into maintaining proper care adequately. You wait, it’s coming, there will be lots more. 

 

Now, the Minister of Health is one person over on that side and I think I can ascertain this from his 

debate that at least he is listening. He gets up and he attempts to meet the debate. I have a feeling that if 

he couldn’t answer the question either statistically or some other way he would be prepared to say, he is 

an honest person who rises in principle above the rest of the people over on that side, that maybe I’ll 

listen to that and I’ll take it. If they don’t listen and believe me the debate is over, we’ve got a public 

health care system and the people of Saskatchewan gave your predecessors who were a very different 

party from the party we see across there today, the mandate to bring public health here in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Now it is no good to ramble into statistics into what happens in other areas, let’s get the 

full picture. Alberta, for example, they don’t have line-ups for their hospitals there and besides which 

they have something like half the provincial tax rate. Now surely with all the money we are spending on 

health care people on the Government side of the House should be prepared to listen to almost any 

comment to see if maybe there is some seed of wisdom there that could regenerate reform in their 

programs and could lead to better delivery of the health care system. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — . . . no sense if they have a guilt complex . . . 

 

MR. LANE: — I think that’s right, hitting the nail right on the head because when the comment came 

up of, ‘put the care back into medicare’ fairly recently the Premier of the province was reduced to 

giggling like a giddy school girl saying, where were the Tories when we were putting the care into 

medicare. Where were the Tories then. Well I suggest you look at the statistics, 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2040 

 

the outcome of the Saskatoon Sutherland by-election and see where the Tories were when you were 

putting the care in medicare. You’ll find out where your vote is eroding to, sure we took from Liberal 

votes but you’ll find out where the bulk of your vote went to and you look across the entire province and 

see what we are getting now that the Tories are on the climb, see where they are getting their support 

from. They are cutting deeply into the support that used to be yours when you were a CCF Party, when 

you were a very different party than you are today. 

 

Now, the problem that was raised by the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) and the Member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald), is that for so long this party has said with their little red neon signs on 

laws, ‘free, free, free, we gave you this free’, but now they are caught in the position that they can’t 

admit to people that it is not free. I suggest to you Mr. Minister, that at a million dollars plus a day, 

that’s a long way from free. How are you now going to convince those people whom you convinced it 

was free, that we are spending an awful lot of money and there is a limit and that you do have a problem, 

a legitimate problem. How are you going to do that now? 

 

Now the Attorney General indicates to the House that he is at a point of despair. I believe that, he is 

looking tired these last few days and that is a sign of despair, of fatigue, you’ve been beaten down. What 

you need when you are in despair is a rest. And we propose to give you a rest in 1979 so that you can 

regenerate yourselves and some of your ideas. 

 

Now there are lots of solutions, we have attempted to give the solutions. The shouts come from that side 

of the House, “What would you do, what would you do?” When you try to answer it, of course, you are 

met with rude personal attacks. I’ll tell you what you can do, you can start by perhaps not building new 

wings on hospitals when already there are beds in the city of Saskatoon that are sitting empty, why build 

new wings, that doesn’t seem to be very productive. Don’t tell the Members on this side of the House, 

don’t tell the Members here that money is put before people when you are putting potash before people 

and I suggest to you right now that if you were putting a little less priority on the takeover of the potash 

mine while harping about capitalism and capitalists and you the worst capitalists of all times, only state 

capitalists, not much different. But if you spent a little more time and put a little more priority into the 

delivery of proper health care in the Province of Saskatchewan, basic health care I suggest that things 

would perhaps go much better. I tell you now that no government, that doesn’t mean just an NDP 

Government, no government is beyond looking for better management because better management can 

reduce taxation, better management will provide the kind of funds you need to deliver the kind of 

programs that you want. I leave you with this injunction, Mr. Minister, you start putting the care back 

into medicare, you are going to get a lot of help from this side of the House. You aren’t going to get this 

kind of criticism. You’ve got two roads to go now, either you listen and attempt to work with the 

suggestions that you get here or the only other route open to the Opposition is to start to embarrass you. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I’m quite willing to listen, the trouble is I never hear anything from the other side. 

There is nothing offered. He talks about the high cost of Saskatchewan care, Alberta spent 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2041 

 

last year $311.78 per capita, ours is $254.79. That’s the kind of junk we get from across the way, it is 

just a continuous round of generalities with no basic arguments. We don’t argue that there is anything 

wrong with costing this to people, we have looked at this process before. We know what it would cost, 

we tried it once and it wasn’t cost effective. Other provinces have tried it and not found it cost effective. 

And frankly we don’t intend to spend tax dollars when not convinced that it will be effective. Once we 

come to that conclusion that it is effective we would try it again. We have already tried it. That was the 

tenor of the argument of your Leader for most of the afternoon. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland said that he had 

information that hospitals were filthy, not able to be cleaned because of lack of funds. I ask him to table 

the information before the House now during Health Estimates. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, I assume that Health Estimates will not finish up today. What I said was, 

if the Attorney General was listening, we will be providing you with information, documented proof, 

embarrassment to the Government if you choose not to listen. Now are you telling this House that you 

are not going to listen? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am telling you, don’t you go about trying to politically blackmail me or the 

Government. You are saying to me that you have information about hospitals being too filthy to clean. I 

want that information now. Now you give it to this House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, what he is telling the Members of this Assembly is that he is not going 

to listen, so he is going to get his information and he will get it in due course on my terms. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, this is from the person who talks about no personal attacks. This 

is from the person who elevates political debates. This is the person who is getting at truth. This is the 

person who wants to put the facts before us so that we can come to a resolution. Two days these 

Estimates have been before us, he now says by implication that hospital board or boards and by that 

smear has smeared every hospital board in Saskatchewan by saying they are too filthy to clean, that’s 

what this Member has said. He is following the same kind of tactics that he has been following in other 

aspects which I can’t raise in this debate. I am saying, Mr. Chairman, and I as one Member before I get 

off on this vote number one, I say that the Member has an obligation if not to himself, it not for the 

Members of this Legislature, at least an obligation to the hospital boards of Saskatchewan to tell us the 

facts when this matter is before the House right now. When you go around trying to blackmail, that’s 

what you are trying to do, trying to embarrass us politically, that’s what you are trying to do, that’s what 

you said you are trying to do, that kind of cheap politics is disgusting. Now, give the Minister a chance 

to give a rebuttal to this situation. Table the information. I ask you to come forward and give this 

information to the House, give it to the Minister of 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2042 

 

Health so that he can take a look and see what this is all about. I am saying to the Hon. Member, Mr. 

Chairman, that either there is no such information or if there is the information the Member is going 

purposely and deliberately to misrepresent that information as he purposely has misrepresented the 

information with respect to a police question which is typically the Tory tactics in this House. Now you 

are either going to be fair, you are going to be fair and you are going to give the Minister of Health a 

chance to rebut this situation or not. Now I am asking you as a Member of this House, as a member of 

the bar, to show that element of fairness that I think exists on your side. I am getting pessimistic, this 

Tory caucus has changed in the last two or three months. The Tory caucus now is the kind of caucus that 

revels in semi-scandals and goes about looking for dirt and muckraking which I never thought was a part 

of the Tory operation but you are into it now good. That seems to be the modus operandi. I am saying if 

you have got that kind of decency in you, if you’ve got that kind of fairness in you, you don’t even have 

to tell the Member privately, tell it to him on the Estimates. Will you do that now? 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, you know when I listen to a speech like that it is quite obvious that you 

have got your headline now and you can give it a rest. So let me tell you something I told this House that 

we have two roads to pursue, either the high road which I would like to maintain or we can use the other 

road, we can use political embarrassment. Now hear me out, Mr. Attorney General, now what you are 

doing is you’re betting, you are gambling, it’s a long shot and if we record it it would be a different 

thing, you are betting that I don’t have the information. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am not betting a thing. 

 

MR. LANE: — Hold on a minute, don’t get excited. What we propose to do is to allow the Minister to 

take the high road and perhaps listen to us but if the only way that we can bring some semblance of 

order to that side of the House and bring some inkling for perhaps care for those who are sick in our 

province by bringing forward information to show that the hospital system is breaking down, then you 

are going to force us into exactly that situation. Now let’s not talk, Mr. Chairman, and since it has been 

brought up, let’s not talk about misrepresentation, I know what you are talking about and you managed 

to score a point on that. It was about the police report and I ask you now to deny whether the documents 

tabled were in fact a police report. There was a part of it questionable as to who prepared it, but part of it 

was a letter under the hand or seal of a member of the police department. Are you denying that? I don’t 

want to bring this back up again but if you bring it up I am going to bring it up again and just as often as 

you want to. Now I am telling you right now and I hope that you know me well enough by now that if I 

say I am going to bring information forward I will. That’s a promise. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, on this issue . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order. Mr. Chairman, far be it from me to request 

that you bring this House back to order. I don’t think that we are here to listen to the petty, 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2043 

 

cheap, political attacks of the NDP and the Tories against one another. I don’t think that this particular 

Legislature is the place, Mr. Chairman, and that these Estimates on Health are the place for these two 

political parties to bring out their animosities by these kinds of insinuations and personal attacks. I 

would like to suggest if they want to do that to go out to the country and the hustings and let’s get back 

to the business of the day, get back to the Health Estimates and let’s get down and carry on and be 

responsible in this Assembly. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I take the Member’s comments as being fairly apropos and I could not 

see the relevance of a legal letter that the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland mentioned, bringing a legal 

matter to the Attorney General, so I want Members to return to Item 1 and the general administration of 

the Health Department. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I will follow your ruling with respect to Camp Wilderness, 

although I am hopeful that on another occasion, another opportunity that matter will be resolved and the 

Members will have an opportunity to have that resolved. But I want to speak to this Item 1. Because 

what the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland said was that he had information about a dirty hospital, a 

dirty hospital due to the lack of funds by the Government. I think, Mr. Chairman, what we as Members 

of this House have a right to now, we have a right to know what hospital that is. Do you know, how 

many hospital boards there are in Saskatchewan — 132 hospital boards in Saskatchewan. The Member 

is an elected Member and a lawyer. He says that there are hospitals or a hospital that is dirty or is filthy. 

He knows that the proceedings are being publicized and he is going to say to heck with the 132 we are 

going to let the people of Saskatchewan worry about all 132. Have you raised this matter with the 

hospital board in a letter? Have you raised this matter in letter to the Minister of Health? We are talking 

about the health of people. You are the fellows that are concerned about the health of people. You are 

the one who has raised this bogey, maybe it’s a fact. If it’s a fact I will be as concerned on this topic as 

anybody is. But you have got a duty and an obligation when the Health Minister’s vote is on, you say he 

has starved the hospital out and the result is the hospital is filthy. You have an obligation to tell this 

House which hospital or what hospitals they are. I want to know if it is Saskatoon, St. Paul in my riding. 

I want to know if it is in Moose Jaw, if it is the Plains. I have a right to know what hospital that is and 

the Minister has a right to at least try and speak to the matter or defend it or move by way of some kind 

of defence or at least try and rectify the problem if it exists. You can’t say that I am not going to refer to 

it if you have listened to our political suggestions. Now I am pleading with you, give us the name of that 

hospital right now, tell us the facts of the situation so at least the Member can defend himself on this and 

the Government can defend it. Now will you do that at least? I am asking you, will you or not? 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I can see in terms of how far we have progressed in Estimates, 

Estimates are a long way from done yet and I am not going to be cajoled by the Attorney General or 

anyone else in the House to doing anything that I choose not to do. So there. I’ll tell you now that if you 

want to pick up a board like that and turn it into a headline for 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2044 

 

yourself that’s your right, that’s your privilege to do, if you want to indulge in that kind of politics and 

certainly you have got a lot more experience in that than I have. If you want to reduce the level of 

politics in this House to that level, I don’t want to play your little ball games. Let me tell you this, 

Estimates are a long way from done yet and we will just see how they proceed. 

 

You know during the last election — sorry to bring that up — there were challenges, people challenging 

and I don’t fall for those challenges. I will do it when I am ready to do it, but be assured I will do it. That 

is all that I have to say. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that I object with everything that I have in me about 

the business of headlines on a filthy hospital. Look it, every politician here may look for headlines. I 

have been as guilty, maybe more than anyone else in that regard. I admit to that, but leave that aside, 

You are saying that there is a filthy hospital, or hospitals in Saskatchewan. You are saying that the 

problem is serious because of lack of funds, but apparently not so serious that it just, it just won’t drag 

on for a couple of days. Just let the filthy hospitals exist out there. You want to raise it whenever you 

want to raise it. We are concerned about the care in medicare. You are the one who is concerned about 

the care in medicare and you have a smile on your face because you think some of that is politics. 

 

I am telling you, and I hope the Liberals will support me in this regard, the allegation that you have 

made is a serious allegation. Why can’t we get that information from you? Give us the names of the 

hospitals. Tell us what you have done with it, name the hospital. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — I am pleased to inject a bit of debate at this particular time 

and add some comments for the Minister of Health, a man whom I respect very much. It seems 

interesting that the Minister of Health can come forward with statistics that are amazing. I remember 

him distinctly, that there were some 20,000 drugs on the drug plan. Did you say that? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Well how many drugs are there? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: —- About 1,200 or 1,300. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — It is ironic, Mr. Chairman, that on the first occasion that I had to use the Drug Plan 

that after visiting the specialist he gave me the prescription and I went down and I said, I suppose you 

want my hospital number and he said, no, this drug that you are going to get isn’t on the plan. So of the 

1,200 I don’t know why the first time that I ever used the plan, it missed me altogether. 

 

Mr. Minister, you brought in debate last night some letters and I am not condemning you for bringing 

the letters, they were congratulatory letters, which you had received about the 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2045 

 

hospitalization and medicare in Saskatchewan. I am sure that you would be willing to admit to this 

House, at this particular time, that particularly last summer you did, in fact, receive a countless number 

of letters from people complaining about a particular problem. I think the Minister would agree to that. 

Certainly many letters came to me that were copies of letters which were going to the Minister and I 

think the Minister would agree that there was a very definite problem in Saskatchewan about providing 

medical services to people at one particular time. The number of letters that I have been getting in lately 

would indicate that somehow the problem isn’t as severe as it was then. But I don’t think that the 

Minister in bringing letters which are of a congratulatory nature to the House, I don’t think that the 

Minister would admit that he did get many, many letters from all over Saskatchewan complaining about 

the inadequacy of hospital care. I think that the Minister is honest enough that he would admit that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to get back to a statement made by the Attorney General and I don’t know why he 

chose to single out the Member for Rosetown-Elrose for supposedly having said something he didn’t say 

— anyway during my presentation to the House on the Speech from the Throne — I indicated that the 

press had quoted it exactly. I think the Attorney General, if he studies the transcript of Hansard, would 

be prepared to admit to this House that the Member for Rosetown-Elrose did not make any suggestion 

whatsoever that the fee for entrance into hospital should be $10 per day. I am sure that the Minister of 

Health didn’t read it that way. 

 

What I said to the Minister at that particular time was that during the time of the acute bed shortage, and 

there were hundreds of people who were waiting for medical attention, those very people would have 

been quite prepared to pay $10 per day to get into the hospital. I am sure that the Attorney General will, 

in fact, be checking that particular document from Hansard. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General in regard to my colleague here and in relation to what he has said, 

kept harping on a statement that this Assembly ‘has the right to know.’ If I counted this correctly he 

made that particular statement seven times, that ‘he has the right to know.’ I want to refer this House, in 

particular, to last year during the Budget Debate. I want to go back to the statement that the Attorney 

General made, and I believe it was seven times, that this House has the right to know. 

 

Well, Mr. Attorney General I wish that you would nudge your colleague, the Minister of Finance (Mr. 

Smishek) when he, in this House, said a Member of the Conservative caucus tried to illegitimately bribe 

him to get some information on the Budget prior to its presentation. 

 

I wonder if the Attorney General, and I wonder if the Minister of Finance, in agreeing with the Attorney 

General that they have a right to know, why that right to know was denied to this side of the House at 

that particular time? I want to make that point clear because we were denied the right to know. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have mentioned and he is very good with statistics, he mentioned the fact that the 

amount of money being expended in Alberta, per capita, was considerably less than the amount of 

money being expended in all of the programs in Saskatchewan. Isn’t that what he said? All right, let’s 

check up 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2046 

 

and see what the Minister said. In my recollection, and I may have heard him incorrectly, my 

recollection was that Saskatchewan was spending more money per population on health care . . . 

 

I want to ask the Minister this question. There is no question about it that there are two departments that 

are very closely related. One provides health care to the citizens of the province and the other provides 

educational services to the people of the province. These are the two big departments in expenditures of 

public funds. Will the Minister agree? If we follow the pattern of the escalation of expenditures in both 

of these departments, I think that the Minister will agree that some time within the next few years, and 

these years are not too far away, that we are reaching a point where all of the budget of the Province of 

Saskatchewan could well be spent on these two departments alone. The Minister is much better at 

figures than I am. He could quickly draw out a graph to prove that what I am saying is very true. But 

there is a correlation, Mr. Minister, between these two departments and I would like to suggest to you 

that what is happening today, and what is being more or less forced upon boards — I am talking about 

these hundred and some education boards in Saskatchewan — and not doubling the criticism at the 

government. It is a fact of life and it is a fact that this province has to face, both in hospital care and 

educational services, the continual increase in costs. 

 

What is happening at the present time in education is the same path that you were forced into pursuing 

because of costs in health. I think that this is the story that the Minister, and that this is the fact that has 

to get out to the people of the province. 

 

Right at the present time in education the boards are being faced with escalating costs and what are they 

doing? All over the province, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, boards are being forced to lay off 

supportive staff and teachers themselves. We have to do this in order to live within our budgets. Right at 

the present time in my own budget, we are laying off the paraprofessionals and we will be laying off 

staff. Now in order to come within your budget and all of the other programs that you have initiated, you 

have been forced to go to hospitals and give the directions, under a formula, that they must lay off staff 

and I think the Minister will admit that. 

 

The problem is cost. The problem is that you have to live within a given budget and the costs are 

escalating so high that you, in your wisdom, along with your officials decided that you would take the 

option of laying off people at hospitals, closing out part of the hospitals, so that you could live within the 

cost of the health budget. Now there is a similarity. 

 

I want to point out to the Minister of Health, in his statistics, that when in fact he compares, like he did 

with the Member for Kindersley, that the hospital is judged by the surrounding area, the number of beds 

have to correspond to the population of that area. Mr. Minister, don’t you see that there are times when 

this is highly unfair to the larger hospitals for this simple reason. Let us take a look at my own 

constituency. 

 

We have seven hospitals in my constituency, but only one of those hospitals can perform a 

tonsillectomy. So if you go to the Rosetown hospital, what do you see? You see patients 



 

Committee of Finance  April 13, 1977. 

 

2047 

 

from Dinsmore, where there is a hospital; you see patients from Milden, where there is a hospital; you 

see patients from Elrose where there is a hospital. So really, in a broad sense, of just taking the hospital 

zone and determining the number of beds is highly unfair when you take a look at the total district that a 

hospital serves. I know that is one of your problems and I know that is one of the problems facing the 

hospitals where we have three and four doctors such as the one mentioned at Kerrobert. 

 

Mr. Minister, let me ask you this question. What would you do if the hospital costs continue to increase 

as they have in the next five years at the rate they have in the previous five years? Do you think that you 

will still be able to operate and provide medical service and care to the people of Saskatchewan without 

having to go for other forms of revenue? Do you think it is possible to go on with no cutback in care, 

without other sources of revenue to keep going? I think this is a question which has to be answered. 

 

This is 1977 and what happens in 1980, Mr. Minister? Even with deterrent fees, a tax on the sick and all 

other ways in which there may be some other revenue coming in, sooner or later I think you will agree, 

Mr. Minister, that when the revenue of the province can no longer cope with the cost factor, that the 

Department of Health is going to have to do exactly the same thing as the various boards of education 

are going to do around the province. You are going to have to lay off staff and you are going to have to 

cut programs. 

 

I think I am not attacking you for it, I am simply putting the picture to you the way that it is today. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to suggest to you that when you quote the statistics as to the number of beds per 

capita, I know that you do not do that in a deceitful manner. I think that the true picture which has to be 

brought to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan, they should know the number of beds available 

per population for major surgery. That is the real issue. You can go to 132 hospitals but most of these 

132 hospitals in Saskatchewan, are the small hospitals with the one doctor. Is that not correct? Some 

117, one doctor one hospital. The point that I am making, and I think this is the point that has to be 

made, is that while you can count these beds as part of the population, when we run into the crisis that 

we were in last summer, these beds are not beds that really count when it comes to the serious problems 

and the surgery problems. I think that the Minister agrees with that. I think that is why we have the long 

waiting lists at the hospitals. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I am not being critical of the Minister but I want to draw to his attention that which is 

being viewed in the public, really the people out on the streets aren’t really interested in this debate that 

is taking place here. When an individual has a problem getting medical attention then it becomes a very 

personal thing to him. And when he sees it he wants to know the answer, why? 

 

The Attorney General can come back at my colleague for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) and he can 

say the Member said this and the Attorney General can say that he has the right to know and so on, but 

really, Mr. Minister, what I am saying is that in providing the health care in Saskatchewan, let us not 

deceive ourselves, let us not deceive the Members of this House, let us not deceive the general public of 

Saskatchewan with 



 

April 13, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2048 

 

statistics as they are really not interested in statistics. They are interested in basic hospital care; they are 

interested in getting service; they are interested in getting the care they need at the time when they need 

it. The Minister is well aware that there were hundreds and hundreds of people who, in fact, really were 

in to the problem of getting medical attention. I know the number of letters that he has received from my 

constituency and if you were to multiply that by 51 I am sure that the stack of letters would be that high 

and I am sure that the Minister is not going to deny that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think that it is 5:00 o’clock and I ask it to be 5:00 o’clock. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I am very sorry that the Member for Sutherland has not tabled the information of 

the hospitals involved. That places a very serious cloud over this whole matter. I have no choice but to 

move the Committee rise and report progress. 

 

Progress was reported and the Committee given leave to sit again. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 o’clock p.m. 


