



















































Hansard: December 22, 1977


(1198) 1199 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

December 22, 1977 
 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. M.J. Koskie (Quill Lakes): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the legislature through 

you, a special guest from the constituency of Quill Lakes. I would like to introduce Mr. Gerald 

McGrath, former president of Quill Lakes and now the president of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Party. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Coronach Power Development 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question I would like to direct to the 

Premier and it arises from a comment yesterday made by the Minister of Mineral Resources in 

connection with the Coronach development and the suggestion that somehow the federal government 

and the Department of External Affairs are not pursuing the matter in conjunction with the way the 

provincial government wishes it to be done. I have before me, Mr. Speaker, a Leader Post heading of 

November 10, 1977, which says, “Blakeney Blames Ottawa.” I am sure the Premier is familiar with that 

particular story. The thrust of the story is that the federal government is not responding properly to the 

provincial government’s request in connection with Coronach. Also, Mr. Speaker, I have before me a 

photostatic copy of the House of Commons debates, December 14, 1977, where the Minister of External 

Affairs, Mr. Jamieson, indicates that as far as he is concerned Premier Blakeney is quite satisfied with 

the way the federal government has been handling this particular situation. 

 

So, my first question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is, is it a fact that the provincial government is quite 

satisfied with the way Mr. Jamieson’s office is dealing with this particular matter with the government 

of the United States? 

 

Hon. A.E. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — In general, yes, we are satisfied with the manner in which Mr. 

Jamieson’s office and the Department of External Affairs are handling the issue with the United States. 

 

Mr. Malone: — A supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to direct this to the Minister of 

Mineral Resources but I see he is not in his seat today so I will direct it to the Premier. If that is the case, 

Mr. Premier, and notwithstanding the remarks made by the minister yesterday, could I ask the Premier 

why the information that’s been requested by the Lieutenant-Governor of Montana of a technical nature 

earlier this fall has not been provided to the government of Montana to alleviate their concerns about the 

Coronach power development? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member will need to direct that one to Mr. Jamieson, 

the Minister of External Affairs. I believe our arrangement with External 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1200 

 

is that, by and large, the material supplied to agencies of the United States government or to the states of 

the United States shall be supplied by the Department of External Affairs. We are happy to supply it to 

them. That is my understanding. I could be in error on that but that it is my understanding of the 

arrangement. 

 

Mr. Malone: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Can the Premier give me the assurance that 

the information that has been requested and it is rather detailed technical information, has been 

transmitted from the Minister of Mineral Resources department to the Department of External Affairs 

and if the information is in Ottawa at this time? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, Mr. Speaker, I cannot. I am frank to admit that I do not even know what 

information the hon. member for Lakeview is referring to and accordingly I cannot give the assurance 

that he requests. 

 

SEDCO — Intercontinental Packers 
 

Mr. H.W. Lane (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of 

SEDCO. Within the last few months has SEDCO or has your department or any other agency or 

department of this government purchased, accepted as payment on a loan or allowed a security for a loan 

or in any other way dealt with Intercontinental Packers or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates with respect 

to pork bellies or other commodities? You gave notice on this question and I would like to hear your 

answer. 

 

Hon. N. Vickar (Minister in charge of SEDCO): — Mr. Speaker, no we have not to my knowledge. 

There have been no loans made of that nature and no deals. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. He qualified that with ‘to his knowledge.’ Would he then 

take notice and affirm that none of the other agencies of his government have dealt with any of the 

subsidiaries . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I’ll take the next question. 

 

Housing Starts 
 

Mr. G.H. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): — A question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance. Is the 

minister aware that housing starts in Saskatchewan during the third quarter of this year are down about 

25 per cent over the same period in 1976 and that this is significant. Would the minister not agree that 

this is a significant early warning of an economic slowdown in 1978? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree that there is any significant 

slowdown in housing. We have a province, according to my latest information, in the order of 11,000 

housing starts in the province this year and that is a sizeable number. We did have in 1975 a larger 

number of housing s tarts but that was an unusual year. We believe that the housing starts this year are 

keeping up with the pace of housing needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Penner: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Figures that have been released showing 

national comparisons indicate that Saskatchewan is second only to Newfoundland in the drop of housing 

starts in 1977 compared to 1976. Would the minister give this Assembly some indication of the plans 

and the programs that his government may have in light of the fact that we are into an economic 

slowdown in 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1201 

 

Saskatchewan, I don’t think there is any doubt about that, insofar as balancing a budget in 1978 is 

concerned? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the matter of perhaps a drop in misrepresented by what the hon. member 

is saying. It all depends from where you start. We did have a higher year than this year in the number of 

housing starts but we are satisfied that we have a good housing program in Saskatchewan. Many people 

are employed in the construction industry. I can tell the hon. member that from time to time I meet with 

house builders in this province and they are very satisfied with the housing programs that the 

government of Saskatchewan has been undertaking since we have been in office. I might also inform the 

hon. member that, for example, in Saskatoon they have had the largest number of housing starts in the 

history of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of 

Finance if he thinks that the dramatic decrease in the number of housing starts in the last quarter is 

related to the fact that the government of Saskatchewan has failed to indicate when rental controls will 

be removed in Saskatchewan and the fact that it looks as if they will go on ad infinitum and if the 

minister has any thoughts or concerns about the impact of the failure to set any removal date for rent 

controls upon housing starts? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is aware that new housing isn’t under control and that 

has no bearing whatsoever on the number of housing starts. 

 

Answer to question re Liquor Outlet — Saskatoon 
 

Hon. E.B. Shillington (Minister of Government Services): — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 

from the member for Saskatoon Eastview who asked whether or not there would be a wholesale liquor 

outlet in the new Saskatoon provincial building — Saskatoon-Sutherland, I’m sorry — I find that there 

will be no wholesale liquor outlet in the Saskatoon provincial building. 

 

CPN — Closed Circuit Television 
 

Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Attorney 

General or the Premier if he cares to answer. Mr. Premier, in guaranteeing the $2.6 million to CPN you 

state and I quote: 

 

The announcement at his weekly news conference describing closed circuit television as an 

experiment and the long guarantee as a financial risk and if either one flounders it will likely be CPN 

since the new venture is likely to have tougher sledding than the old one. 

 

How can the Premier justify this unnecessary risk of the taxpayers’ money? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have attempted during the course of the news release, which was 

presumably published because that is an excerpt from a comment surrounding the publication of the 

news release, to indicate the reasons why the government thought this was a reasonable risk. One of the 

ones emphasized was that by having CPN or some other closed circuit television operation carrying on 

its operations in Saskatchewan there would be an opportunity to provide closed circuit television to the 

larger towns and smaller cities of Saskatchewan that do not now appear likely to get any cable television 

of the conventional kind. That was certainly one 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1202 

 

of the reasons which was given as justifying the risk. Other reasons include the one set out in the news 

release, the opportunity to have a wider range of programming; the opportunity to have programs 

selected by local groups as opposed to the programming offered by conventional cable television, 

namely NBC, CBS, PBS and ABC. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, when will you be in a position to 

provide this service then to these rural communities and cannot conventional cable TV through its 

microwave facilities offer this same service cheaper? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — To answer the latter question first, I am aware of no place on the North American 

continent where conventional cable television is provided to communities the size of Moosomin through 

a microwave hook-up. If there are I’ll be happy to have the information on them. It is my belief that it is 

not economically feasible, and I am not aware of where it operates, as I say. We are well aware of the 

Weyburn-Estevan situation and it is there of course; that is known to us all in Prince Albert. I am 

speaking of significantly smaller centres than that. 

 

With respect to the first question as to when “we will be able to provide this service”. Answer — the 

government of Saskatchewan does not propose to provide the service. We certainly are very hopeful that 

CPN or some other closed circuit cable television operator, and now CPN is the current choice, will be 

able to provide this in a measurable number of months but I have no knowledge with precision of when 

that will be. 

 

Legislation relating to Hunting 
 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 

Resources. It may be the value of the coyote pelt that has caused a good deal of concern in our area, both 

pro and con about the hunting of coyotes by using hounds. There are all kinds of rumours in our area 

that the minister is going to be introducing legislation that is going to prevent the hunting of coyotes by 

the use of hounds. Is this indeed a fact? Is the minister considering introducing such legislation? 

 

Hon. A. Matsalla (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I do not expect 

to introduce any legislation to control the hunting of coyotes and foxes by hounds. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not recognize the fact that there 

are some closed arguments for and against the issue, and the one that the rancher is very disturbed 

sometimes about is some of the actions that the hunters have, and of course there is the other side too, 

with the person who is using the hounds. Would the minister not agree or not look into the matter of 

probably establishing some sort of a licensing system so there could be probably more control than 

presently exists in the methods that are being used now? 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t considered the licensing system, nevertheless I do realize that 

there are pros and cons with respect too this type of hunting. I think one of the things that we must 

recognize is that the hunting of coyotes and foxes by hounds has been a tradition over the years. 

Nevertheless, I think there has been some abuse with respect to it and I think one of the main complaints 

that we have been getting is the damage to property. I am hoping that we might be able to do something 

to rectify the situation by conducting an education program. At least we 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1203 

 

attempt to do this first before we proceed with any kind of regulation or legislation. 

 

Local Government By-laws 
 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — I would like to direct a question to the Attorney General. The 

Attorney General is aware, and certainly everyone in this Assembly is, that for years the local 

government boards in Saskatchewan, mainly the towns and villages, have had the right under their part 

in Saskatchewan to bring in by-laws concerning that which is commonly known as the curfew laws in 

various towns. 

 

At the present time the concerns are being expressed by many towns throughout Saskatchewan with 

regard to the control of juvenile delinquency; and in most cases it is the local detachments of the police 

that are asking for some authority to help them in the policing. Many towns, Mr. Attorney General, as 

you are aware, are attempting to impose by-laws to control this. Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering if the 

Attorney General would now agree that it may be the time now, much more so than it has been in 

previous decades, that it would be easier for towns and easier for detachments to look at this if we had 

provincial legislation instead of each town trying to go with its own by-law? 

 

Hon. R.J. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to acknowledge that in 

some areas there may be a difficulty all right. I have from time to time received reports from members of 

the RCMP. I don’t want to overstate that because I think we have a danger of perhaps overstating it. But 

having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think the position really has to be that this is a matter which can best be 

dealt with by the local government exercising its local authority and its local autonomy. It does have the 

power to pass curfew by-laws. I believe that there are two or three communities around Saskatchewan 

that have done so. In fact judging by some reports in the popular press, in some areas there is some 

success for the passage of that kind of a local by-law, and I think for the hon. member to suggest that the 

province, in effect, step in and usurp what I think is the proper area for local autonomy in this area is 

unwarranted at this stage. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I agree in what has been the habit in the past and 

certainly agree with the Attorney General that this is a local option. Would the Attorney General not 

agree that in the smaller centres in Saskatchewan that provincial legislation would, in fact, carry more 

weight and make it more liveable in many areas where the town council, those imposing the laws are 

also business personnel and are feared to move in a way to correct the situation because of the local 

nature, and it would give the police more policy, more strength without embarrassment to the town 

officials? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I want to make this quite clear that I have not received, to 

the best of my recollection, any communications from any towns or villages or cities, (maybe the odd 

one or two letters in six and one-half years as AG came to me on this matter) which indicate that there is 

a requirement for provincial-wide law in this area. The hon. member raises his voice to that. Now there 

may be a problem in his constituency area but I don’t think that towns or villages are that easy to shirk 

their duty or their responsibility. I don’t think because they are business men and happen to be on 

council that that is any reason for them to not pass laws as they see fit to govern the conduct of activity 

in their community. My experience has been that they pass the laws which they think are the right and 

correct laws to pass, so to me to simply move in and take over on a province-wide basis, this area of 

what I think is proper local autonomy, I just cannot accept at this stage of the game. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1204 

 

Handling of the Coronach Development 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question 

of the minister in charge of SPC, again in connection with the Coronach development. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the minister certainly left me with the impression that he was dissatisfied with 

the handling of this particular matter because of the Department of External Affairs in Ottawa. I wonder 

if the minister would be prepared to tell us today in what way he is dissatisfied and what the Minister of 

External Affairs or his department has done that meets your objection? 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that it may be 

advantageous to give a brief review to the members of the Legislative Assembly with regard to what has 

been done in the negotiations or discussions pertaining to the establishment of the Poplar 

River-Coronach thermo installation. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, some members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are calling for order. The member asked 

for some information and I think it is difficult to give it to him unless I have the opportunity to take a 

few moments to convey it to him. 

 

May I start, Mr. Speaker, with identifying the meeting that was held in Helena, Montana in August of 

1975 with the general manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, gave to . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m 

finding it just a bit confusing that the member for Lakeview, the member who leads the Liberal Party, is 

asking for order when he asks a question in relation to the Poplar River thermo installation, and I think 

that they have undertaken to ask questions in this legislature for several days now. Obviously they have 

not been able to digest or decipher the information, I think very significant information, that has been 

offered to them and I am going to attempt, this Thursday, to give them a more comprehensive answer in 

hopes that it will resolve the dilemma that they have in their minds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may return, and you will allow me to give them a brief history of the negotiations 

and discussions between the state officials in the United States of America and the state officials in the 

state of Montana and the province of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada. Let me again say 

that there was a meeting held in 1975 to provide general information to state officials, both at the state 

level and the federal level in the United States of America. The general manager of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation was at that meeting. There was a meeting in Ottawa in October, 1975, and at that 

meeting it was agreed, agreed, Mr. Speaker, by the Environmental Protection Agency, that no 

transboundary air pollution problems would be created; no problems would be created by the 300 

megawatt plant being established or constructed in Coronach, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was also agreed . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — Inventory 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1205 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier in the absence of the minister in 

charge of Sask Potash. 

 

Because of the unusually high inventory of mined potash at PCS mines, is this the reason PCS is 

planning to cut back from a seven-day to a five-day work week? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge (a) of whether the inventories are high or low, and 

(b) whether or not there is a proposal to cut back from a seven-day week to a five-day week. I regret that 

I am unable to report to the hon. member on the daily activities of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Larter: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Can the Premier tell us whether our 

potash sales — the forecast for 1978, are up or down or by what per cent? Is there any forecast so far? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not impressed by the urgency of that question but to deal with it 

nonetheless, the sales projections, at least for the first half of this potash year that we are in have been 

good and are good. Whether or not these will continue I think depends upon the rate of application in the 

spring seeding or planting season in the United States. I think the projections are for a relatively heavy 

seeding, particularly since there is some evidence of significant purchases of grains by the Soviet Union 

and the People’s Republic of China, but I do not know whether these projections amount to a budget or 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think I will take the next question. 

 

Boundary Dam Tests 
 

Mr. R.E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of SPC continues to try to 

stick handle around the situation . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nelson: — . . . and I would like to read just a small paragraph of a letter from Thomas L. Judge, 

Governor of the state of Montana. 

 

I agree with the association that critical information gaps presently exist including confusion regarding 

the conclusions of a coal test burn at Boundary Dam Station, December 18, 1975. Moreover, coal and 

leacher samples previously requested from Canadian officials have not been received as of this date. 

The lack of data makes the evaluation of potential transboundary effects for all practical purposes 

impossible at this point in time. 

 

That point in time is September 28, 1977. My question to the minister is: how can you say these people 

are informed when the governor of the state of Montana has no idea that they have been informed and in 

fact says exactly the opposite? 

 

Hon. J. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I can only suggest that the member 

for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is mixed up and with all due deference it may well be that some politicians 

in the state of Montana are also mixed up. For the 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1206 

 

record of this House, Mr. Speaker, let me say that in order to measure the percentage of sulphur content 

of the coal that would be burned in the Poplar River Station, a sample burn was conducted in Estevan in 

1975. That test burn was witnessed by a representative of the EPA and I want you to record this, Mr. 

Speaker, carefully, and the member opposite as well. Montana was invited to witness that test burn and 

Montana authorities decided not to send a representative to that test burn when it was carried out. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, a test burn confirmed that the retention of sulphur will be within the air 

quality standards as set out by, not only Canadian standards but the United States of America standards 

as well. Copies of the test results were made available to the US authorities in 1976, the spring of 1976. 

US authorities, Mr. Speaker, however, requested samples of coal which would be used by the Poplar 

River Plant. In 1975 the Saskatchewan Power Corporation sent to those US authorities eight samples of 

coal. In February, in fact February 3 of 1977 a new request was made by the USA EPA. The request was 

for 40 new and additional samples of coal and overburden from 40 different locations in the Coronach 

area. Mr. Speaker, on October 17, 1977 a package of not 40 samples, but 54 samples of overburden and 

coal were sent to the US and SPC has committed to sending even further overburden samples to the 

United States of America. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said in this legislature before, there is a question of jurisdiction. Saskatchewan 

Power is required to adhere to Canadian laws, not US laws. Yet the US authorities are insistent that SPC 

accept their standards. The US authorities have demanded from SPC data on ambient air quality. This 

data has also been sent. They are now demanding the drawings of the plant layout. SPC has agreed to 

install 99 per cent particular control on the first 300 megawatt plant at a cost of approximately $6 

million. We are committed to that, Mr. Speaker. But when we look at the state of Montana we find out 

that they don’t live up to their own regulations. Mr. Speaker, a 173 megawatt plant at Billings, Montana 

does not have any sulphur removal equipment. I wonder whether the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is representing . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I believe I will take the next question and give the members an 

opportunity to reword their questions in such a fashion that they will not encourage debate and 

encourage the ministers to bring forward answers which are briefer. I will take the member for Rosthern. 

 

Proposed Refinery at Warman 
 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — A question to the minister responsible for SEDCO. Does your 

department presently have agents in the Warman area where the proposed refinery is supposed to be 

trying to increase the options for an additional year, plus trying to buy options on additional land? 

 

Hon. N. Vickar (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — No, SEDCO at this point in time is not 

involved in acting as an agent for anybody in the Warman area. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Supplementary. I suggest that the minister should talk to his people because they 

have knocked on every door in the last three days. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I will take the next question. 

 

Cable Guarantee 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, if I might direct a 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1207 

 

question to the Attorney General regarding the cable guarantee made. Yesterday I asked the Attorney 

General whether that cable guarantee is not in addition to cable guarantees of approximately $100,000 

per month and that’s the way CPN has been able to fund its development for almost a year so that the 

total amount of money gambled is more in the $5 million range? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I see. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow and the 

proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. MacDonald that Bill No. 47 An Act to provide for the 

Taxation of Income from Oil Wells be now read a second time. 

 

Miss L. Clifford (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I ended yesterday by indicating that on supporting this 

amendment and asking for this amendment we were asking the government and all members in this 

House to support a Select Standing Committee of Law Amendments to look into Bill 47, especially the 

specific levels of taxation. I was mentioning as well that during the last two or three years we found the 

government in Saskatchewan has become covered with a cloak of secrecy and that it is growing day by 

day. This bill will enable the government to specify the levels of taxation in Cabinet in secret rather than 

to have it referred to a committee, as we are asking. They seem to look at themselves as being a select 

body, an intellectual body in their ivory tower that does not care about whether or not the bill will be 

legal or any other opinions, whereas I feel they should be looking at the fact that they want to get as 

much advice and legal advice as possible so that the bill will not be declared ultra vires. 

 

There are many advantages to having decisions made in Cabinet walls and by a select few. They often 

look good at the time, but unfortunately they are often not adapted to the practical needs and in this case 

the legal needs of what type of bill we need in this province. 

 

A deep-rooted respect for an individual is an essential part of the democratic system, Mr. Speaker, 

setting democracy apart from any other type of system. Each citizen is a very special case and when it 

comes to the fact that you consider that all people are like a herd of cattle to be herded away to a pasture 

then we are coming into a very difficult situation. I think this is what is happening to the government 

opposite. They now feel that they have all the opportunity that they need by just discussing among 

themselves. They don’t need to consider any other legal or any other advice from the industry or the 

people of Saskatchewan and they will make a decision entirely on their own regard. It is vitally 

important to see that as a government in business as you increasingly affect our lives, that you must take 

great care that you do what is best for the people of Saskatchewan. I am not sure that even you are 

entirely convinced that this is the way that you are going about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members in the Liberal caucus have been asking other members of the House to support 

this amendment. We have asked the members on our left to stand up for principles and support the right 

way. We have asked them to stand up and follow us 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1208 

 

and follow our leader Ted Malone. They have scoffed at what we have said. They have not stood up for 

any point in this debate. Even the member for Rosetown (Mr. Bailey) has suggested that this would be a 

good idea, but they don’t look like they are going to follow the suggestion. If they can’t follow the 

member for Rosetown, as was pointed out by the member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe), I would like them to 

listen for a minute to what their leader said on November 23 and I quote from Hansard: 

 

But you can certainly sit down with the industry as to future plans of this government, as to the future 

legislation of this government and come up with legislation that (a) the industry won’t attack and, (b) 

that will gain the maximum benefit that windfall profits for the people and, (c) that is reasonable for 

all, rather than as you have now stubbornly made autocratic and dictorial decisions from your treasury 

benches without any consultation, without any approval of anyone in the province including the 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that sounds pretty much like the Leader of the Conservative Party is going to support our 

amendment, like the member for Rosetown is going to support our amendment. I ask the members to my 

left to put away all the dissension that seems to be in that party and get together and support the leader 

and the member for Rosetown. They have indicated that this will be a good idea and I hope that they 

will get together and get off their rear ends and do something that is positive for this province instead of 

sitting there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Miss Clifford: — I ask all of you, who verbally support an open government system, to say that you 

want the best legislation possible for the province of Saskatchewan, so that we can protect what is 

rightfully ours, to vote for this amendment. You have assured us that this is what your goal would be 

and we ask you to look into every measure possible to make this legislation valid. We say that by doing 

as we have suggested, in this amendment, this will be possible. 

 

You say, as the Minister of SPC has stated two days in a row, that you obey the laws of Canada, that you 

obey the laws of Saskatchewan. Let’s make sure that you don’t knowingly pass legislation that will be 

declared ultra vires again. I ask you to support this amendment and, Mr. Speaker, I will probably be 

supporting this amendment and a previous amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, may I say, first of all . . . Yes, 

I will remember it is the Christmas spirit and I will begin by congratulating the member for Wilkie (Miss 

Clifford) for participating in this debate. I appreciate the opportunity to follow her in the debate. I 

always enjoy the remarks of the member for Wilkie. I find them interesting and very worthwhile. To 

have a member from the fair sex in this legislature, I think, is very, very valuable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on entering the debate on Bill 47 my desire is to direct my comments to the people of 

Saskatchewan, who have taken a great deal of interest in this issue and taken a great deal of interest in 

this legislation. I wish to direct my comments to the members of this Assembly who have the interests of 

those Saskatchewan people at heart, sufficient enough, to participate and participate actively in this 

debate. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1209 

 

I do not have to repeat the background of the bill. You are all well aware of the events that led up to the 

bill. In 1973 the OPEC cartel decided to raise the world price of oil from just over $2 a barrel up to $10 

a barrel. You are aware that Saskatchewan introduced Bill 42 to ensure that a portion of that windfall 

profits, from the increase in the price in Saskatchewan oil, went to the owners of the resource, the people 

of Saskatchewan, rather than to the oil companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill did its job and it did it fairly. Saskatchewan people were able to retain their 

position as national leaders in social and educational fields through oil taxes. The people of 

Saskatchewan had accepted the bill and, indeed, the people of Saskatchewan took it for granted. So there 

were legal disputes, but the average person didn’t worry much about that and the bill, after all had been 

upheld by unanimous decisions in all the courts in Saskatchewan. So Saskatchewan people, in general, 

never gave the bill a second thought. They had good reason, Mr. Speaker, for their confidence for there 

was only one avenue open to the oil companies following their failure in the Saskatchewan courts and 

that was to go to the Supreme Court of Canada for the decision in Saskatchewan had been unanimous by 

the six judges who heard the case. These were not Saskatchewan appointed judges. They were judges 

appointed by the Government of Canada in Ottawa. The Government of Canada obviously felt them 

competent to be judges or they wouldn’t have appointed them. These judges had declared the 

Saskatchewan law sound. 

 

There was no question, Mr. Speaker, that the people in Last Mountain-Touchwood, including their 

member, were more than a little bit surprised when the decision declaring the bill unconstitutional by the 

Supreme Court was announced. They were surprised, as they had a right to be surprised, along with all 

the people in Saskatchewan — and I expect including the six judges. The decision supported 

unanimously by six federally appointed Saskatchewan judges had been overturned by seven federally 

appointed Ottawa judges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this taken together with the series of federal intrusions into the area of resources over the 

past three years, becomes rather interesting. Maybe the growing economic importance of Saskatchewan 

and Alberta has something to do with a pattern of the federal government in Ottawa at chipping away 

piece by methodical piece, chipping away at the constitutional right of the provinces to control their 

resources. 

 

Anyone, Mr. Speaker, who looks at the Ottawa scene, can see what is going on. The government in 

Ottawa, this year, is facing an $8 billion deficit and it expects to face a $10 billion to $11 billion deficit 

next year. That means, Mr. Speaker, that that government is totally incompetent in managing its affairs. 

It is incompetent in managing its affairs within the constitution of this country and this is not a new 

problem. This is an old problem. It was a problem that began to develop in the 1950s. In fact the 

government of the member for Prince Albert, in the House of Commons, was the beginning of the 

mismanagement of the federal government at Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — So what do they do? Will they start to look around? What do they see? They see 

that the resources are not under their jurisdiction. The resources of particularly Saskatchewan and 

Alberta are an economic key of the future. They recognize that under the British North America Act that 

resources are under the control of the provinces. But, even though they know this, it has not stopped 

them from 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1210 

 

making moves typical of that government of chipping away and of cutting away. 

 

Consider, Mr. Speaker, for a moment, the activities of the federal government in the resource field in 

recent years. In October of 1973, before Bill 42 was even introduced, the federal government imposed 

an export tax on Canadian oil. And think about their argument. Their argument at the time was that the 

oil companies stood to make too much windfall profits from the increased prices and no federal Liberal 

government would not want the oil companies to make such a profit, would they? Then after our bill 

was in place the federal government imposed a stiff additional oil export levy, indicating that they 

needed the money to finance the compensation to the eastern consumers of the difference between the 

world price and the domestic price. 

 

The fact that under the constitution the provinces were rightful owners of the resource, never seemed to 

enter the picture. The federal government blatantly used its taxing power to reach some of the increased 

value from a provincial resource. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Talk about what the Premier said. 

 

Mr. MacMurchy: — I’ll talk about what the Premier said, Mr. Speaker, to the member sitting on his 

seat, from Regina South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government can truly do amazing things with tax laws. You know that in May 

of 1974 the then Minister of Finance introduced the double taxation budget, which did not allow the oil 

companies to deduct their provincial royalties in the calculation of the federal corporate income tax. The 

proposal, Mr. Speaker, was mysteriously dropped some time just before July 1974, mysteriously 

dropped, Mr. Speaker, just before a certain July 8th election. But amazing, somehow it seemed to find 

its way back into the November 18th federal budget of 1974. 

 

The outcries have been such that a minor change was made and double taxation would only take place 

on 75 per cent of the oil companies’ gross revenue. But, certainly, nothing had been sacrificed in the 

principle of the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, naturally, when any two bodies have taxing powers over one item it is possible for one to 

take such a big chunk of the pie that there is none left for the other. Thus, the federal move of double 

taxation, in effect, put a severe limit on the province’s ability to tax its resources. The extra tax, in effect, 

removed the initiative for exploration and by removing initiatives for exploration and development the 

federal government effectively challenged the province’s right to control and to benefit from the 

development of their own resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consider the federal government’s activities in the pricing field. In April of 1975 the 

federal government passed Bill C32, The Petroleum Administration Act. Under The Petroleum 

Administration Act the federal government assumed unto itself the power to unilaterally terminate 

commodity price agreement. The federal government, by that act, assumed unto itself the power to 

refuse to negotiate a renewable agreement. Finally, it gave itself authority to impose, unilaterally, the 

maximum prices on a natural resource owned by a province. When one thinks about the logical 

implications of this last provision, one begins to understand that what the federal government had 

intended to do was to begin to needle its way to the heart of the control of provincial resources, that they 

had their eyes set firmly on acquiring control of 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1211 

 

the price, the flow, the production and the sale of any natural resource. 

 

We know, as well, that the price as set by the federal government in 1974, 1975 and 1976 for domestic 

oil were well below world prices. 

 

We, as Canadians, we in Saskatchewan, supported the principle of providing oil to eastern Canada at 

less than then world price. We have been willing to sacrifice our extra economic well-being in order to 

subsidize the East. That aside, Mr. Speaker, it is still true that a federal policy interfered with the West 

receiving fair market value for its resource. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 1976, the federal government imposed a 10 cent excise tax on gasoline. 

This, they said, was necessary to help finance the Oil Import Compensation Program, but a federal 10 

cent tax on every gallon of gasoline in a time when energy prices are increasing rapidly, means 10 cents 

that the provinces cannot have to say nothing of the effect of what the 10 cents per gallon had on the 

individual. And, again, Mr. Speaker, the federal government was putting a severe squeeze on the 

province’s ability to benefit from its own resource. 

 

Consider, Mr. Speaker, also the federal government’s creeping, or not so creeping, intrusion into the 

supply and distribution aspects of resource control. The National Energy Board Act gives the federal 

government, through Cabinet, not through Parliament the right to control the volume and the price of 

crude oil, natural gas and other petroleum products. Yes, the federal government under The British 

North America Act controls interprovincial and international trade, but through the Cabinet decisions 

related to this act, the federal government can have drastic impact on revenue of the provinces, the 

amount and the speed of development and the level of productivity. Because these decisions are made at 

the Cabinet level, really the provinces have no input at all into the decisions. 

 

Through The Emergency Supply Allocation Act, the federal government has given itself power to take 

control of all petroleum and petroleum products if it sees a shortage of fuel, real or anticipated, that may 

jeopardize the national welfare for economic stability. Pretty wide powers! 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, consider the federal government activity in the development field. I ask the question, 

why should the federal government feel it necessary to actually undertake to appraise and access coal 

and uranium resources within specific provinces? It does not take the great mental fortitude to realize 

that the federal government will not be gathering this information for the good of the province. The 

federal government sponsors its own research in natural resource fields. I think that it is safe to assume, 

in this area as well, that research undertaken will be aimed at supporting federal interest and will not 

give any special consideration for provincial development policies. 

 

The federal government has already implemented phase one and phase two of its mineral policy for 

Canada, which deals with resource and export pricing as well as environmental and employment 

concerns. Phase three, Mr. Speaker, now underway, extends the federal say into mineral resource 

development. And not to be left out, as the price of conventional and energy sources increases, the 

federal government is working on developing a coal control policy under the title of National Coal 

Policy. So it covers all fronts. Not only have they made these rather significant strides into the 

non-renewable resource area, I think they are doing their best to weasel into the renewable 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1212 

 

resources as well. No question that the provinces are prepared to talk to the federal government about 

interprovincial movement of forestry products. We always have been, but in 1975 the federal 

government developed a national forestry policy and, yes, the stated objective is none other than to 

formulate future courses of action regarding the forest industry. It does not say we will formulate future 

courses of action regarding the interprovincial movement of forest products, it says, formulate future 

courses of action regarding the forest industry. 

 

Somehow, Mr. Speaker, mysteriously over the last two years, discussions initiated by federal officials 

seemed to have crept into the areas of replacement policies in case of fires, new development and 

research. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has control under The British North America Act of 

interprovincial trade and international commerce. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has the 

right to levy indirect taxes, but, Mr. Speaker, the provinces have control of intraprovincial trade and 

natural resources, resource ownership and resource management. 

 

In all the foregoing examples the federal government has used its given powers as a guise to needle into 

the ownership and management of natural resources. It has used its policy powers and where necessary 

created statutory powers to give itself the maximum control it could under existing provisions of The 

British North American Act. But, Mr. Speaker, the policy and the legislative devices are not the only 

tools the federal government has been using to attempt to get a lever into the provinces’ control of 

resources. From 1973 to January, 1977, the federal government has intervened on behalf of the 

opposition against the provinces in an unbelievable nine out of ten challenges to provincial legislation 

that have come before the Supreme Court of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the elevating of the Central Canada 

Potash challenge of the prorationing act to the Supreme Court in 1977 has made the eleventh challenge 

to the provincial legislation and the tenth intervention by the federal government against the provinces. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the two best known of these cases are the Central Canada Potash prorationing 

challenge and the CIGOL challenge. You all know what happened in the CIGOL case. The provinces of 

Alberta and Manitoba and Quebec intervened on behalf of Saskatchewan. Those provinces knew what 

was at stake. The federal government intervened on behalf of Canadian Industrial Gas and Oil Limited. 

The decisions to intervene was made incidentally by the hon. Minister of Justice, at that time, the 

member for Saskatoon-Humboldt. In the CIGOL case the federal government actually attempted to 

become a co-complainant in the case, actually joining in the suit rather than just intervening on behalf 

of, as is the usual procedure. The attempt, Mr. Speaker, was unsuccessful, so the federal government 

reverted back to being an intervener but nonetheless it had tried. In the Central Canada Potash case 

which is now before the courts, the federal government has actually done an about face in its position 

since 1969. As is well known to members on both sides of the Assembly when the then Attorney 

General, Darrel Heald, brought the legislation forward to this Assembly he had the assurance of the then 

federal Department of Justice that there would be no problem from their point of view. That was in 

1969. When the member for Saskatoon-Humboldt became the Minister of Justice in 1972 there seemed 

to become a problem with the legislation. The federal government moved on November 20, 1973 to 

become co-complainant in the prorationing case. 

 

I am sorry the hon. member for Regina South is out of the House at this time because I think he would 

be interested in my next comment, he would be waiting for it. Make a note. Somehow there is a strange 

resemblance between the new minister’s activity in 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1213 

 

the justice field and his activities in the transportation field. In 1973 the then Minister of Transportation, 

Len Marchand — this wasn’t Len — it was Jean, Jean Marchand, I’m sorry . . . he had given a clear 

commitment to adjust the freight rates for processed rape seed so that the raw seed and the processed 

product would move at the same rates. But the new Minister of Transport seems to have different ideas 

and has not only been doing his best ever since to remove the crow rates but additionally to remove the 

low rate for rape seed after which he says, there would be no problem. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the CIGOL case can be interpreted in some respects as a challenge to the provinces, 

ability to tax; the prorationing case is clearly a challenge to the provinces, right to resource management. 

In the prorationing case, Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Newfoundland and New Brunswick all joined 

Saskatchewan in defending the legislation. Those provinces saw clearly and still do see this case as a 

fundamental case to the powers of the provinces to manage their resources as provided in the British 

North America Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that can hardly be seen as one political party against another, for the Saskatchewan 

prorationing legislation cuts across political parties and it’s being challenged by the same political party 

at the federal level as introduced at the provincial level. Mr. Speaker, this is a straight centralist versus 

provincial rights challenge, a challenge to the powers laid out in the British North America Act by the 

central government of this country. It is becoming clearer and clearer what a prophet our Premier, Allan 

Blakeney is, for he said at the First Minister’s Conference in Ottawa, December 19, 1976, “The federal 

position in the current resource cases demonstrates a systematic and a deliberate attempt to destroy 

through court action the provincial rights of resource ownership.” Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you 

that the November 23 decision of the Supreme Court of Canada is but another piece in the whole pattern 

to wrest the control of resources from their rightful place with the provinces onto the British North 

America Act. 

 

As I said in this Assembly in the Throne Speech two or three weeks ago, the ground for rejecting Bill 

42, as I understand it, was that Saskatchewan had imposed an indirect tax, or in other words a tax that is 

passed on to the consumer; the province has rights in direct tax, as we all know, but no rights in indirect 

tax. If that tax was passed on to the consumer, then the price of oil leaving Saskatchewan should have 

been different than the price of oil leaving other provinces but it was not, for the price of oil paid to 

producers was and is the same across Canada. Oil that leaves Alberta sells for the same domestic price 

as does oil leaving Saskatchewan and the same export price. The presence of our tax made no difference 

to the price of oil. It is difficult for me to understand, therefore, how our tax set the price of oil and 

hence interfered with interprovincial trade as was claimed. As I have said before, I’m a farmer, not a 

lawyer nor an economist but that just does not add up to me. As some have already observed and 

observed clearly, Justice Dixon’s logic in this minority decision is just a little bit too convincing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the pattern comes into sharp focus. I think the federal-provincial lines are drawn. As you 

know, this is not only true in the resource area but it’s true in the whole field of communications, where 

just after the CIGOL decision on cablevision was declared by the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court 

declared cablevision to be solely under the jurisdiction of the federal government. It is true in the field of 

regulation of financial institutions where the federal government seems intent on gaining control of 

market and economic regulations. It is true, Mr. Speaker, in the field of housing and urban affairs, with 

which I have had a bit of experience. Again under the constitution, 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1214 

 

provincial governments have sole jurisdiction in the fields of public land, municipal institutions, local 

works, generally matters of local nature. It is true that there has always been a whole range of 

cost-shared programs involving the federal government, the provincial government and municipal 

governments, particularly in the housing field. The policy control of the federal government in these 

programs has always meant that if a province saw the need for a certain program and if the federal 

government did not agree, there was only one thing to do, to find the money within the province. The 

federal control of the substantial amounts of transfer money to the housing field has always meant that 

provincial and municipal initiatives are restricted, often the priorities are distorted, the buildings which 

have only half met the needs are constructed because the whole thing would not qualify for federal 

funds. 

 

Saskatchewan knows all too well the experience of having to find its own money for programs in the 

housing field, that we have felt important. I think the province is to be congratulated for its leadership in 

setting aside $35 million for land assembly in Saskatchewan communities. Our present experience with 

Prairie Housing Development is another case in point, except with that one we are having to go it alone 

and we are actually being obstructed by the federal level. For an area which constitutionally belongs 

solely to the province that is pretty strong influence by the federal government. Recently the federal 

government has taken onto itself a more systematic challenging of provincial authority in the area of 

direct communication with the municipalities. The federal Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs is on 

record as publicly suggesting that a more appropriate way to deliver some of their funds and some of 

their programs in the housing field might be directly to the municipalities. We heard a week or so ago, 

the federal Minister of Transport announce that he would be providing abandoned rights-of-way from 

former rail lines directly to the municipalities for their disposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the municipalities were created out of the powers of the provincial governments in the 

constitution; the powers of municipalities are ones delegated to them directly from the provincial 

government. It is a long accepted practice at all levels of government that the federal government deals 

with the province and the province deals with the municipalities. The examples of an increasingly 

aggressive federal government in taking more and more powers for itself cuts into all fields of 

government; justice, social service programs, communication, manpower training, economic 

development. I say that that government wants to control without the costs, as it systematically pulls out 

of cost-shared agreements in the field of health care, post-secondary education and social service 

programs. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government uses policy, it uses legislation, it gets into the 

courts, it seems to use every method it can find to eat away at the constitutional powers given to the 

province under the British North America Act. 

 

As I said in the Throne Speech a few weeks ago, I believe that it is time for changes to be made in the 

constitution. The act does need to be brought up to date to meet the needs of the 1980s and the 1990s in 

the proper development of this great country but these changes need to be made by the elected 

legislators and I think they need to be made quickly. When the Prime Minister visited our Premier, Allan 

Blakeney, early this month, he did not hold out much hope for a constitutional conference in the near 

future. He said, “Quebec is unwilling to co-operate.” I say, surely that’s inadequate, inadequate grounds 

for rejecting an opportunity for the rightful people in our nation to make some conscious decisions about 

the future of our constitution. Surely when the change is going on in practice every day, the least that 

our Prime Minister could do is to take positive action to bring the first minister together to guide the 

process. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1215 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have come a full circle to Bill 47. The people of Saskatchewan, I say, accept the 

principle of Bill 47, they accept the principle that increases in value of a capital asset or a land, or a 

resource accrued to the owners of the capital asset, or the land or the resource and not to the renters. In 

the minds of Saskatchewan people this issue has been settled and been settled for some time but what we 

are seeing is the long accepted principle being violated on two fronts: (1) by the oil companies that feel 

they should have the lion’s share of the profits as so brilliantly outlined by our Attorney General in 

second reading and by our Premier in his second reading speech, and (2) by the federal government that 

because of their incompetence feel that they need the valuable resource revenues, not the provincial 

governments, regardless of what the BNA says. 

 

The Prime Minister has said that he will not exploit this Supreme Court decision on Bill 42. I ask the 

members of this House and you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does that mean? Does that mean that the 

issue is settled in his mind, as it is in the minds of Saskatchewan people with the passage of Bill 47? 

Does that mean that the federal government will now cease and desist from further intervention on 

behalf of oil companies and potash companies across this province, against this province? Will the 

federal government now back out of its many attempts at the policy and the legislative level to work its 

way into the areas of provincial control? Is the battle with respect to Bill 42 and Bill 47 over by his 

statement? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 47 is a good bill; it’s a basic income tax bill; it imposes a direct tax, an income tax on 

oil producers and it poses it retroactively. The province clearly has a right to impose direct income tax. I 

pay income tax to the province, the members opposite probably pay an income tax to the province and 

there are many precedents for retroactive legislation. The Supreme Court, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in its 

Bill 42 decision did not question that aspect of that tax. Now under the act, every person is liable for tax 

on his oil well income derived from the production of oil wells located in Saskatchewan for each 

taxation year ending after December 31, 1973. His oil well income is the revenue received by him for 

the production of oil, less the expenses incurred to earn that income. In the case of the income earned 

from the business or the property or the farm, the deductions are based on generally accepted accounting 

principles and good commercial practice. This bill is a fair bill, that’s what is done in the case of this 

bill, it is a good bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Prime Minister has said that he will not exploit the Supreme Court decision on 

Bill 42. I call on the Prime Minister to support this legislation. I call upon him to support this legislation 

because it is a direct tax and it is good legislation. Even more important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I call 

upon him to support this legislation because his assurance of provincial rights in the area of resource 

management will go a long way towards settling one of the most fundamental problems facing this 

country, that of national unity. Provinces that have concrete evidence that their right to the ownership of 

resources will be honoured, I say will likely be in a much better mood to negotiate constitutional 

changes. Mr. Speaker, I call on the Liberal members opposite to support this bill; those hon. members 

have said they will oppose the bill. I say to them, that not only is Bill 42 a good bill but what is at stake 

in Bill 42 is much too big an issue, Bill 47 rather is much too big an issue for petty politics. If 

Confederation is to remain alive, if it is to remain well, the provinces must be able to exercise their 

ownership and their control of the resources. The increasing number of intrusions into areas of 

provincial jurisdiction by the federal government must be stopped. I call on the 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1216 

 

Liberal members opposite once again to look beyond petty politics to the national unity implications of 

this legislation and throw their weight behind this income tax legislation, which in my mind is sound and 

constitutional. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will support the bill and oppose the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say with interest that the remarks of the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs and particularly his remarks about petty politics had a decidedly hollow 

ring in the face of the fact that it was his party, that party sitting there, in their role of the government of 

Saskatchewan which has supported every situation that now exists with respect to oil taxation legislation 

in Canada. Your party, your Premier was there. I would like to read into the record for the benefit of the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs some of the things that that former denizen of delirium, the former leader 

of the NDP in Canada, David Lewis, had to say about this particular situation and the tax regulations 

that were brought in by the federal government which the Minister of Municipal Affairs has just so 

soundly criticized. Mr. Lewis stated: 

 

I was saying that step by step the NDP has wrung out of this government an oil policy in the direction 

of Canadian interests. Mr. Lewis then said, I remind hon. members that earlier in the year we 

demanded export controls on oil and petroleum products and after some time Canada got them from 

this government. Months ago we demanded (speaking of the NDP Party in Canada) a two price system 

so that Canadians would not be gouged with domestically produced oil in the hands of the 

multinational corporations. We said that the only way to have a two price system without the 

multinational corporations getting huge windfalls was by having an export tax. He said, I remind hon. 

members that it was the NDP spokesman who made these demands. Eventually these became the 

policies of this country. 

 

Need I say any more about the remarks of the member for Last Mountain, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs? 

 

I would like to add only a few remarks made by . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Get the date for Hansard. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I am sorry I have lost my place and I won’t be able — if you would like to check it 

out, Mr. Member of Regina South. I didn’t put a marker in it. December, 1973. 

 

I would like to add that it has been a curious thing for me to sit here and watch backbencher after 

backbencher after backbencher. I think there were three of them, rise in this debate and say, preface their 

comments by saying, “I don’t understand the intricate legal arguments involved with Bill 47 or Bill 42.” 

If they had stopped right there truer words could never have been spoken, Mr. Attorney General and Mr. 

Member for Saskatoon Nutana or Centre or whichever seat you represent. Truer words could never have 

been spoken. That is the problem that we in the Liberal caucus have tried to point out not only to the 

people of Saskatchewan but to you members who sit opposite us in this House. We have said, you 

people did not understand the legal problems that you faced in 1973 when you brought in Bill 42 and 

you obviously have no better 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1217 

 

understanding of the legal problems that you face today with Bill 47. What is worse, while members 

stand up and acknowledge the fact that they don’t have the understanding necessary to guide this kind of 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan they have made no attempt to understand. 

 

Members on this side of the House have, I think, very soundly placed before you some of the dangers 

that you face in pursuing your goals on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. They have been met 

continually with a deaf ear by members on your side of the House. We have put two good amendments 

before this legislature to date on Bill 47. The first amendment you rejected out of hand. This amendment 

I have little doubt of what your reaction will be to it when it does come to a vote. 

 

The member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McNeill) also said one other really important thing when he was 

speaking on the amendment. He said, and I hope that our curly headed member will listen to this, that 

Bill 47 fits in with the entire resource management policy of this government. That, members opposite, 

was perhaps the most significant thing that the member for Meadow Lake said. He said this Bill 47 fits 

in with the entire resource management policy. I say on the basis of that alone you people should rise 

and withdraw your legislation. Your resource policy overall since your election in 1971 has been dismal 

and we have pursued those arguments on other occasions. Your handling of the potash industry which 

that members was so proud of because he felt he was beyond attack, your handling of potash resource 

development has been dismal. We see the annual report this year and in an eight month period PCS was 

a sad investment for the people of Saskatchewan, earning them a return of one-third of one per cent on 

their investment, a loss of revenue to the people of Saskatchewan of $30 million. That’s the kind of 

resource manage policy he feels, the results he feels Bill 47 will garner for the people of Saskatchewan. 

We won’t lose $30 million in revenue if that bill fails. We are going to lose closer to $500 million that 

we have collected in the past and perhaps another billion that we hope to collect in the next five or ten 

years. He says Bill 47 fits in with the entire resource management policy. How does it fit in with the 

overall oil policy of this government? It has driven the industry out of Saskatchewan and no place is that 

more clear than in the Kindersley constituency. 

 

Revenues? Bill 47 fits in with the resource management policy. I can only assure he believes there is 

some association with Bill 42. That means the member feels that Bill 47 through its association with the 

oil policy could well result in additional losses to this province because to date your successes in the oil 

industry have been a disaster. They are non-existent. We not only have the severe short term loss of 

people and dollars in our oil producing areas in Saskatchewan but we have a potential loss of $500 

million roughly. That’s how Bill 47 fits in. That’s why this party on this side of the House is opposing 

Bill 47. We have stated before and some of your more enlightened members I am sure have realized that 

all of us who sit in this legislature have the same goal with respect to the recovery of the $500 million in 

taxation in the future. However, we say exactly the same thing as the member for Meadow Lake. We 

can’t support this piece of legislation because it fits in so perfectly with your entire resource 

management policy. 

 

Members opposite as well have tried to insinuate and I am glad to see the Attorney General back in such 

a jovial mood, members on your side of the House have tried to insinuate that members on this side of 

the House have sort of got together with the oil companies to try and put a stop to this piece of 

legislation and I say that is the most foolish thing that members over there could have said. The oil 

companies in this province I say are just googly-eyed to get this legislation passed, absolutely. I could 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1218 

 

imagine the kind of reaction — and I am sorry the Minister of Mineral Resources isn’t here — because I 

could imagine the kind of reaction Husky Oil is having right now to the possibility of this legislation not 

only being withdrawn but I suspect there is some possibility members on his side of the House may even 

be convinced to vote against it themselves. I can imagine Husky Oil’s board room right now praying that 

this legislation gets passed. Look at the cards that they hold in their hand when they sit down with Black 

Jack Messer to discuss the establishment of a heavy oil refinery on the Saskatchewan side of the border. 

How would you like to be in Jack’s place when he has to negotiate a tax rate with Husky Oil? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the member is well aware of the fact that all hon. members should be referred 

to by their constituency or the portfolio they hold. It depreciates the decorum of the House if members 

are referring to other members other than in that manner. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I have so completely forgotten which constituency he represents. I was 

merely for the sake of continuing this debate in a consistent manner trying to make some reference to the 

member and I unfortunately made the slip of referring to him by other than his constituency name. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Does he represent the state of Montana? 

 

Mr. McMillan: — As I understand it not even in the least little it of a way. I say that your open ended 

tax rate at this time is enough to make Husky Oil do hand flips in the province of Saskatchewan for the 

next 20 years. The Minister of Mineral Resources, I believe the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. 

Speaker, has sent out enough hot air balloons in this province about the potential for attracting a 

three-quarter of a billion dollar oil refinery in Saskatchewan that I say to you there will be considerable 

public pressure on him to produce. Considerable pressure. Perhaps not as much of a pressure as 

suggested by the member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) when he had his discussion about the potential 

for and I loath to say it, bribery, but there is considerable pressure on the Minister of Mineral Resources 

to come to some amicable agreement with Husky Oil to locating on this side of the border. Now to the 

best of my knowledge, as a result of the kind of resource policy you have pursued over the past six or 

seven years, Husky Oil to date has only got one good reason for locating on this side of the border and 

that will be an advantageous tax rate under Bill 47. I would list a number of other more peripheral 

reasons, the good nature and the hard working qualities of our Saskatchewan citizens and our 

continually better weather than is experienced on the Alberta side of the border? Very little. Now Husky 

Oil has a club and believe me they are prepared to use it, an open ended tax rate. Husky Oil and the 

Minister of Mineral Resources is a deadly combination for this province of Saskatchewan. We say that 

the circumstances under those two parties would meet would not be in the best interests of this province 

and we would like to see some secure tax rate written into this piece of legislation so that the Minister of 

Mineral Resources and perhaps the Attorney General don’t find temptation too great when they sit down 

at the bargaining table. 

 

I say that for you people to waltz into the back room in this province hand in hand with the oil 

companies to determine an amicable settlement as far as a future taxation rate goes is a dangerous thing 

for any government to do and a particularly dangerous thing for this government to do in view of the 

kind of demonstrated capabilities you have in the resource management field. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1219 

 

I would like to make a few statements about the Tory Party and their role in this debate and if by some 

stroke of luck I can stir the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) to his feet as a result of my comments. I 

think we may have a chance to hear from him and he has assured me that he is prepared to speak should 

someone get him emotionally upset. While I have no desire to ruffle his personal feathers I would more 

than enjoy hearing from the Tory Party in debate. The Conservative Party has behaved in this legislature 

in much the same way as a drunk who has wondered out onto the freeway in rush hour. They have found 

themselves in a position, they suddenly wake up and they are in the middle of a busy freeway and they 

don’t know what to do to get out of there. They think probably the best and most immediate thing to do 

is to follow the heaviest flow of traffic and they immediately jump in that lane. They come close to 

getting run down on three or four different situations and suddenly decide maybe they haven’t made the 

best decision and in their confusion, in their fog, make a lap back for the white line and promptly sit 

down on it and don’t move. I don’t know whether they are waiting for the traffic to thin out or what is 

going to happen. 

 

We moved an amendment to this major piece of legislation in the legislature. The Tory Party stood and 

voted against it without so much as a whimper we are accustomed to hearing from them. I say that in 

itself is an irresponsible action. I had hoped for better. It is one thing to stand on a piece of legislation 

and have the intestinal fortitude to get up and justify that. We have been waiting for you to get up and 

justify it. Goodness knows, maybe we are wrong and you are right, as far as that is from the possibility 

of being believable, maybe it’s true. Get up and enlighten members of this legislature about your actions 

on behalf of this socialist government. We will be more than interested in hearing what you have to say 

not only about the situation and the position you took on our first amendment, which was a sound 

amendment, we want to hear what you have to say about this second amendment that we have brought 

into this legislature. How are you guys — do you know what’s going to happen to you over the 

Christmas holidays? You are going to go home and you are going to associate with your friends and 

your scattered supporters in your constituencies, you may be in the middle of your little Christmas cheer 

parties and some of your people are going to start asking you guys why you took the position you did in 

favour of this socialist government on this major piece of legislation. If for no other reason than it would 

give you some practice in justifying yourself you might rise in this House and explain to us why you 

have taken this unnatural position. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — They know a good bill when they see one. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Well, I hesitate to think that obviously in the minds of the Tories and it never 

occurred to me before they came to this legislature that this philosophic desires could so closely align 

with yours, until as I’ve explained beforehand how we found out how many socialist members they had. 

I still suggest and only as a good-natured warning to you fellows, you’re going to catch a lot of flack 

when you get home over Christmas and you have the opportunity here to prepare your explanations, not 

to our supporters or the socialist supporters but to your own supporters. I say, take advantage of that 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have introduced a second amendment to Bill 47 which we feel is in the best interests of 

the people of Saskatchewan. We have seen members on that side of the House, a few of them, rise and 

speak against that amendment, not with any conviction, certainly not with any sincerity and above all, 

not with any understanding. We feel that there is some possibility yet that the members to our left might 

be able to 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1220 

 

find it in their realm of good sense to stand up and vote with us on this legislation and I hope that we 

have convinced some of the backbenchers on the government side and certainly the Tory caucus to 

support this legislation. Let there be no doubt that the Liberal caucus is sincerely and firmly in favour of 

seeing this improvement brought into Bill 47 in the hopes that the public interest might be better served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.H. Penner (Saskatoon-Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to enter the debate on the 

amendment, I think it is important initially to point out just one more reason why the government 

members who are sitting opposite, ought to support the amendment which is before us. It was rather 

amusing, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the comments of the Minister of Municipal Affairs a moment ago in 

attempting to provide some kind of an insight into the reasons why the government has taken the 

position it has with regard to the whole question of resource development. It is interesting, on the one 

hand, to contemplate what the Minister of Municipal Affairs had to say and, on the other hand, to listen 

to the remarks of one Mr. Knight who spoke in debate in December of 1973 in the House of Commons. I 

would like to quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, because I . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Who is this Bill Knight? 

 

Mr. Penner: — . . . I think it’s important for members opposite to understand this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He is a Conservative I assume. 

 

Mr. Penner: — Well, I understand that members opposite have a closer affection to him even than they 

do to the Conservatives in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, they wouldn’t hire a Conservative to do that job. 

 

Mr. Penner: — At any rate, he said, that is not the case with the Premier of Alberta and I want to quote 

to this House the opening remarks of the Premier of Saskatchewan when addressing the people of this 

province. This ought not to be forgotten in the sequence of events. He said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, 

from page 87, the Premier of Saskatchewan said this: 

 

Tonight I want to talk to you about our new oil policy in Saskatchewan. Before I do let me first say 

that the Saskatchewan government approves most of the moves toward a national energy policy 

announced last week by the federal government. We support extension of the oil pipe line to Montreal 

and other efforts to make Canada self-sufficient in oil. We support the announced intention to set up a 

national oil corporation to help find and develop new Canadian oil and gas. We support the intent of 

the federal government to hold down the price for Canadian consumers of western Canada crude. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when you listen to that, having been enunciated as a position that was taken in 

1973 and compare it to the position taken by the Minister of Municipal Affairs this afternoon, it’s no 

wonder that the Liberal party has proposed not 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1221 

 

one but two amendments in order to help save the situation that the people of Saskatchewan find 

themselves in today. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important for members opposite to remember that in this particular 

instance, insofar as Bill 47 is concerned, their responsibility is to govern rather than to look for an easy, 

political solution to the problem that they have created. We need a group of people, Mr. Speaker, who 

are prepared to safeguard that position that the people of Saskatchewan ought to have with regard to 

revenue from the oil industry. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is important for members opposite to understand what the word ‘govern’ 

means. If you look in the dictionary, Mr. Speaker, you can find a number of definitions. One that is 

suggested is that the word ‘govern’ means to control the actions or the behaviour of and I think if the 

members opposite reflect upon that definition of governing insofar as Bill 42 is concerned, they would 

have to admit that they failed miserably in that regard. If you take a look at another definition of the 

word ‘to govern’, Mr. Speaker, you would not that it says to keep under control. Again, if one looks at 

Bill 42, if it was intended as an effort to keep under control revenues to the people of Saskatchewan, 

they have again failed miserably. A third definition is to conduct the policy, action and affairs 

despotically or constitutionally. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we can see again quite readily where the 

government, insofar as Bill 42 was concerned, failed miserably. 

 

It is interesting to note that the definition of the word ‘to govern’ puts despotically opposite 

constitutionally. When one recognizes that Bill 42 was unconstitutional it is easy to arrive at a solution 

about the kind of government that this group has placed before the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Penner: — Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford, in Saskatchewan, to risk, in Bill 47, what the people of 

Saskatchewan had risked on their behalf by this government in Bill 42. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have some genuine responsibility to assist in making certain that the failure of Bill 42 is not repeated 

in the failure of Bill 47. When one looks at the amendment that has been put, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 

clear for anyone who reads it to see that what it is there to do is to provide some kind of guarantee and 

assistance to this government, assistance to the government and a guarantee to the people of 

Saskatchewan that what was originally an error to the tune of $500 million (at least potentially to the 

tune of $500 million) does not become an error which is potentially a $1 billion error. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during debate members opposite have indicated that under no circumstances anywhere did 

anybody ever suggest to them in 1973 that Bill 42 was likely to be unconstitutional. The Premier 

indicated that nobody had alluded to that, the Attorney General indicated that nobody had alluded to that 

and it just simply flies in the face of the facts of the situation, Mr. Speaker. I want to enter into the 

record a statement that was made December 12, 1973 by Mr. McLeod, the member for Regina South. 

He said this: 

 

What is really happening is this. The Minister of Mineral Resources says that they are putting up 100 

per cent tax. He is not pretending that he is entitled to do this because of the BNA Act. He has rightly 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1222 

 

said that the federal government has the right to deal with trade and commerce. He has rightly said that 

the province of Saskatchewan has the right to deal with mineral resources, all of its natural resources. 

But what the province of Saskatchewan is attempting to do is to take away from the Dominion of 

Canada its rightful powers in trade and commerce by means of a trick. The province of Saskatchewan 

is saying that although the federal government does have, for the benefit of all of Canada, the right to 

regulate trade and commerce under the pretence of regulating natural resources, the province of 

Saskatchewan will take away a federal right which the Dominion of Canada has. 

 

Later in the same speech, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina South at that time, Mr. McLeod, said 

this: 

 

The New Democrats will vote one way and we will vote the other because I believe that a vote in 

favour of this bill is at attack upon Confederation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it couldn’t have been said any more clearly. It demonstrates beyond any shadow of a 

doubt that the members who are sitting on the other side of this House require advice. They need help 

and the amendment which is before us, Mr. Speaker, has been designed specifically to provide them 

with the kind of help which they have demonstrated they need. 

 

When we look at Bill 47, Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in the House would agree that the success or the 

failure of that document is something that will be judged by history. It will be judged on the basis 

whether it corrects or does not correct the irresponsibility of Bill 42. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that history 

is in no particular rush. We want the government to assure itself, to assure, us, to assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that the bill will do what the government says the bill will do and the only way the 

government can give that kind of assurance, Mr. Speaker, is to refer the bill. 

 

I suggest to members opposite that a few months, when judged in the framework of the course of 

history, can have absolutely no consequence and when one looks at the fact that what they are prepared 

to do is double the risk on half a billion dollars. I submit to the members opposite that if they are 

realistic and reasonable and honest with themselves they’ve no alternative but to refer the bill. 

 

The government knows, as well as we know, that the success or failure of the bill will rest with the 

relative closeness of the tax rate to be established compared to the rate that was established in Bill 42, 

which we already know has been shown to be unconstitutional. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of other reasons why I think it is important for the people of 

Saskatchewan that this bill be referred. The two other reasons that I want to look at, Mr. Speaker, are 

statements that were made by the Premier himself when he rose in this House to debate Bill 47. Two 

statements and I am reading from page 981 of Hansard, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier said: 

 

I will just comment on the point raised by the hon. member. May I say that this government has no 

intention of nationalizing the oil industry at this time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the end of the remark to the member who is yapping opposite and in a moment 

I am going to read the next sentence that the Premier made but I first want to make this point. We had a 

major industry in this province nationalized two years 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1223 

 

ago, Mr. Speaker, without even so much as a hint from members opposite that that was what they 

intended to do. We have a statement made by a man who has always been considered to be pretty careful 

with his choice of words, where he indicates, we are not going to nationalize the oil industry at this time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Continue! 

 

Mr. Penner: — The member for Saskatoon Buena Vista invites me to go on, and I am going to go on 

because the next statement that the Premier made is even more significant than the last one. This is what 

he said and I am going to quote again from page 981. He said: 

 

Nor do we have any intention of nationalizing it when this bill is struck down. 

 

Now he is talking about Bill 47, Mr. Speaker, and he is saying when this bill is struck down — a 

Freudian slip, Mr. Speaker, a Premier leading a government, bringing in a bill where they have so many 

doubts that even though they don’t want to admit the possibility that it is going to be struck down, he 

says in his speech, admits in his speech that there is that possibility. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if the government has the real intent of protecting the people of Saskatchewan, 

again it has no alternative but to accept the amendment that we have put. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I want to take the opportunity to urge the members who are sitting 

to my left. I know that it can’t be done now in second reading because they have already made some 

kind of a commitment that they are going to support the government in second reading of this bill but I 

want to encourage the members opposite to support the Liberal Party when it comes to debate in third 

reading and vote on third reading. We know that the people who are sitting to my left have been working 

in a void insofar as any kind of effective leadership is concerned. We invite them and we invite them 

unashamedly to support the Liberal party and to support our leader when it gets down to the nuts and 

bolts of debate of this bill in third reading and to the final vote in third reading. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at the way people are reacting to the position that the 

Conservatives have taken and I expect the kind of heat that they have felt is going to be an added factor 

as to why the Progressive Conservative party is going to support the Liberal Party when we get into third 

reading and when we get into the final vote. 

 

I was interested in an article that I picked up in a recent copy of the Regina Leader Post in the letters to 

the Editor, which I thought, Mr. Speaker, might be of some assistance to the members to my left as they 

try to make up their minds what in fact they are going to do when they do get into third reading. It is 

entitled “Double Talk”, the article begins by saying: 

 

The spectacle of the Progressive Conservative leader, Dick Collver, supporting the province’s new oil 

tax legislation is just too much. Here is the leader of a party which has repeatedly opposed the 

province’s resource policy, now shamelessly climbing on the bandwagon of public insistence that 

Saskatchewan tax money be kept in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the PC policy changes overnight and suddenly they support the tax. The 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1224 

 

same cynical double talk has prevailed with potash. In both cases the message is clear. But as anyone 

can see, there are as many holes in this logic as in Swiss cheese. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there is anything that could any better indicate a pretty 

perceptive individual who wrote that letter I would say, who realizes that the Conservatives are in fact 

leaderless, devoid of any kind of principle when it comes to the kind of responsibility that they ought to 

have in this House. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, with just two further comments — one, a final invitation insofar as I am 

concerned and I am not going to mention it again, that the Conservatives will join us when it comes to 

third reading and vote against the government and secondly, Mr. Speaker, to indicate that I think there is 

ample reason why the amendment, which has been put, ought to be supported. That is what I intend to 

do and I will not support the bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few 

words in connection with the amendment and to urge members opposite and urge members to my left to 

give us their support in this amendment which I feel will greatly strengthen Bill 47. 

 

Before making my comments, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see so many Conservative members in the 

House this afternoon. I understand that most of the members who aren’t here are out in a desperate 

search for used lumber with blue paint on it to be stored somewhere in the event that an investigation 

which is taking place looks for such a quantity of material. I wish them luck in their endeavours, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is very interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, that the members to my left still have yet to rise to speak on 

this bill. I am advised that the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) indicates he is going to have some 

comments in third reading. It is very interesting when you think that by that time you would have 

thought the members would have made up their mind one way or another before third reading which I 

gather will be some time in January. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me emphasize once again that the Liberal Party, and only the Liberal Party, has 

opposed Bill 47. Our opposition grows the more we look into the bill, the more we understand the 

ramifications of it. Over the past few days, indeed the past few weeks, we have been highly critical of 

the bill. As I say, Mr. Speaker, our criticism has been a constructive criticism. We have made 

suggestions to the members opposite as to how this bill can be improved. The member for Regina South 

(Mr. Cameron) in his amendment indicated that the bill could be improved by splitting it in two. Our 

argument at that time was that we could ensure the future, the future of oil development in this province, 

and future revenues, if that was done. We could also ensure the past and make sure that the money that 

had been collected to date illegally under Bill 42 could be retained by the province. Members to our left 

and members opposite have ignored this advice. 

 

We must ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, why do we oppose this bill? Why do we oppose it so vigorously? 

Let me say there are four reasons, Mr. Speaker. The first reason is the basic one that this bill will not 

retain the money that was collected illegally under Bill 42. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1225 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Malone: — That is first and foremost, Mr. Speaker. That money is still in danger of being returned 

to the international oil industry. 

 

Secondly, this bill does not ensure the development of the oil industry in the future. Indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, it does anything but that. We don’t know what the tax rates are going to be and until we see 

that either in Committee of the Whole or later we cannot determine what will happen with the future of 

this industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, the bill as well, is simply an invitation for the oil industry to attack it. 

There are so many loopholes in it, it is so colourable when compared to Bill 42 that anybody in the oil 

industry, any legal department in an oil industry office, must just be sitting back waiting and praying 

that this bill is passed by this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Malone: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, fundamentally the bill is a bad bill and it is going to hurt the 

future of Saskatchewan. It is bad for the people of this province, it puts in jeopardy their future and the 

future of generations to come. Those are the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why we oppose the bill. Those are 

the reasons we put in one amendment and the reasons we now have a second amendment before this 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Malone: — The key to the bill, of course, Mr. Speaker, is the tax rate, what it will be, in trying to 

determine what the tax rate or tax rates will be. I think it is well, Mr. Speaker, to look at the enforcement 

sections of Bill 47 and to try to determine from them the intentions of the government as to how serious 

they are about the provisions of Bill 47, how serious they are about negotiating with the oil industry to 

come to a reasonable tax rate, a tax rate that will ensure the moneys that have been collected in the past 

will be retained and a tax rate that will ensure the future development of the industry in the province. 

 

When I look at some of these sections, Mr. Speaker, I am struck by one thing. I have never seen such 

vicious and odious provisions in any piece of legislation that has come before this legislature. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to deal with one or two sections particularly and I want to start by section 21. 

 

Let me just read the opening paragraph of this section. It says: 

 

It is lawful at all times for the assessor or any assistant assessor or special assessor to enter upon any 

premises for the purpose of making inquiries, obtaining information and otherwise performing his 

duties under this act, and for any of those purposes he may use all machinery, equipment, appliances 

and things as he considers necessary or expedient. 

 

Now just look at the implications of that section, Mr. Speaker. At all times — in the middle of the night, 

on weekends — he can determine when people will not be at the premises 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1226 

 

and decide at that time to break into those premises. That’s what this section permits the assessor or one 

of his flunkies to do, Mr. Speaker. Look at the other provisions of the act. It says, ‘to enter upon any 

premises’, not business premises, Mr. Speaker, of the particular oil company involved. This particular 

section allows the assessor to enter private dwellings, homes of the people who are employed by the 

company, to enter upon law offices, chartered accountancy offices, anywhere that he determines that 

there may be some information that may be useful to him. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at 

perhaps the most invidious provision of this section. It says he may use all machinery, equipment, 

appliances and things to help him in this particular project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that this particular section allows the assessor to bug telephones if he 

wishes. It allows the assessor to burglarize places . . . so the Attorney General walks out — he walks 

out. I would like to see the Attorney General deny these provisions are not in this particular bill. It 

allows the assessor to have more power under law than any RCMP officer, any municipal policeman, 

any law enforcement agency in the province of Saskatchewan at this time. It allows him to break the 

laws we know in this province, Mr. Speaker, to burglarize, to bug, to do anything that he feels is 

necessary to obtain information for the purposes of this act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one would think that when you have such stringent provisions in a section of an act 

passed by this provincial legislature that there would be some duty upon the assessor to get a warrant 

from the court, to get permission of the Attorney General, to get permission of the minister involved, 

but, Mr. Speaker, there is no such provision. The act provides that it is lawful at any time for any 

assessor to do the things that I have outlined to this legislature, and, Mr. Speaker, knowing the way the 

NDP government operates I believe that they have full intention to use these provisions at any time, in 

any way. 

 

There is one other point in this section, Mr. Speaker. It says that the person who gains this information, 

illegally or otherwise, will not be allowed to communicate it to anybody except for the purposes of this 

act. Well there’s one other point, Mr. Speaker. There is nowhere in this act that we find any section that 

says to the person who does gain this information, and who does communicate it in breach of the act, 

that he is guilty of any penalty, nothing whatsoever. So I suggest to you what this section means, Mr. 

Speaker, is that any person who works for the Department of Mineral Resources, if they are the 

department to administer this act, who is appointed as an assessor or a special assessor or an assistant 

assessor, can go to any premises in the province of Saskatchewan, he can break into them, he can use 

whatever illegal means that he wants to to get access to those premises, he can get any information that 

he wants and he can use that information in any way that he chooses, and I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that there isn’t a statute in Saskatchewan, a statute in Canada, that contains such odious and vicious 

provisions as section 21. 

 

There is another section, Mr. Speaker, which is of interest to all, and that is section 34, and I will refer 

all members to it. What this section provides, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister, whoever he may be, can 

set any tax he wants in compliance of the act or in non-compliance of the act, and he can collect any 

amount of money that he wishes to collect from the people that he assesses that tax against. I refer you 

to section 34, subsection 4; where direction of the minister has been given under this section, tax shall be 

collected or assessed or re-assessed and collected, notwithstanding any other provision of this act or any 

provision of any other act. Now, Mr. Speaker, why do we need the act when this provision is in here? 

This provision allows the minister to set whatever tax rate he wants, to collect whatever money he 

wants, to go to any company 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1227 

 

that is indirectly involved or directly involved in the oil industry, and demand from that company any 

amount of money that he sees fit to be paid to the government of Saskatchewan. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, a section like this begs some explanation, begs some explanation from the Attorney General, 

and I suspect that we will not have such explanation, Mr. Speaker, until we get to Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Another interesting provision, Mr. Speaker — section 34(2); an avoidance or reduction of taxes may be 

regarded as improper for the purposes of this act, although not otherwise illegal or unlawful. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, what this provision suggests is that any company that conducts its affairs in such a way to take 

advantage of the law of the land, tax laws of the land, to try to pay the least amount of taxes possible 

which everybody in this House does, which everybody in the country does, which everybody in the 

province does; if he conducts his affairs in that efficient way and pays a smaller amount of tax as if he 

conducted them in a less efficient way, it doesn’t matter. The minister can walk in and say, ‘we think 

you should be paying this amount of tax, it doesn’t matter whether you have these exemptions under the 

act, you’re not entitled to them because we say that you are trying to reduce the amount of tax load that 

you should have to pay.’ Again, a section that demands an explanation, a section that I’m sure the 

Attorney general will not deal with in closing this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are these two sections out of, I don’t know how many — 45 or 46 or 50, these two 

sections alone, Mr. Speaker, would make any right thinking individual want to oppose this type of 

legislation. Any individual who has any concern at all for the justice in this province, any individual at 

all who is concerned about the garnering of revenues for the province of Saskatchewan — these 

sections, Mr. Speaker, are vicious, these sections do away with the right of this legislature to examine 

the activities of this government, these sections allow the minister, whoever he may be, to be a law unto 

himself, and I say, Mr. Speaker, these sections should be removed. There will certainly be amendments 

put forth towards them when we get into Committee of the Whole. 

 

Who supports these two sections, Mr. Speaker? Well, the Conservatives seem to support this particular 

legislation and they have indicated that they are going to vote for it. The NDP sees nothing wrong with 

this type of legislation; they’re obviously going to vote for it. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to remember the activities of the party that sits to my left and the part that sits 

across from me. This is a bill, Mr. Speaker, that is not going to be forgotten and it is a bill that is not 

going to be forgiven, because in the days ahead, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to 

realize that this bill is bad for the province of Saskatchewan, and they are going to remember in the next 

election, those who supported it. One would have hoped, Mr. Speaker, that the members to my left could 

have made some contribution to this debate, but what we have seen is the ‘three stooges’ in the front row 

acting as simply that for the government who sits across from me. We have seen their members get up 

and say the Attorney General wants this bill passed, therefore we have to pass it. The Premier says the 

bill has to pass so we have to pass it. We have even seen the member for Qu’Appelle, we have seen the 

member for Rosetown or Rosthern — Rosetown, get up and make motions, Mr. Speaker, to put closure 

on this House; motions that say the government wants this bill through in a hurry, so we’re the stooges 

of the government so we’re going to put those motions through. But it is very interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

They make those motions at the start of the day’s session but they don’t put them on the order paper to 

be debated. Heavens, they wouldn’t want these motions to be debated and brought to the attention of the 

public as to what the members opposite are intending on doing. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1228 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Tory contribution in this debate has amounted to nothing more than cowardly attacks 

on your office, an attack that again continued last night with a letter to the news media from the member 

for Estevan, an attack that he didn’t have the courage to bring in this legislature. Their contribution to 

date has been making unsubstantiated charges about deals but not getting up and giving any evidence of 

those deals. One wonders, Mr. Speaker, why they are here at all. Why are they in this legislature? They 

never get up and say anything, they get up and vote the way the government tells them to vote. Mr. 

Speaker, I urge the members to our left to follow the lead that the Liberal Party is showing. Get up and 

have some courage and follow some honest leadership, my friends — honest leadership. Vote for the 

amendment that we have proposed, an amendment that will make this bill workable, vote for our 

amendments in Committee of the Whole. It will be very interesting in Committee of the Whole, Mr. 

Speaker. We intend on bringing a series of amendments. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that we will be here two 

or three or four days debating those amendments. It will be interesting to see where the members to my 

left will be standing on those amendments — amendments that are going to be brought by an honest 

party, a party that I ask those members, leave to follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this legislature to put the interests of the people of Saskatchewan first. 

Stop playing politics, stop playing petty partisan politics. Support this amendment, Mr. Speaker, because 

this amendment will result in a better bill, a bill that will ensure for the people of Saskatchewan that it 

will retain the money that has been collected to date, and a bill that will ensure even future revenue in 

the years ahead. Mr. Speaker, those who don’t support this amendment, those who haven’t got courage 

enough to get up and oppose the NDP across from us, I believe are going to be regarded in the future by 

the people of Saskatchewan, as simply stooges for what they are, as people who aren’t interested in this 

province but only interested in their short-run political gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader has cut me right to the depths of my 

heart. I feel that I have to get up and defend ourselves and show the people where we stand. I think the 

people of Saskatchewan know where we stand and they know what direction we are going. 

 

It is my pleasure to now discuss Bill 47 with the members of the House. As you know, the constituency 

of Estevan has always prided itself as being the oil capital of Saskatchewan. The oil industry, or what 

there is left of it in Saskatchewan, has been centred in Saskatchewan and Estevan, and we in that area 

have been proud of the contributions made to the city and our area by the oil industry. They have made 

much contribution to this area of Saskatchewan. I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that people in that 

area have a far better knowledge of the industry as a whole than do other areas of Saskatchewan not 

blessed with the oil reserves that we have in the south-eastern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the past few weeks since the decision on CIGOL was announced, I have spent much time reading 

whatever I could find on this whole sordid mess. I have reviewed the debates in this legislature that took 

place when Bill 42 was introduced in December, 1973. I have read and re-read the remarks then made 

by my predecessor from Estevan, the then Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, and the Premier of the 

province, and other 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1229 

 

socialist MLAs of that day, many of whom still sit in this House. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, some 

of the remarks then made by the Premier and his supporters must receive my wholehearted support. It 

was however, their methods and their reasoning that cause people in all walks of life in Saskatchewan to 

be suspicious as to their motives. Mr. Speaker, reading the debates of those times is most interesting and 

informative; in fact many of the remarks are reviling, and in plain and simple truth, made me sick. The 

issues involved were in fact, quite simple, yet this government chose to channel the simple issues and 

use the situation as it existed at that time, to pounce on its enemy, being the opponents of state 

ownership as then represented by the oil industry, and thoroughly confused the whole matter. The oil 

industry was used as the whipping boy. It was placed in a situation neither created by it or over which it 

had any control, and no matter what had been the outcome, it could not win the argument, and therefore 

very little was heard from the industry itself. Consequently, in the non-producing oil areas of 

Saskatchewan, many people felt the oil industries were the villains that this government made them out 

to be. The industry was called everything under the sun. The members of this government, blinded by 

their hatred of personal initiative and profit, and spurred on by their great socialist philosophy, laid all 

the blame for all the problems on the oil industry. 

 

They seem to think that the oil industry is made up only of American giants who rape the Canadian 

people at will. This conception of the industry is totally inaccurate and completely unfair. There were 

thousands of people in the oil industry in Saskatchewan who are just like any of us. Most of them had 

been raised on farms in Saskatchewan and sought their future in a growing industry that offered 

opportunity and reward. Some of our farm boys went on to the teaching profession, others sought fame 

and fortune as lawyers and doctors. These people were not attacked. Why were the families associated 

with exploration, production and distribution of oil singled out at that time as being undesirable in our 

province and economy? 

 

In Saskatchewan, we lost thousands of people to Alberta where they were welcomed and could pursue 

their livelihood without fears and feelings of mistrust and hatred that have been generated and fostered 

by the doctrinaire socialist philosophy of this NDP government. 

 

I have said previously, Mr. Speaker, that some of the remarks made by the Premier in 1973, and by the 

then hon. member for Estevan, received my support. Those matters had to do with a fight between 

Ottawa and the provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta. We must remember that the real villain of the 

whole mess is not the oil companies as the NDP attempt to make out for their own philosophical pursuit, 

but the government of Pierre Elliott Trudeau. They are the ones who started the confrontation; they are 

the ones who are government should have taken issue with. The Trudeau government started the fight by 

the imposition of the export tax on Canadian crude. This arose after the Arab nations increased the cost 

of oil, and eventually the cost of oil flowing into eastern Canada from the Arab nations and Venezuela 

was increased drastically. The export tax was a method devised by the cunning Liberal government to 

skim off some of the profits on oil flowing from Saskatchewan and Alberta to the United States markets, 

and thereby help the consumers in Ontario and Quebec by reducing the price of imported oil. 

 

It is not without coincidence that Trudeau’s power bloc comes from Quebec and that was the main area 

that the two western provinces were expected to help. The position was completely untenable to 

Saskatchewan and Alberta. The only people in Saskatchewan and Alberta who favoured a continuing 

raping of the western Canadian 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1230 

 

interests by Quebec and eastern Canada was the Trudeau government, Otto Lang and the very few 

supporters of either Trudeau or Lang left in Saskatchewan. This action by the Liberal government in 

Ottawa could not and can not be condoned or tolerated. We were told to go along with it for the good of 

Canada but it is high time that someone told the Prime Minister that just possibly what is good for 

Quebec and central Canada is not necessarily good for the rest of Canada. 

 

Such was the situation on this issue. The Ottawa government had to be told, and in as far as we are 

concerned, Saskatchewan and Alberta were absolutely correct on that issue. 

 

These resources belong to and are under the control of the provinces, and the federal government had no 

right whatsoever to expect Saskatchewan and Alberta to subsidize the oil prices in Quebec and eastern 

Canada. If oil prices needed subsidizing then let the Government of Canada and all of the people of 

Canada do the subsidizing. Why should we be called upon to put up the dollar? 

 

In western Canada we are sick and tired of being used as tools to promote eastern interests. The Prime 

Minister has done nothing to promote his so-called ‘just society’ in the west. We are no longer prepared 

to be subservient to a dominant eastern Canada, and fortunately for us in western Canada, Premier 

Lougheed of Alberta and his Conservative government made that plain. Our government in 

Saskatchewan could have shown similar leadership. They are in the same situation. They could have 

given the leadership which people in Saskatchewan, as in all western Canada wanted but, no, they had to 

confuse what could have been a very simple issue. They could not resist the temptation to seize the 

opportunity to pursue their dedicated philosophical pursuit, the complete takeover, by the state, of all 

means of production, development and distribution. They, therefore, went after the oil industry and went 

after it, they did. 

 

The vile antagonism and hatred that they entertain towards anyone or any group not directly employed 

by the state is imprinted on the very pages of those debates. I never knew before what hatred and fear 

was all about. 

 

A socialist, I suppose, in order to bring about the desired social, economic and political change so 

important to him, is filled with hatred towards anybody not associated with the socialist philosophy, yet 

at the same time, he has an inborn fear of the desires of personal freedom and initiative found in as many 

people who oppose the totalitarian bureaucratic philosophy of the socialist. Is it any wonder that people 

who are concerned about retaining personal freedom are now coming by the thousands to support the 

progressive Conservative Party? The oil industry was made out to be the villains, the very worst and 

despicable of all profit oriented people. Remember, we in Estevan and in Swift Current and 

Lloydminster and the constituencies of Weyburn and Souris-Cannington know the people in the oil 

patch. We know the industry includes hundreds of Saskatchewan companies involved in the total 

exploration and development process. We know these people and know them to be good, honest 

citizens. We know them to be good corporate citizens. The strongest supporters of community 

co-operatives endeavours, in these areas, are the Saskatchewan oil companies. 

 

Members of the Saskatchewan oil companies take time from their endeavours to sit on school boards, 

town councils, service clubs and every community-minded endeavour known. A member of the industry 

represented Estevan constituency for a number of years in a straightforward, unselfish manner, yet, this 

NDP government, filled with the hatred for anyone who makes a profit, chose to condemn an entire 

industry for no 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1231 

 

reason other than to satisfy an insatiable appetite to take over everyone’s life. They cared not over whom 

they trampled, or who they destroyed in the process. Success, to them, would only be obtained when 

they brought the entire industry to its knees and have the state take over the entire industry. In their 

deceptive manner of true socialist they camouflaged their nefarious scheme and attacked the industry by 

blaming all of the problems on the Saskatchewan oil companies, who seem to be always fair game. By 

their innuendoes they attempt to place the blame for the rising costs on these companies. They inferred 

that the farmers and consumers in Saskatchewan could only be saved from unscrupulous profiteers if 

they, the benevolent government, saw to it that the prices were kept in line by the all-wise, all powerful 

group of master planners, and that the solution would automatically come about by the NDP owning and 

controlling the industry. 

 

The Premier left the impression with the people of this province that he, and he alone, with his 

government dedicated to a socialist doctrine would control the prices. What, however, Mr. Speaker, has 

been the result of this further socialist intrusion into the business world? 

 

As everyone knows the prices have gone up and up and the majority of the price of gasoline goes to 

governments, therefore, let every farmer and every person in Saskatchewan be aware of the fact that 

when they buy gasoline that over one-half of the cost goes to governments. The so-called unscrupulous 

profiteering Saskatchewan oil industry were the people this socialist government blamed. But let the 

public be well aware of the fact that the people who have the most at stake are the unscrupulous 

governments. 

 

Furthermore, as the price goes up for gasoline, let the public know that three-quarters of the crude oil 

price increases scheduled over the next year and a half will go to governments. As the farmers of this 

province face an ever increasing cost price squeeze, let them be aware that the people applying the 

greatest squeeze is not the oil industry, but this benevolent socialist government who claim they had to 

bring in Bill 42 in order that they could keep the prices down, a dismal failure and a betrayal of the 

consumer and the farmers. 

 

One of the objectives of Bill 42 was supposedly, according to the Premier, more rather than less 

exploration for oil and natural gas in Saskatchewan. This infamous Bill 42 was going to accomplish all 

of that. After all, we then had Saskoil, one of the family of Crown corporations and it was going to take 

up any slack that might result with the withdrawal by the so-called irresponsible private sector. 

 

Let me examine the results, Mr. Speaker, as they speak far louder than words. Hindsight may now seem 

great, but this government was told what would happen, but they in normal fashion, chose to ignore all 

the warnings. After all they are the master planners. They know what is good for you and me and 

everyone in the province and what right do any one of us have in questioning their wisdom. Well, here is 

an example of their wisdom. Their intrusion into the oil industry was to result in a greater exploration of 

oil and gas. Well, Mr. Speaker, the whole world should know the result. 

 

The number of oil wells drilled in Saskatchewan each year since 1973 is almost 60 per cent of what was 

drilled in 1973, the year before the socialist intrusion. Footage drilled is down a similar amount. The 

number of wells completed in Saskatchewan dropped in 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1232 

 

one year from 367 in 1973 to 93 in 1974. The volume of oil production was decreased from 86 million 

barrels in 1973 to 56 million in 1976. Even in socialist jargon that can hardly be described as more 

exploration, another dismal failure. It only points out that government should not be involved in 

business. They should be involved in regulation and control, but they should stay out of business. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have indicated, and will do so in a very forceful way in the next election, 

that they don’t want the government involved in business. That is the message that the socialists can 

only learn in one way and that is by defeating them at the polls. Failure after failure in business 

enterprises never seems to teach them a lesson, because they have the basic belief to state ownership and 

apparently only one thing will stop them in their headlong pursuit of complete state ownership, an 

absolute control over everyone’s life. 

 

Had the NDP been, in fact, concerned about exploration, then I suggest they could have established a 

similar tax to that in Alberta to ensure the increased profits went into development or into the public 

purse. But, no, their answer was Bill 42. 

 

If windfall profits created this reaction by the socialist NDP to the oil industry, what about other sectors? 

When farmers profits increase drastically, due to world shortages, do they become windfall profits? 

When that happens will that be the time when the move comes to institute state farms, to ensure the huge 

profits accrued, to the state? When certain law firms receive high accounts due to unusual conditions, do 

they become windfall profits? The truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that a party dedicated to bringing 

about a change in the social order by completely taking over all means of production, distribution and 

demand must, of necessity, eliminate all profits and everyone who doesn’t see evil in making a profit. 

 

Every gainfully employed person in society, whether self-employed or otherwise, likes to make a profit. 

What is wrong with it if it is done honestly, morally and completely above board? Yet, this government 

of doctrinaire socialist leaves the impression with everyone that profit is dirty, that a person who is profit 

oriented is an evil person, that of necessity he should be shamed or despised. Our party doesn’t accept 

that view for one moment. We welcome people who are energetic, hard-working and wish to improve 

their lot in life. We believe in personal freedom and firmly believe in the rewarding of personal 

initiative. 

 

After the next election we will welcome every person who wishes to improve his lot in life by making a 

profit. We won’t create a climate of confrontation as has been created by this government over its oil 

policy. Let us make it known that we will ensure that everyone pays a fair share of taxation, based on 

their profits and, if inequalities exist in the taxation laws, we will change those laws rather than 

condemn everyone. 

 

Our oil industry is in a mess. Our province is placed in an almost impossible position and all due to the 

inept bunch of socialist politicians. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larter: — I knew the gentlemen to our right would give it to me sooner or later, Mr. Speaker. No 

wonder the general public is suspicious of all politicians, yet, we all have to suffer in Saskatchewan 

because of the actions of this group of bungling socialists. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1233 

 

It may be very well, that this new Bill 47 will also be struck down by the Supreme Court and sooner or 

later we will all have to face the music. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larter: — For what purpose, why was it done? To feed the socialist appetite. We crippled and 

practically socialized the oil industry and yet spent the income to take over the potash industry. What is 

next? Don’t bother with any more of your deceptions and your deceit. There is no question that your 

appetite will not be satisfied until everyone has fallen under your socialist sickle. Now you are on the 

spot as is everyone in Saskatchewan due to your ineptitude and your proposal to, again, legislate your 

way out of it by applying retroactive legislation to so-called windfall profits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larter: — British parliamentary practice has always followed the tradition of never making a 

taxing statute retroactive. Such action may be felt in complete anarchy. No one will ever be certain of 

their position and your great master planners will now be applying the socialist thumb screw after the 

event. You can now wait to see and then bring in any segment to their knees by applying retroactive 

legislation. And, after all, if you believe that the end justifies the means, as has been exemplified by your 

socialist thoughts, over and over again, then why care. 

 

Is it any wonder that ordinary people, in every walk of life, who would have formerly supported the 

NDP are now supporting the Progressive Conservative Party. The people of Saskatchewan should not 

have to suffer because of the ineptitude and bungling of this government. That, however, would be the 

result in view of the decision of the Supreme Court. 

 

In order to protect the citizens of this province, not from the oil industry, but as the result of the failures 

of the government, we are supporting the government on second reading of this bill . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larter: — . . . even though we know that it is wrong to retroactively impose taxes, at the same time 

the people have to be protected from your bungling. There are amendments, however, that must be made 

to this bill to bring about the necessary changes and again, to protect the public from your further 

bungling. If you really believe in the family farm, the small family farm and the small business, you will 

believe in the small oil companies. 

 

We trust that these amendments will be approved. Governments should not bring about confrontation 

governments should not be involved in business. That was the cause of the whole problem. That 

problem must be resolved before anyone in this province can feel safe and secure. The only way to solve 

the problem is for the people to remove the cause. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are eager 

for that opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — While I have a maximum attendance in the House I want to just bring members’ 

attention to some rules which are I find being bridged in the House and it has 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1234 

 

to do with decorum, Rule 18. I don’t think that any of the member are doing this intentionally, but it 

does make the House appear a bit ragged and it is contrary to the rules and I will just cite them quickly. 

 

When Mr. Speaker is putting a question no member shall enter, walk out of or cross the Chamber or 

make any noise or disturbance. The members might wish to communicate with other members across 

the Chamber. The avenue behind the rail is always open. If members must cross the floor they should 

observe the usual courtesies to the Chair and to the rules. When a member is speaking no member 

shall interrupt him nor pass between him and the Chair. (I notice a number of members are doing that). 

No member may pass between the Chair and the Mace whether or not the Mace has been taken off the 

table by the Sergeant at Arms. 

 

I just remind members of that. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 9 
 

Malone Penner McMillan 

Wiebe Cameron Nelson (As-Gr) 

MacDonald Stodalka Clifford 

 

NAYS — 38 
 

Blakeney Mostoway Koskie 

Thibault Whelan Johnson 

Bowerman Kaeding Thompson 

Smishek Dyck Lusney 

Romanow McNeill Collver 

Snyder Feschuk Larter 

Byers Rolfes Bailey 

Kramer Cowley Birkbeck 

Baker Tchorzewski Berntson 

Lange Shillington Katzman 

Matsalla Vickar Wipf 

Robbins Nelson (Yktn) Lane (Sa-Su) 

MacMurchy Allen  

 

 

STATEMENT Re Youth Parliament 
 

Mr. Speaker: — While I have maximum attendance, I would like to make one announcement which 

might assist the members. We had originally authorized the Youth Parliament to use the Assembly over 

the Christmas recess and members had 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1235 

 

been instructed in anticipation of that to remove the material under the desks. We have now cancelled 

that for the simple reason that it becomes difficult for us to clear the Assembly of essential material that 

members have in their desks and bring it all back in — on the assumption that we will be meeting 

shortly after the new year begins. We have asked the Youth Parliament to find another location for their 

Youth Parliament. I hope that if members hear the public talking about the Youth Parliament not being 

able to use the Chambers that they will be able to say that it was unfortunate but the conditions warrant 

us keeping the Chamber for the members at this time. 

 

Debate continues on Bill 47. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, it has been a long second reading debate on 

Bill 47, not quite as long as the debate during the course of The Potash Development Act and The 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Act, Bills 1 and 2 in 1975 but nevertheless quite a long debate and 

at times a fairly interesting debate. Interesting for not only what was said but interesting for what was 

done, because it is for sure, Mr. Speaker, that you can’t say that we are going to judge the actions of 

members by what they say, we can only judge the actions of certain members by what they do. Mr. 

Speaker, I think I must make that point as strongly as I can, especially in light of the fact of the last 

words of the last speaker from the opposition, the hon. member for Estevan who told me and told this 

House for something like one half hour about all the evils of socialism — I picked up some new words, 

nefarious, devious, master planners, the socialist doctrines, all of these kinds of scare-catch phrases, how 

Bill 47 was fitting that pattern, how Bill 47 was a part of this great big socialist design, how Bill 42 was 

so bad and how Bill 47 was so bad. I thought to myself well here, I can surely judge the action of this 

member by what he says. But no, lo and behold he surprised me by getting up to vote against the 

amendment proposed by the Liberal Party saying that he is going to vote for this bill in second reading 

when we vote on it in just a very few short minutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to be very serious for a moment. I say to the Conservative Party (and I don’t mean 

this in any personal sense to the member for Estevan who spoke, but I mean this is a party sense because 

he speaks for your party on this issue) that speech was probably one of the least believable speeches that 

I have ever heard in 10 years in the Saskatchewan legislature. It simply lacks credibility. You can’t say, 

for example, on the one hand as the hon. member for Estevan says, this bill is dangerous because it 

reveals the mentality of socialism, not creeping socialism, but rampant socialism to listen to him, it’s 

going to lead to state farms. He says the bill is going to be unconstitutional, runs a very big risk of being 

a defective no good bill, all the reasons for voting against it. But hold on, on the other hand he says that 

the people need to be protected from the possibility of losing the money and we are going to vote for 

Bill 47. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a “duplicitous” position and one which is lacking 

credibility probably of the highest order in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. You cannot take 

the position that the bill is defective and then say in the same breath that you are voting for the bill 

because the people of the province of Saskatchewan need protection. You either are for this bill because 

it’s going to do the job or you are not for this bill because it’s not going to do the job and it’s incumbent 

upon you to vote against it in second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, I know, the boys laugh. I think that anybody who looks at it from a 

fair-minded point of view says on second reading, when you are voting for a bill 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1236 

 

in principle, you are voting for what the bill does, what it attempts to do and whether it can do the job. 

You are saying that the purpose of the job is to protect the oil revenues and that’s why you are voting for 

it. I say to you, Mr. Leader of the Conservative Party . . . no, I’m saying that the bill not only will protect 

the interests of the people of Saskatchewan but will do the job in protecting the interests of the province 

of Saskatchewan. You’re not saying that. You’re not saying that. You’re trying to walk both sides of the 

street. You have a credibility problem. The Conservative Party of Saskatchewan has a credibility 

problem when it takes this particular position. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what I think is shaping up here. What we are seeing here in the 

Conservative Party is the beginning of the laying of a foundation, a political foundation, to vote against 

Bill 47 in Committee of the Whole and against Bill 47 on the third and final reading. That’s what they’re 

doing. Mr. Speaker, in reality they know in their heart of hearts that this bill seeks to protect the people 

of Saskatchewan from this potential loss, from the interests of the oil companies, putting it bluntly. They 

know in their heart of hearts that they can’t go for that. The member for Estevan told us at length about 

his private enterprise philosophy, how he is going to welcome private enterprise and profiteering to the 

province of Saskatchewan if he ever should be a member of the government. That’s what he said. You 

weren’t in the House, member for Nipawin but that’s what he said. That’s his position on the one hand 

he knows that Bill 47 is against that philosophy of profiteering. We know that the principal of Bill 47 is 

exactly designed to stop that and yet on the other hand the member for Estevan says he’s for it. 

 

Mr. Larter: — On a point of order. I did not use the word profiteering. I wish the minister would retract 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I can’t allow the member to get back into the debate. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will say that the member did not use the word ‘profiteering,’ that is 

correct. You know this is as if it’s some sort of big debating point they scored by me making this 

concession, that it does not matter the substance of the remarks with respect to profits and the open 

welcome approach that you were going to take to the resources, if you should ever be the government, 

can only be interpreted one way and that is profiteering! That’s the position that I am saying they are 

caught in. What we are seeing here, Mr. Speaker, is the beginning of a political change on the part of the 

Conservative Party. I believe that they have been embarrassed by their right wing free enterprise friends 

to their right, the Liberal Party. I say that they are being hurt by their own supporters. They know their 

own supporters are telling them that they can’t vote with the CCF or an NDP government. They have 

already hastily said they are going to vote for the bill in second reading. By the speech of the member 

for Estevan, what we are seeing is a 365 degree political turn-around by the Conservative Party because 

there is no other way that you could possibly explain the logic and the words with the actions of voting 

for the bill in second reading, there is no other way you can credibly explain it, Mr. Speaker, none 

whatsoever. 

 

I do want to say one other thing which I found very shocking, a very shocking proposition which I find 

to be dangerous to the entire concept of democracy and government. That is — this is the only comment 

I’m going to make with respect to the speech by the member for Estevan, a second point and that relates 

to the question of, ‘Let the public beware.” Here are his words, I was writing as fast as I could. He said, 

“Let the public beware, the most dangerous actor in the piece (talking about the oil piece) is . . . (Who, 

not the oil companies but) . . . the government.” Not even Ottawa, he started off on Ottawa, then his 

speech developed and then he ended up by saying, “Let the 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1237 

 

public beware . . . (Now I mark those words and underline them for you, Mr. Speaker) . . . the most 

dangerous actor in the piece is the government because they are taking too much; they are taking too 

much.” That’s what the member for Estevan says. Now, Mr. Speaker, if you follow the logic of that, if 

according to his reasoning, we are at fault because we are taking too much, then by logic we should be 

taking less according to his argument. And if we should be taking less, the question is: — how much 

less? And I say how much less is $250 million or more or less, that’s what the Conservatives want really 

in their heart of hearts with respect to this bill. That’s what they are going to propose in the Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am saying to the member for Estevan that when your party rushed into this debate 

on November 23 when the CIGOL Supreme Court decision came down, your leader said this on page 

169 of Hansard. “We believe that legislation along the lines of Alberta, after negotiations with the 

industry, would have achieved the vast majority of the half a billion dollars that is now in jeopardy . . .” 

Now I emphasize the words, coupled by what the member for Estevan just said this afternoon, I want to 

say that half of not the “vast majority.” Half is $250 million or perhaps more, less than we had collected. 

I refer you to page 174 of that debate on November 23, he said, “We believe that this Assembly should 

immediately request that the Government of Canada pass enabling legislation allowing the government 

of Saskatchewan to collect from the oil industry royalties and taxes (listen to this, Mr. Speaker) royalties 

and taxes along the lines of those charged in the province of Alberta for the past number of years.” Mr. 

Speaker, he could not have said it more clearly, he said, we should “ . . . collect royalties and taxes along 

the lines of those charged in Alberta . . .” And if we charge the royalties and taxes, Mr. Speaker, along 

the lines of those charged in Alberta, we would be forced to give back to the oil companies at least $250 

million, a quarter of a billion dollars, applying the taxation scheme. I’m going to meet this point in detail 

in Committee of the Whole, coupled with the words of the member for Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the member for Estevan said today on behalf of the Conservative Party, coupled with 

what the Leader of the Conservative Party said on November 23, make no mistake what they mean when 

the say negotiation with industry. What kind of negotiations would the Conservatives give us? You 

know what kind they would give us? I think the member for Nipawin said on November 23, “Make the 

oil companies squeal.” I think his exact words are, “Make the oil companies squeal like the government 

of Alberta did.” Not attack, squeal but not attack. Squeal, Mr. Speaker! Now I suppose if one had a 

dictionary definition to take a look at that word squeal, you would find in the dictionary I looked up that 

it means to utter a shrill cry as of a child from pain, fear, anger or joy. You can produce that result from 

a little pinch or perhaps a little tickle or perhaps a little squeal, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of 

negotiation that the Conservatives would give us and that’s the kind of philosophy that the 

Conservatives are trying to peddle in the province of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . the kind of philosophy which says the government is the enemy in the piece. It’s 

the kind of philosophy that says the government is against the people, that the government isn’t there to 

protect the interests of the people through their elected representatives, that the bill within the piece is 

not the oil companies and not those who seek to profiteer but somehow the government, the elected 

representatives. Mr. Speaker, that philosophy is a shameful philosophy which should be rejected by 

every member of this Saskatchewan legislature. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1238 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, during the course of this debate we did hear from the member for 

Nipawin. He tried to give us some statements and facts respecting Saskoil, he spoke of Saskoil and the 

member for Estevan repeated it again here today in rather disparaging terms. I recall the member for 

Nipawin specifically saying that the private oil companies wanted to get rid of some of their oil 

properties. I think the words he used, “so they pawned them off,” the words he used on poor 

unsuspecting Saskoil. And the member for Indian Head-Wolseley says it’s really true. 

 

Well, I want to tell the member for Indian Head that with its partner, Saskoil has so far brought in 26 

non-unit oil wells and one gas well out of 28 holes drilled on undeveloped lands acquired from Atlantic 

Richfield which was part of this pawning off deal that you were talking about and the member for 

Nipawin was talking about. Mr. Speaker, 27 producers out of 28 tries, some sort of pawning off, some 

sort of lack of success — pawned off . . . all the bad . . . (Interjections by Mr. Malone) . . . Now the 

member for Lakeview, the Leader of the Liberal Party really should have been paying more careful 

attention to what the Conservative leader says and what his deputy leader says here. He says that Saskoil 

got taken, got taken by Atlantic Richfield in the deals, they got pawned off. I am saying to you that the 

facts are, out of the 28 tries, Saskoil was successful on 27 of them. The rate of return on that Atlantic 

Richfield acquisition has been over 21 per cent and even the member for Nipawin, I think you would 

recognize that as a pretty fair rate of return. Just to set the record a little bit straighter, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskoil in the fiscal year ending last March produced 3.3 million barrels of oil, had gross revenues of 

$14 million and net profit of over $1.1 million, Mr. Speaker. I say to the member for Nipawin and the 

Conservative Party and to the Liberals, try sticking to some of the facts when you tell us about the lack 

of success for Saskoil. 

 

Now the member for Nipawin and the member for Estevan today tried to say that oil production and all 

of this activity has been down because of Bill 42 since 1973. It’s correct, Mr. Speaker, oil production in 

Saskatchewan has gone down since 19973. But the argument that is advanced by the member for 

Saskatoon-Sutherland and the Leader of the Liberal Party and others is that somehow this is only due to 

Saskatchewan’s oil policy. I want to tell the Leader of the Conservatives in particular and all the 

members of this House that Alberta has similarly suffered a corresponding decrease in oil production 

from 1973. Well, the member shakes his head. Well, in 1973, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta oil production was 

522,171,000, that’s in 1973. In 1976 it is down to 383 million. We haven’t got the figures yet available 

for 1977 — in barrels, yes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What happened . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Those are the figures, and I ask him to get up and deny that and I ask the Liberals 

and I ask any of the Conservatives. In Committee of the Whole I want to meet you on this head on 

because your argument is that Bill 42 caused the drop in production. I am saying that if Bill 42 caused 

the drop in production, how do you explain the drop in production in Alberta? Mr. Speaker, there is 

absolutely no credibility whatsoever by the members opposite when they attack this bill. 

 

Now I want to speak to one other matter which has been raised repeatedly in this debate and that is this 

question that the rate is being set, the taxation rate is being set by Order in Council and how bad this is, 

according to the Liberals and to the Conservatives. I am not so sure that it is so bad for the 

Conservatives because they voted against the 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1239 

 

amendment that the Liberals offered and I am glad at least to have them on record in that regard. At least 

they said at one stage or another, the Conservatives did, that this was bad and the Liberals maintain this 

position that it is bad. The member for Nipawin and the member for Lakeview, in his words this 

afternoon say that Bill 47 says that these rates of taxation are delegated to the Cabinet, the 

Lieutenant-Governor in Council or as the member for Nipawin is wont to say, “made in secret by the 

Premier.” We know that that is what happens in the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, “made in secret by 

the Premier.” Well that’s the way maybe he would run the government of the day in the Cabinet but it is 

not the way the law or the way the Premier of this province runs the Cabinet of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You may do your things in secret in the dark of night, but not this government with 

respect to activities of the Cabinet and the regulations. So it is kind of an interesting revelation of 

mentality that somehow we are going to be making these rates in secret. 

 

The member says that the bill takes the power of taxation away from the people and puts it in the hands 

of one man, the Premier. 

 

Now I am sure, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite feel so strongly about the legislature’s power to 

tax they would not argue this in any partisan sense. They would point out where other jurisdictions did 

the same thing and where they will also object to that. Well I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Conservative leader perhaps should borrow some of the legal advice he has been offered so freely by the 

Liberals and get some interpretation of at least one statute from one province which he so dearly loves, 

the Alberta Mines and Minerals Act, Mr. Speaker. Because if you argue to me that Bill 47 gives our 

Cabinet too much power you take a look at what Alberta legislation gives Premier Lougheed to do under 

the Alberta Mines and Minerals Act. 

 

Following the impeccable logic of the Liberals and the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, just picking on this 

one province, the Premier of Alberta, in his wisdom, in secret, can set the royalties on natural gas, 

petroleum, sodium sulphate, quartz minerals, quarry-able materials, placer claims, bituminous sands and 

coal, Mr. Speaker, all done by regulation, all done in secret by the Premier and the regulations of the 

day. And I don’t single out the Premier of Alberta, Premier Lougheed, or the province of Alberta, the 

Order in Council power. The simple fact of the matter is that those kinds of pronouncements which are 

partisan in their attack on this legislation, which are blind to the realities that exist in the parties in the 

provinces to which they so dearly hold close to their hearts, is not debating with honesty and vigour as 

far as the people of the province of Saskatchewan are concerned. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, during the course of this debate we had two amendments which were tendered by the 

Liberal opposition. The first was an amendment which we defeated only today, the amendment with 

respect to the rates and referring to the Select Committee. Now, Mr. Speaker, I give the member for 

Indian Head credit because he acknowledged right at the very beginning that this amendment was very 

similar to one that was moved back in 1973 during the Bill 42 debate. Indeed, he could not have said 

anything more correct, because back in 1973 the motion moved then by Mr. McIsaac and seconded by 

Mr. Grant read: 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1240 

 

This House declines to proceed with this bill until the subject matter thereof has been investigated by a 

Select Standing Committee of this legislature for the provision of public representations to the said 

committee and the report of such investigation is tabled in this Legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that amendment was four years and four days later. There is a very striking similarity 

to the amendment we just defeated about referring it to the Select Standing Committee. But there are one 

or two differences. For one thing, Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that this amendment which we just 

defeated is that rather than refer the bill to any Select Standing Committee, Mr. MacDonald would have 

the bill referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments. Secondly, in the amendment no 

reference is made for public representation this time round before such a Select Standing Committee. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that the hon. members of the Liberal Party opposite deliberately 

avoided provision for public representation this time round. They purposely avoided the question of 

public representation. 

 

I opposed this amendment today and I opposed the amendment four years ago because the passage of 

those amendments would have killed the principle of this bill and I for one oppose that principle of this 

bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — But I am saying to you that there is a reason why you left out public representation 

this time round and the reason that you left out public representation this time, the reason that you did 

not want to allow the public to come in and have their points of view on Bill 47 is because you knew 

doggone well the public would absolutely hound you out of the legislature for delaying and opposing the 

bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. members opposite that there is a reason why they 

made that provision, because they wanted to politic on Bill 42 and that’s why they included the public. 

This time they did not. 

 

But I want to say something much more serious, Mr. Speaker. These members opposite, the lawyers in 

the Liberal caucus, are saying somehow this bill is colourable and statements that are being made or 

might be made will colour the bill. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this about this amendment and the 

first one that was made. I will say a word or two about it. I don’t know what better way to go than to 

allow somebody the grounds of arguing colourability than to have accepted the amendments which are 

before this House, Mr. Speaker. I am saying that this amendment, the one we just defeated about 

referring it, was an irresponsible amendment. It was an irresponsible amendment because what in effect 

it would have done, in my judgement, in my view, is opened up the question of colourability. To suggest 

a reference of the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments would be playing into the hands of 

those who might challenge the legislation on the very grounds that the Liberal party says that they are 

opposed to this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the same thing with that first motion made by the hon. member for Regina South (Mr. 

Cameron). He said in this House, and then he put it down in the amendment, that we should use this 

legislation solely as a club to force a settlement. The amendment should be divided into two, but to use 

it as a club to force a settlement 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1241 

 

on the industry, with respect to past taxes paid under Bill 42. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if one were 

deliberately trying to set out a plan which could be interpreted as trying to do indirectly what the 

Supreme Court has ruled we couldn’t do directly, this might be the way to go by that first amendment. I 

say to you, Mr. Speaker, compare those amendments in contrast with what Bill 47 tries to do and what 

Bill 47 tries to do is place a direct tax regime which is designed to get a fair share of the returns on our 

oil resource. Certainly it applies retroactively but it is also a perspective bill and I am glad that this 

House has rejected the resolutions which suggest that somehow we should ask the federal government to 

refer this matter to the Supreme Court on various grounds. I am glad that we rejected those amendments 

because I think they might have been interpreted in some quarters as an admission that we have serious 

doubts about the validity of the legislation. It would have been argued in some quarters that we 

encouraged the federal government to continue their intervention in the Supreme Court. The 

amendments would have meant that still a substantial period of delay, perhaps a year, perhaps even 

more, Mr. Speaker, if we had adopted any one of these amendments with respect to the Liberals, that 

have been put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only say that the House was wise indeed, both legally and on policy reasons, for 

rejecting the two amendments which were put forward by the Liberal opposition. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this House has had experience on taxing legislation passed, retroactively 

passed, yet. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Interjection (inaudible). 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, you sure have . . . well . . . I am going to give you another one and you might 

say, what does it amount to? Well, perhaps the Minister of Finance can tell us. 

 

You people, when you were the government in 1965, passed a bill called The Tobacco Tax Act . . . 

 

Mr. Malone: — In 1965? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, 1965, I know, you can blame it on all that you want. I tell you, the Leader of 

the Liberal Party can adopt the attitude that he wasn’t there, because that’s the attitude of the Liberal 

Party. They can blame the actions of past Liberal governments on former Liberals who aren’t there to 

defend themselves and not as a Liberal group. Well I am saying, that’s not the policy of this party or 

government. We take the responsibility and the faults of everything that the CCF or the NDP has done 

for any time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I am saying to you . . . I am saying to the lawyer for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) 

. . . he might say, big deal! The Tobacco Tax Act . . . 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Even my mother wasn’t old enough then. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Oh that’s fine. Maybe she wasn’t. Well as the Premier says, maybe your mother 

wasn’t old enough, but she was here, was here voting for it, that’s for sure, on a retroactive piece of 

legislation. And this is a substantial revenue bill, it is a 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1242 

 

substantial taxation bill and I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this bill was introduced and it was an 

entirely different kind of procedure that the only other traditionally approved taxation scheme which 

might be similarly identified, passed in the Maritime Provinces, and yet, I didn’t see the Liberal 

government of the day saying, well we’ve got to go and get the thing tested in the Supreme Court to see 

if we can get the . . . how many millions of dollars a year . . . the three or four millions of dollars a year 

or more . . . to make sure the revenue is secure. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but they passed that taxing 

bill, absolutely, and made it retroactive. Now I want $17 million. I suppose the Liberals would say what 

is $17 million? Again, Mr. Speaker, my point is that this debate has been characterized by selectivity in 

the criticism. The Premier used this phrase, “selective opposition to various points, selective partisan 

criticism.” Not a word, not a word about this particular action of theirs. 

 

I mention to the member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) in particular. He will be interesting in 

knowing this. In 1966 there was a certain able Minister of Mineral Resources called Cameron and he 

introduced a bill called The Mineral Taxation Act, chapter 1968 and I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

that bill was passed and amended retroactively — The Mineral Taxation Act, by the Liberal 

administration. 

 

Yes, and I didn’t see the member for Regina South get up and differentiate the two reasons why he 

opposes this bill retroactively and he doesn’t that one. You just check the bill and how it applies to the 

Minister Taxation Act then and the regulations that were made then. I didn’t see the Leader of the 

Liberal Party say, oh yes, this one’s bad retroactively, but that tobacco tax, that’s bad also. No, I didn’t 

hear him say that. Mr. Speaker, it is a selectivity, a specialization in the opposition which absolutely is 

not commendable with respect to the House. 

 

I want to make one other point, Mr. Speaker, before I finish. I want to make one other point before I 

close up, Mr. Speaker. That is with respect to the question of the Liberals and why they oppose Bill 42, 

why they oppose Bill 47, why they oppose both of these pieces of legislation. I think that the member 

for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) . . . talk about your respect for the law . . . the member for Regina South who has 

been a leading character or actor in this opposition of the Liberal Party . . . Wascana, the same thing with 

the member for Indian Head (Mr. MacDonald), they time after time get up and they say that they oppose 

this bill, like they opposed Bill 42. They opposed Bill 42 they said because they told us that it was 

unconstitutional. Mr. Speaker, I say to you, Sir, that that is a blatant misrepresentation of the reasons 

why they opposed Bill 42, just like the reasons they advanced today are blatant misrepresentations as to 

why they really oppose Bill 47. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party that day, now Senator Steuart, the Leader of the Liberal 

Party, outlined the position of the Liberal Party on Bill 42 and the position was as follows from 

December 12, 1973 Hansard: 

 

We will oppose the NDP move to break agreements, seize leases and take over the oil industry. We 

will oppose it because it is another example of the Blakeney government failing to honour contracts, 

breaking government commitments, driving investment, men and brains out of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We would oppose it further, Mr. Speaker, because it will in the long run result in less 

oil and gas discoveries in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apart from one paragraph by the member, now Mr. Justice McLeod, the member for 

Regina South, apart from one paragraph on the question of indirect taxation, not a word about the 

unconstitutionality, Mr. Speaker. Not a word, Mr. 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1243 

 

Speaker, not a word from the Liberal Leader, not a word from any one of them and the majority of the 

remarks (and I have them here and I invite anybody to look at them) and the member for Regina South 

of the day, apart from that paragraph or two paragraphs of about a ten page speech, not a word on the 

constitutionality of the situation, Mr. Speaker. This is the simple fact of the matter. They opposed it then 

for one simple reason. They opposed it, Mr. Speaker, because they opposed this government’s attempt to 

preserve the windfall profits of oil for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it why they are opposing Bill 47. They 

can talk about colourability, they can talk about retroactivity, they can bring in their amendments, but 

they oppose Bill 47 for one reason. They are opposed to this government’s attempt to protect the 

windfall profits that belong to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And, Mr. Speaker, they are joined, joined in this unholy cause by the Conservatives 

opposite. I don’t care whether the Conservatives vote for us or against us on this bill because they have 

attacked the bill every step of the way. You have attacked the bill in the press. The member for Swift 

Current didn’t have the guts to get up in the legislature and tell us why he opposed the bill. The member 

for Estevan gets up and opposes the bill. Whether you vote for it or not doesn’t mean much because both 

of them, the Conservatives and Liberals, Mr. Speaker, both of them make no mistake about it, are 

opposed to this government’s resource policy, which is what Bill 47 represents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I heard on November 23, cries for an election from the Conservative 

party. I heard some even from the Liberal Party, although I wasn’t quite sure I was believing my ears. 

But I was hearing it, Mr. Speaker. Oh how political fortunes change in four weeks. Oh how political 

fortunes change, not a call for an election from the Conservatives today. You know why, Mr. Speaker? 

Their roar for an election of four weeks ago has turned into a whisper today. Oh yes, they still whisper 

it. I tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because they know full well that Bill 47 represents an embodiment of 

what the people of Saskatchewan want governments to do. We are not here to negotiate the kind of 

reasonable deal that Alberta has negotiated so we can give your oil company friends $300 million more. 

We are not here to oppose this kind of protection of funds. We are here to govern this resource and this 

revenue in the best interests of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

Bill 47 does and, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be moving second reading of this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following record division: 

 

YEAS — 38 
 

Blakeney Mostoway Koskie 

Thibault Whelan Johnson 



 

December 22, 1977 

 

1244 

 

 

Bowerman Kaeding Thompson 

Smishek Dyck Lusney 

Romanow McNeill Collver 

Snyder Feschuk Larter 

Byers Rolfes Bailey 

Kramer Cowley Birkbeck 

Baker Tchorzewski Berntson 

Lange Shillington Katzman 

Matsalla Vickar Wipf 

Robbins Nelson (Yktn) Lane (Sa-Su) 

MacMurchy Allen  

 

NAYS — 9 
 

Malone MacDonald Stodalka 

Wiebe Penner McMillan 

Merchant Cameron Clifford 

 

MOTION 
 

Adjournment of House 
 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of 

Finance, Mr. Smishek, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns today, December 22, 1977, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, 

January 3, 1978. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:18 o’clock p.m. 

 


