



















































Hansard: November 22, 1977


 

 

147 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

November 22, 1977. 

 

EVENING SESSION 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

MANITOBA NDPS TO SASKATCHEWAN 
 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I wonder 

if the Minister of Finance took notice of a question yesterday about NDPers from Manitoba coming to 

Saskatchewan — I heard the Minister of Revenue made an announcement today about one. I was 

wondering if he had all the details of all the people from Manitoba that have been hired since the 

election? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think we could save that for the question period. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I wonder if I might take 

this opportunity to move the traditional motion of condolence honouring the memory of past members 

of this Legislature who have died since we last met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two members referred to in this motion. I move, seconded by the hon. member 

for Lakeview (Mr. Malone): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing since the last session of two former 

members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions they made to 

their community, their constituency and to this province. 

 

John Hewgill Brockelbank, who died on May 30, 1977 was a member of this Legislature for the 

constituency of Tisdale from 1938 to 1952 and for the constituency of Kelsey from 1952 to 1967. He 

was born in Heathcote, Ontario in 1897 and came west with his parents in 1911 to settle on a farm 

west of Battleford. He attended Saskatoon Collegiate Institute until the First World War when he 

served with the Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry in France and Belgium. Upon returning 

from overseas he attended Normal School in Saskatoon, taught for two years in the Bjorkdale area and 

then farmed in that district until 1944. During his 29-year career in the Legislature he served from 

1941 to 1944 as house leader of the opposition party; he served at various times as Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, Minister of Natural Resources and Industrial Development, Minister of Resources 

and Provincial Treasurer; he also acted as Deputy Premier from 1961 to 1964. He was an active 

supporting of co-operatives and farm organizations, including the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the 

Saskatchewan Grain Growers’ Association and the United Farmers of Canada. In 1974 he received an 

honorary doctor of laws degree from the University of Regina. 

 

John Cunningham Knowles, who died on August 31, 1977, was a member of this Legislature for the 

constituency of Wilkie from 1938 to 1944. Born at Severn Bridge, Ontario in 1894, he was educated at 

Ufford, Ontario and 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

148 

 

Northern Business College in Owen Sound. He was a veteran of both world wars. He went overseas 

with the 122nd Battalion, and served in France and Flanders in the First World War and served in the 

16th-22nd Saskatchewan Light Horse in the Second World War. After the First World War, he came 

west and farmed at Unity. He was on the board of directors of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and for 15 years was a member 

of Unity municipal council. After the Second World War he was manager of a real estate company in 

Regina until his retirement in 1965. He was active in numerous community organizations including 

the First Presbyterian Church, the Royal Canadian Legion, the United Services Institute, the IOOF 

Lodge, the Friendship Masonic Lodge, and the Wa Wa Shrine Temple. He received the Efficiency 

Decoration (ED) from the Canadian Army in 1944 and was also awarded the order, Member of the 

British Empire (MBE) in 1946 for distinguished military service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few less formal comments. 

 

I knew both members. I knew Brock very well; I knew Jack Knowles less well. Brock, as many of us 

knew him, was in this Legislature for almost 30 years and for all but three of them he was either a 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition or Leader of the Opposition, or a Cabinet Minister. Brock had his 

tremendous strength as a person in the warmth of his relationship with people. Even during his long 

career as Cabinet Minister I never felt that people worked for Brock, they rather worked with him. He 

inspired great and lasting loyalty among his constituents and among the public servants in the 

departments and corporations which he headed and among his political colleagues. 

 

Although Brock had positions involving great responsibility and great pressure, he bore his burdens 

lightly and never lost his good humor. Lesser mortals were always amazed that he could accomplish so 

much and make so many tough decisions while remaining apparently so calm and so accessible. 

 

In his years of office Brock dealt with people of all walks of life — the trapper, the fisherman, the 

worker in the sawmill, the chief executive officer of an international oil company, or an international 

mineral company — he walked with kings and commoners in precisely the same way. He dealt with 

them all in the same open and considerate way and over the years he gained their lasting respect. Even 

men who disagreed profoundly with him, and many did particularly during his period and the portfolio 

of the Minister of Mineral Resources, admired and respected Brock and as time went on frequently said 

so, even when he was still in public life, privately and publicly. 

 

I was a great admirer of Brock. I came to know him when I first came to Saskatchewan in 1950 when he 

was chairman of the board of the three Crown corporations — Saskatchewan Forest Products, 

Saskatchewan Marketing Services and Saskatchewan Government Airways, for which I served as 

secretary, and continued to know him and grow fonder of him as the years went on, until his untimely 

death earlier this year. 

 

Brock was a great parliamentarian. He respected the process by which free men govern themselves and 

the role which the Legislature plays in reviewing and debating. He respected the role of the Legislature 

in being a window into the inner workings of Cabinets and administration. 

 

In seven years that I served together with Brock in the Legislature he was the 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

149 

 

acknowledged expert on rules and procedures. In Opposition he was our chief tactician in our efforts to 

call the government to account. 

 

He was the principal architect of the present procedure of scrutinizing public spending through a Public 

Accounts Committee, chaired by a member of the Opposition. He was a formidable debater and 

performer in this house. 

 

He will be very sorely missed by those of us who knew him. He was a tireless worker in his political 

party and continued working in his party in an executive role up until two or three years prior to his 

death, and in an active role right up until the time of his death. 

 

I didn’t know Jack Knowles as well as I knew Brock. I came to know him when he moved to Regina. I 

did not know him as a member of this Legislature. I am, however, aware of his contribution as a member 

of this Assembly and as a Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

Jack Knowles led an accomplished and varied life. He had an uncommon ability to do well in many 

different fields of endeavor. I think that will be illustrated by the biography which I read. He was active 

in politics, in military, in business and in local government. Aside from his professional endeavors he 

was a member of many worthwhile organizations to which he gave a great deal of his time. I am sure 

that his concern for the people of Saskatchewan, his loyalty to his country and his contribution to this 

Assembly will not be forgotten. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone). 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Party): — Mr. Speaker, I am of course honored to join 

with the Premier in seconding the motion of condolences to the surviving family of both gentlemen, Mr. 

Brockelbank and Mr. Knowles. I must say that I find myself at somewhat of a disadvantage in that I did 

not personally know either one of the gentlemen involved, although I, of course, have fond memories of 

seeing Mr. Brockelbank, your father, come to the session and sit behind the bar on many occasions, to 

no doubt give the benefit of his wisdom and advice to the government of the day. 

 

I would like to join with the Premier, of course, in expressing my condolences and sympathies, once 

again to you and your family, and also to the family that survive Mr. Knowles. 

 

It is obvious from the record that the Premier has read that both men have distinguished political careers 

and careers of public service in this province. And I think that those careers and the things that they have 

done for the people of their constituency, their political parties and for all of the people of Saskatchewan 

can be considered as a lasting memorial to them, and that their memories will be regarded by all of the 

people who knew them as people that served this province in a distinguished way and in a manner 

befitting them. 

 

I, therefore, join with the Premier, Mr. Speaker, in extending the condolences of the Liberal Party to the 

families of both gentlemen. 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

150 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to join with the Premier and 

member for Regina Lakeview in extending to the families of the late John Brockelbank and Mr. 

Knowles, the condolences of the Conservative caucus. 

 

I did not know Mr. Knowles, I don’t ever recall meeting him. However, it is many, many years ago that 

I first met Mr. Brockelbank and in recent years I met him again after coming to this House. 

 

I think the records of both gentlemen, as ably put by the Premier, speaks very well of their contribution 

that they made not only to this Assembly, but indeed to this entire province. 

 

I am pleased to join with the Premier and the Leader of the Liberal Party in offering our condolences at 

this time. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Tisdale-Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, the death of John H. Brockelbank, or Brock as 

he was known to his many friends and colleagues, came as an unexpected shock to those of us who 

respected and admired this eminent humanitarian and politician. Having an enormous talent for hard 

work, Brock spent 29 consecutive years as a member of this Legislature, serving the residents of this 

province with a great deal of energy and sensitivity. Throughout his years in Saskatchewan politics 

Brock demonstrated a keen sense of responsibility to the principles of human justice, belief in people 

and the co-operative action on which his philosophy was based. 

 

His political career began around 1920; was secretary of the first grain growers local that was formed in 

his community and later joined the farmer labor party, which eventually became the CCF. 

 

The people of the Tisdale constituency first elected Brock to the Legislature in 1938 and he continued to 

serve Tisdale until 1952 when he ran his successful campaign in the newly formed Kelsey constituency. 

The fact that Brock continued to be re-elected without fail until his retirement in 1967 is an indication of 

the high degree of faith and respect afforded to him by his constituents. 

 

Serving as a provincial cabinet minister for 20 years, Brock held the distinguished portfolios of Minister 

of Natural Resources and Industrial Development, Municipal Affairs, and Mineral Resources. He was 

appointed Provincial Treasurer in 1962 and acted as Deputy Premier from 1961 to 1964. Brock was 

largely responsible for the outstanding success of the sodium sulphate industry in Saskatchewan, and 

also the clay and brick enterprises administered by his department. He was minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Timber Board for a number of years and took a very personal interest in programs to 

assist residents in the province’s north. An evidence of that interest is there for us today, not only in the 

way of facilities but jobs. Brock’s exceptional organizational ability and consistent common sense made 

an important contribution to the ever expanding economy of this province. 

 

Brock has been described, and I quote: “. . . as a man of humanity and wisdom; a distinguished prairie 

statesman.” To me he was a person I could always count on as a friend and as an associate, and above 

all, as a source of advice. Brock will be sadly missed by all of us, but we can take comfort in the fact 

that he lived a full and rewarding life. We can be proud that he was a man of infinite wisdom and great 

integrity, gaining the lasting respect of everyone he encountered. 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

151 

 

Although we can no longer turn to Brock for personal advice and comforting reassurances, something 

which I have taken advantage of time and time again, I’m convinced that the high principles and 

exemplary ideals that were so much a part of Brock’s life will continue to have a noticeable impact on 

the future governments of this province. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that this time of condolence for your father will be difficult, but I ask that if you 

keep in mind the character of your father, Mr. Speaker, this Legislature and its members will all be for 

the better. I join with residents of Saskatchewan in offering my deepest sympathy to the Brockelbank 

family. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the Premier and 

other members of this Legislature in paying tribute to the late John H. Brockelbank. I had the privilege 

of serving with Brock as he was known to thousands of people in Saskatchewan, as a newly elected 

member of the Legislature from 1964 to ’67. And indeed, it was a privilege and an honor, especially for 

a new member to have served with him. He was a great teacher in helping a new member about the rules 

and procedures of this Legislature; in helping a new member to get organized and started on how best to 

serve the constituents by whom one was supported and elected, and in helping to serve the people of the 

province. He held a great respect for parliamentary procedures as all of us know. He was continually 

reminding us and lecturing us to respect and abide by the rules and procedures that we as MLAs adopt, 

and adopted to govern ourselves in this Legislature, and to set an example of honoring the laws that we 

have helped to legislate. 

 

I will always remember Brock at the time when he addressed a particular nominating convention back in 

1970. When he instructed the delegates at that nominating convention to look for the person that they 

would nominate as a political candidate to be the standard bearer for the political party that I 

represented, he said that what we should look for in a political candidate is a person who should have 

particularly three qualities. Elected members should have dignity, honesty, and ability. Those qualities 

were essential in 1970 and they are essential today. May I say that he personally was a prime example of 

the politician who served with dignity, honesty, and ability. 

 

During the years that I served as an elected member until the time of his death, whenever I had a 

difficult problem with which I needed some help, the man I wanted to discuss that problem with was 

John H. Brockelbank. I wanted his advice, his wisdom, and his friendship. He was a great citizen of his 

community, a great citizen of this province and of this country. He set a high standard as an elected 

representative and as a cabinet minister. He gave untiring service to the party that he helped to found. He 

shall be missed by all his friends, his relatives and his immediate family. But I believe that we are all the 

better for it because we had known Brock. Above all, Brock was a humanitarian, dedicated to building a 

better world, a world of peace, of freedom, and plenty for all. 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, as previously mentioned, Mr. Knowles was an 

active and dedicated member of his community. As an MLA he was known in his constituency as a man 

who was quick to get things done. I didn’t know him personally but from talking to people who did, the 

best story that I have heard about him was during the Second World War. In his active participation in 

recruitment during the Second World War it was found that one of the teachers, who was on his board as 

he was serving as a trustee, decided that he would like to enlist so he left the school high 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

152 

 

and dry and went to enlist in the armed forces. It happened however that this teacher was suffering from 

an asthma condition and really didn’t think that he would be accepted but decided to try it anyway. He 

went and the line ups were long, and he wondered why he kept being ushered to the front of each line 

every time he had to go to a different station, and lo and behold at the end of the last line was Mr. 

Knowles who told him that unfortunately due to his health condition he would not be able to represent 

his country in this way. The teacher missed one day of school and was back in his community serving 

the community but he did have his chance to try to enlist in the army. This was a man, Mr. Knowles, 

who have the man the opportunity to serve his country but also kept in mind the needs of the 

constituents and acted quickly and fairly. 

 

I would like to express on behalf of my constituents, and with the other members of the House, my 

sincere sympathy to Mr. Knowles’ family. 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege to know J.H. 

Brockelbank very well. We were in this House as colleagues from 1960 to 1967 in government and in 

opposition. He was, in every respect, a true Saskatchewan parliamentarian. In politics he was basically a 

teacher. He taught political leadership, dedication, integrity, tolerance and impersonal criticism. People 

liked and admired him and enjoyed his friendship. He liked people and always had time for them. He 

listened carefully and he gave good advice. The Legislature and the province owe him a great deal. He 

gave us more than he received. 

 

As a New Democrat and a CCFer I am proud of his record. It is unparalleled. I join other members in 

expressing sincere sympathy to you, Mr. Speaker, to your mother and other members of your family. 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Melfort): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the other members of the 

Legislative Assembly in paying tribute to the late John Brockelbank. 

 

It was my privilege to have known Mr. Brockelbank on a personal basis, and for many years by way of 

his fine reputation in his community. For all the years that he sat in this House, Mr. Brockelbank was the 

CCF member for our neighboring constituency of 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

153 

 

Tisdale, and later Kelsey. He was known to our people as a doer and as an organizer. He believed in 

getting things done. However, more important than this were his humanitarian values. Many were the 

stories of his devotion not only to his constituents, but to the public in general. Mr. Brockelbank’s 

efforts, along with the efforts of his colleagues, were the instruments for founding the many social 

programs we today take for granted. His vision and foresight have helped to make Saskatchewan a much 

finer place to live. 

 

In the last few years of his life, Mr. Brockelbank enjoyed visiting the Legislature. He not only soundly 

participated in the debate, but on many occasions offered sound criticisms. The people of this province 

were saddened by the untimely death of this very fine man. We were all very well aware of what a 

privilege it was to have known and had this man in our midst. The constituents of Melfort and I join my 

colleagues in offering sympathy to Mrs. Brockelbank and family and to you, Mr. Speaker, and your 

family. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with other 

members of the Assembly in passing on my condolences to you and your family and the family of Mr. 

Knowles. I guess that I happen to be the only member of the opposition on either party that had, I’m not 

sure if I could put it good fortune or misfortune, to sit in the Assembly with old Brock, and I say that 

with some degree of affection. I say misfortune because, I mean misfortune to have been on the other 

side because I suppose I can recall some very vivid incidents where in this Assembly Brock’s very 

dominant personality stood out very, very clearly. 

 

The Premier indicated that he was a great strategist. I remember as a brand new member and as a brand 

new government, we walked into this Assembly full of vim and vigour and vitality expecting to set the 

world on fire and old Brock stood up and called for priority of debate and knocked us for a bit of a loop 

— we never ever even got the Throne Speech moved or seconded on that occasion and he sat in his seat 

with a funny smile on his face. I also remember as a fledgling new member that I tried to take him on a 

little bit and I thought perhaps I could say a few words in the Assembly in my first maiden speech and it 

wasn’t very often that someone interrupted someone’s maiden speech, but old Brock did for me four 

times and it’s never really happened since then because he taught me a lesson. But he was a tough old 

rascal, very, very fair and very, very honest in the Assembly, a real parliamentarian. One of the other 

qualities that I can remember very much about Mr. Brockelbank is a fact that, even though he belonged 

to the CCF and the NDP, he had the respect of the business community in Saskatchewan. When I say the 

respect of the business community, I refer, of course, to the oil industry when he was Minister of 

Mineral Resources and many of the other mining companies and investors in our province who liked and 

respected John H. Brockelbank. They recognized him as a man sincerely dedicated to the best interests 

of his province, his community and also the kind of a man that recognized their contribution and 

appreciated their contribution. So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that to me your father was someone that I 

enjoyed knowing; I enjoyed watching in this Assembly. I am sure that the province of Saskatchewan has 

lost one of its very distinguished citizens. 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — I rise to express my sincere and heartfelt words of sympathy in the 

passing of a one time colleague and always a friend, J.H. Brockelbank. He was what I look upon as a 

true Saskatchewan gentleman, proud of his province, and respected and admired by all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Brock, as he was known to the people of this province, had a long and a distinguished career in service 

to the people of Saskatchewan. He was a man of great integrity, whose 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

154 

 

actions sought to keep principles alive in an era of rapid growth and change. He was a driving force in 

the formulation of the first socialist government in the North American continent and saw the CCF grow 

and transform into the democratic party as we now know it. 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, had the honor of sitting in this Assembly with you from 1964 to 1967, at which time 

your father, Mr. Brockelbank Senior, as we sometimes called him, also sat as a member of the 

Assembly. It was during that period of time that my association with Mr. J.H. Brockelbank developed 

into one of great respect and admiration. This respect and his respect for this House and his knowledge 

of the rules and regulations and the procedures governing it, certainly assisted me as it did many new 

members, during that period of time and it impressed all of us. I know that I speak for the people of the 

Weyburn constituency and all who knew him when I say Brock, and we all referred to him as Brock, 

will be missed by all but his influence will continue to be felt by all of us for many years to come. I 

extend to you, Mr. Speaker, and to your family our deepest and sincere sympathy. 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add my 

condolences with those who have already spoken this evening. I first came to know Brock as an 

employee of his in the Department of Natural Resources. I think I could fairly speak for all or at least 

most of the public service employees of that department which held Brock, not so much as a minister of 

the department, but as a friend and a working partner. Under his ministry he developed an esprit de 

corps among his employees or a morale among the staff that remains among many of the fellows who I 

still, from time to time, have occasion to meet with and to talk with and they remember the occasions 

when that inspiration that Brock gave to us was certainly around. He knew each of us personally and he 

called most of us by our first names. As has been said, surely he walked with kings and workers alike. 

 

I recall the first meeting that I had with him sometime around 1949 or 1950 at an official opening of the 

then-called Timber Board sawmill at Big River. I was involved at that point in time in one of 

Saskatchewan’s firsts, insofar as forest fire control was concerned. We were jumping out of airplanes in 

order to put out forest fires in areas inaccessible by other means of transportation. And on that particular 

occasion, we were doing an exhibition jump at Big River and after I had landed and was taking off my 

parachute and harness, a fellow came up to me in blue denim overalls and spoke to me and helped me 

unbuckle and get out of the harness and talked to me about the department. He introduced himself as 

Brockelbank, didn’t indicate that he was the minister of the department, and went away to help some of 

the other fellows and later that day I learned, of course, that he was the minister of the department. 

Brock on many occasions did the same thing as young men came into the department and as he worked 

among us on those occasions. 

 

Since that time, of course, on many other occasions I had the opportunity to associate with him in a 

personal way. Certainly, he will be missed by many, most especially by those of his family, and I would 

extend my personal and sincere condolences to you, Sir, and to his family. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister in Charge of Potash): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a very 

few brief words on behalf of myself and my constituents, condolences to yourself, Mr. Speaker, and the 

rest of Brock’s family. 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

155 

 

I had the pleasure of knowing Brock reasonably well and of working with him and on occasion against 

him, in the New Democratic Party since the time I guess I was 14 or 15 years old and active in the youth 

movement. I think one of the most memorable personal memories I have of Brock is one that happened, 

I think, probably before I officially met him. It was at an annual convention of the CCF in 1959 or 1960. 

He was a cabinet minister and I was a youth delegate to my first annual party convention. We’d had a 

youth convention in the province and we’d passed a resolution to lower the drinking age, as I recall it 

from 20 to, I don’t know, it was 19 or 18, it doesn’t matter. I was at that time, being 14 or 15, a very 

enthusiastic advocate of that. I remember watching all the people as they trooped to the mike speaking 

and we thought we were doing very well on the debate till we saw Brock come to the mike. Brock was a 

senior minister in the government and we figured that somebody was going to lay the heavies on us. 

Now he started out and he started out by reading this passage or it appeared he was reading, which was 

running down young people, saying how terrible they were, how they were all going to the dogs and he 

then proceeded to tell us, and I don’t remember the name of it but it came from a writing that was a 

couple of thousand years old . . . 

 

MR. MESSER: — Pompeii. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — It was Pompeii the Minister of Mineral Resources, the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, 

says. Then he went on to speak in favor of the resolution and it passed as I recall it. I don’t know 

whether Brock was doing that to make us feel good, when he got back to Cabinet it didn’t seem to 

become law. But, as I say, that was one of the earliest occasions I recall of seeing Brock in action. I was 

impressed then and I was more impressed as I grew to become more knowledgeable of his activities 

both in the party and as a member of the government in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1970 when I was elected provincial treasurer of the party in this province, Brock was the one I 

succeeded and I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the 18 months that I looked after the books after him 

were the first 18 months in a long time that they hadn’t balanced. It took a while for me to do nearly as 

good a job as he did as treasurer. He stayed very active in the party after he left this Legislature in 1967. 

I had many occasions to work with Brock. 

 

I think one of the things I have that gives me a great deal of pleasure now is — you will recall, some of 

the members of this House, early in this year there was a Tommy Douglas night in town and they had an 

auction and many people contributed things to the auction. One of the things that was contributed was a 

Stetson of Brock’s that he had received as a gift when he was in Texas and I was fortunate enough that 

night to have a cheque with me and be able to bid enough to get that Stetson. It hangs in a prominent 

place in my family room and I am very pleased that I now have that particular memento. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my condolences to you and to Brock’s family and to say what a 

pleasure it was for me personally to have known and to learn from J.H. Brockelbank. 

 

HON. J.H. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a very few brief words. I 

think in general most of what I would like to have said has already been expressed by other members. I 

came to know John Brockelbank very well during the period of time we sat together in the Legislature. 

He was a man whom once you had met him you would never forget. Brock had a voice that I think 

distinguished him from all others. He was an able administrator and a person who instilled the kind of 

confidence that is rare among politicians, the kind of a person who didn’t demand loyalty but received it 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

156 

 

because of the manner in which he administered his departments and there were many. He was a person 

whose personal habits I thought were rather remarkable. 

 

I think one of the things that I remember most about Brock was the period of time when he served as 

provincial treasurer of the government. I remember the day upon which he delivered his budget speech, 

his first budget speech in that capacity. He exhibited, I think, the kind of talent that few people have and 

that is putting the cares of the day behind them and being able to go to the members’ lounge, as he did 

regularly, where we had a comfortable old leather couch and take one of the cushions from the 

chesterfield or the couch and place it to the head of the lounge and very shortly Brock was catching 

himself 40 winks and snoring very gently. When the bell went at 2:25 he was up, alert and spry, and 

ready to do those things required of him. I think this was one of the faculties perhaps that few of us in 

public life have, to be able to put aside the cares of the day and to enjoy those kind of luxuries in terms 

of that kind of self discipline. 

 

I always respected Brock and I think one of the things that many of the new members appreciated most 

was that he had the time to devote to young members. He offered good advice that was always well 

received. 

 

I do want to join with others in expressing to you, Mr. Speaker, to your family and to your mother 

sincere sympathy on this occasion. 

 

MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with others here today to 

express my feelings of a man whose name was one in my family that came to me through my family in a 

manner that could be termed as endearment. I only knew Mr. Brockelbank for a very short time, actually 

after I had been elected as a member to this Legislature. With the feelings in speaking about the 

individual from a while back, I want to express my sincere regrets for his untimely passing. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Co-ops): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to express my 

sympathies to you and your family with respect to the death of your father. I knew John Hewgill 

Brockelbank reasonably well. I was first elected to this Legislature in 1964 and I remember my 

admiration for him as a legislator and parliamentarian. I think it is true to say he was a master of the 

rules of this House and in addition I had great admiration for him simply as a human being. 

 

When I first was elected to the Legislature, Brock, as we all knew him, was the acting leader of the 

opposition. The contributions Brock made to this Assembly were innumerable on many occasions but I 

think, in my view, the one that was highlighted, in my memory at least, was the speech he made during 

my first term in this Assembly entitled, “The Folly of War.” Brock had experienced the hell of war in 

the trenches during World War I and, Mr. Speaker, everyone who heard that speech was deeply 

impressed with his condemnation of man’s inhumanity to man. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I may be permitted to use a bit of verse to describe what, in my view, was the 

philosophy of one of Saskatchewan’s most distinguished legislators. It would go like this: 

 

Why should I sing of the rich or wise 

Better the humble whom some despise, 

Not of the noble by wealth or birth 

I sing of the ordinary humans on earth, 

The miner burrowing like a mole 

Blasting drilling to give you coal, 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

157 

 

The trapper mushing along the trail, 

The fisherman trimming his small white sail, 

The farmer bronzed by the sun in toil 

As he wrests rich food from the good black soil; 

These are men who really live, 

These are the men who are wont to give 

Sum and substance in honest worth. 

I sing of these men – the salt of the earth. 

 

I express my sincere sympathy to you, Mr. Speaker, and to members of your family. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, it is with sadness that I rise in this 

House tonight in memory of one in my book, one of the greatest legislators who has ever graced this 

House, your father. 

 

I am now the dean of this House having served here for 25 years and by virtue of the fact that I have 

been here as an elected member longer than anyone else. Your father enjoyed that position as did a 

number of others. Herman Danielson I think enjoyed that position and has possibly the greatest seniority 

of anyone that has ever sat in this House along with Fred Dewhurst, another former Speaker. 

 

When I first arrived here as a member of the Legislature in 1952, certainly green in the procedures of 

this House, there was no one person that I can credit for more sound advice, taking more time with a 

new member to explain all the exigencies of this Legislature and to teach a respect for the Chair, a 

position you now hold. There was no one who did that better or more ably, more convincingly than your 

father, the late John Brockelbank. 

 

The name Brockelbank is certainly well known in north-western Saskatchewan because that was where 

the family first homesteaded when they came from Ontario. Two of his brothers farmed there for a 

number of years in the Rockhaven area. Another brother, associated with the university, was the first 

Brockelbank I actually got to know. He was active in 4H and taught us farm boys those things that were 

taught in what was the farm boys camp in the organization which preceded what is known as 4H today. 

Your uncle is still active and alive in British Columbia. Again, a happy association that I have with the 

name Brockelbank. 

 

If there is any one thing that I remember Brock for was his determination, his intelligence and his 

respect for his fellowmen, even though they may have agreed with him only almost violently. He always 

insisted to us in our caucus that that was democracy and that we should respect those institutions that 

had been built up over the years ever since the days of Magna Carta the British Parliamentary system 

and those things which are associated with it, those time honored rules that sometimes seem to fall into 

disrespect because possibly of intemperance, thoughtlessness or ambition, one-up-man-ship. Those rules 

were interpreted to us very, very aptly. There are not too many sitting here that benefited in the ’50s and 

early ’60s. There are some. I will be eternally grateful for the lessons I learned from him, in his lifelong 

experience, first as a member of the opposition prior to 1944, several years in government until 1964, 

then leading us part of the time during an illness of our leader at that time, Woodrow Lloyd, in 

opposition. All of those are cherished memories. I think I can only say to you and to this House tonight, 

that Saskatchewan suffered a loss that cannot be measured in any way, because John Brockelbank chose 

to live and work and give of himself here in this great province. There are many landmarks that are here, 

many advantages that we have here in this province that probably would not be here it if was not for the 

active imagination for the forward thinking that your father presented in caucus, to the party in 

convention and in all the various ways that was possible 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

158 

 

throughout the ’30s, ’40s, ’50s and ’60s, as a leader, as a mentor in this party and this movement in 

every walk that he chose to take and in every path he chose to take. 

 

Among those people who graced that first CCF cabinet, he stood as a giant and there were a number of 

giants there. Saskatchewan and Canada, Mr. Speaker, are better because men like John Brockelbank 

graced this province, graced this country and set examples that many of us should emulate as we try to 

serve the people who elected us. 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well to give condolences to 

you and your family. Unlike some members of the House I never knew Mr. Brockelbank, or Brock as I 

only heard him called. I never knew him as an elected member. The first time I met Brock, I think I got 

one of my strongest impressions of him. It was shortly before the ’71 election when I was a candidate in 

the Moosomin riding, a riding we hadn’t won before and in fact haven’t won since. I remember him 

telling me at that time that the campaign begins the day after the election. I didn’t have much occasion to 

think about that until after the election when I was not an MLA. When I thought about it, I was 

impressed that he had taken the time for a new candidate, a kind of eager beaver, but more that he had 

shown the kind of sensitivity and understanding for a young candidate who was facing an uphill battle in 

a difficult seat, and that he could give blunt, sound advice and not have it resented. 

 

I really got to know him better when he was living in retirement in Regina, and very active he was, in a 

surprising variety of activities, always active in party affairs, always attended the meetings of his riding 

and party functions in Regina. He was active in a wide variety of other functions as well, active in the 

Globe Theatre — never missed a production of the Globe Theatre — often at various meetings 

throughout Regina of places you wouldn’t expect to see him he would turn up, offering the kind of 

sound advice and sagely advice that one couldn’t argue with and one simply had to accept. It always 

seemed to make sense. It was interesting that time and age never seemed to dull the wisdom or the 

understanding he seemed to have. 

 

My sincerest condolences to you, Mr. Speaker, and to your family on the passing of a man for whom I 

had the most profound respect. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. 

Bailey): 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased members be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might move a motion of congratulation. This 

Assembly had as its Clerk from 1949 to 1960 a man by the name of George Stephen, who was a very 

competent and capable Clerk, who has just celebrated his 90th birthday a couple of days ago. I think it 

might be a nice gesture if this House sent him a resolution expressing our best wishes for continued god 

health and happiness. 

 

If I have leave, I will move, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey): 



 

November 22, 1977 

 

159 

 

That this Assembly records its pleasure in congratulating Mr. George Stephen, former Clerk of this 

Assembly from 1949 to 1960 who celebrated his 90th birthday on November 17, 1977. This Assembly 

wishes to express best wishes to Mr. Stephen for continued good health and happiness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before putting that motion, I would like to add a few words in explanation of the motion. I 

knew George Stephen reasonably well. I came to Saskatchewan in 1950 and my first job was secretary 

and legal advisor to Crown corporations and in the course of doing that, it was the then task of the man 

who held that role to arrange for the tabling in the Legislature of the annual reports of the Crown 

corporations and to assist in the operation of the Crown Corporations Committee. We were just 

developing then the procedure of referring questions to the Crown Corporations Committee and the 

secretary undertook the job of getting the answers, and generally I had a good number of contacts with 

George Stephen at that time. 

 

He was in some ways what I would call a “crusty old Scot” who seemed to know his stuff and know it 

very well. He was, however, unfailing in his assistance to me in my duties and I know that others who 

were in the same position found him the same way. I cannot speak with the same confidence as to how 

he served this House, except that I know that his competence, integrity and ingenuity as a Clerk gained 

for him a reputation which was well known across Canada and throughout the Commonwealth as an 

authority on parliamentary procedure. We sometimes think that all of the authorities on parliamentary 

procedure will necessarily be at Westminster or possibly in Ottawa or Canberra as the case may be. In 

fact a good deal of skill and competence has gone into modifying in minor ways the parliamentary 

procedure which is applied at Westminster to make it apply to Legislature like this, where the numbers 

are smaller, where the committee structures are different, necessarily different, able to be more informal, 

able to involve more members and having less need of rigid formality. I think people like George 

Stephen have made our Legislature work by adapting the procedures which were evolved for a much 

larger parliament at Westminster, not only was he an invaluable source of knowledge, but as I indicated 

he was highly inventive and was able to take the information which came from Westminster and adapted 

it to our particular circumstances. He initiated the first electronic Hansard system in the commonwealth 

and developed procedures for the new Crown Corporations Committee; wrote regularly for the 

parliamentary journals. Even though those of us who didn’t have the good fortune to know him in this 

House, are now enjoying his contributions to this Assembly. George retired as a clerk of the Assembly 

the same year that I became a member and then he was followed by a worthy successor, Bev Koester. I 

had a great admiration for him. I remember with fondness the guidance he gave me, and I think he gave 

good guidance to the House and I would like to join in expressing warm best wishes to George Stephen 

on his 90th birthday and I know he continues to be interested in affairs of the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association. I get an odd note from him and I feel sure that others will wish to support 

this motion and extend best wishes to George Stephen on his 90th birthday. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:03 o’clock p.m. 


