



















































Hansard: April 18, 1977


2160 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Monday, April 18, 1977. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE — NEWFOUNDLAND 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would like all Members to join with me today in welcoming three special guests 

from another jurisdiction. Two of them are seated behind the rail to my left; they are Mr. Roger 

Simmons and Dr. Raymond Winsor, from the Newfoundland House of Assembly. They are here to 

study the Public Accounts Committee in the Province of Saskatchewan. The Members of the Assembly 

may bask in some reflected glory that Saskatchewan is one of the provinces that Newfoundland has 

chosen to study with regard to the operation of the Public Accounts. 

 

All Members know that the review of Public Accounts procedures was initiated under one 

administration and the recommendations with regard to that review were implemented under a different 

administration and another administration is now in its place. All Members can take credit for that and I 

know Members will join with me in welcoming these gentlemen from Newfoundland. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

EXPANSION OF TAYLOR FIELD 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the 

Premier, although I’m not sure he is the appropriate Minister to address the question to. In any event as 

all Members are aware the Saskatchewan Roughriders have made an application to the city of Regina for 

the expansion of Taylor Field, to allow for the continual operation of that football club. I am advised that 

the city in return has requested support of the Government of Saskatchewan to facilitate the expansion of 

Taylor Field and I believe the amount that has been requested is approximately $8 million. I’m not sure 

the state of the Government’s consideration of this request, or indeed, whether you’ve had an 

opportunity even to look into it at this time. The first question is: has such a request been made and what 

is the state of the Government’s situation in dealing with the request? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure that a request has been made by the 

city of Regina. Some informal approaches were made by the Saskatchewan Roughrider Football Club 

and subsequent to that, I had understood that they had made some representations to the city of Regina. I 

am not fully aware whether the city has made any representations to us. I wonder, if I may, Mr. Speaker, 

ask the Minister of Culture and Youth to expand more fully. 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2161 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Culture and Youth): — If I may at this time, Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier has outlined the situation as it is. The city has not made a specific request to the province. I 

have had a meeting also with representatives of the Saskatchewan Roughrider Football Club, as well as 

with some representatives from the city of Regina, at which time we discussed the situation of Taylor 

Field, but at this time there has been no specific request from the city. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I think all Members will agree that the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders do more for the Province of Saskatchewan than enhance the reputation of the 

city of Regina. I think they enhance the reputation of the whole province nationally and indeed go to 

many things such as national unity and so on. I wonder, in view of this, if the Minister would be 

prepared to indicate to this House, as to whether or not the Government will look on such a request for 

additional funds with favor, in the sense that it goes to enhance the Province of Saskatchewan and that 

good will come of it for all of the people of Saskatchewan, not just the people of Regina? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I think all Members of the House would agree about the 

contributions of the Saskatchewan Roughrider Football Club, which has been an outstanding institution 

throughout Canada representing the Province of Saskatchewan very well. I don’t think there is any 

argument about that at all. I would agree with the Member wholeheartedly. As to the position of the 

province, when we have had further discussions with the city, I think my answer to that would have to 

be that it would have to be announced in due course. Certainly I have explored with the city of Regina, 

tentatively already, as I indicated previous to this, the ideas that they may have in mind and they will be 

making a submission to me. At that time we will see where we go from there. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m advised, Mr. Minister, that the club and the 

city will need a decision fairly soon, if indeed there are to be renovations to Taylor Field to allow for the 

football season for 1978 to be conducted in the new setup. I wonder if the Minister would give me an 

undertaking that once the representation has been received from the city that it will be dealt with, with 

some dispatch, so that indeed if the representation is met with approval that work can get going right 

away on the project? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear that I consider it on the 

initiative of the city where the thing lies right now. But sure, just as we do deal with all propositions 

brought forward to this Government, we will deal with it expeditiously. 

 

OPEN HOUSE CANADA PROGRAM 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Culture and Youth as well. Some time ago in this House you were asked about your potential 

participation in a supplementary way, in the Open House Canada Program, that was 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2162 

 

announced by the Federal Government. You stated at that time that you needed some time to study those 

federal provisions to see what role your Government might be interested in playing. I’d like to know if 

at this time you have come to a decision about the project of that nature on a Saskatchewan basis? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, we have not reached any decisions on it as to what we might be doing 

at this point in time. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Can you give this House some indication of whether or not a decision will be 

forthcoming or if in fact, you have decided that a project of this nature is not worthwhile in the Province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, we have not made the latter decision as outlined by the Member. We 

have not had the full opportunity to explore with federal officials yet (I’m not being critical in saying 

that) what their specific proposals are, but when we have done that, we will be making the appropriate 

announcement. 

 

OIL ROYALTY STRUCTURE 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — Mr. Speaker, I would address a 

question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. On April 7 in response to a question by myself pertaining 

to the oil royalty structure in the Province of Saskatchewan, the Minister announced that there was 

virtually no difference between the royalty rates on new oil in Alberta and the Province of 

Saskatchewan. It has now come to our attention that the Minister has received representation from the 

Independent Petroleum Association, from the Canadian Petroleum Association and from some 

individual oil companies that would belie that particular fact. Is the Minister now prepared to announce 

to this Assembly that a further change in the oil royalty structure in the Province of Saskatchewan will 

be designed by the Government of Saskatchewan to encourage drilling this year in the light of the 

current drought conditions in Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said before we are 

expecting a higher level of activity in the Province of Saskatchewan this year compared to previous 

years. The Member makes mention that I have received documentation from IPAC and other 

independent petroleum operators. I have not to this point in time, at least my office, has received no such 

communications from the parties that he makes reference to. I say again to this House that there is 

substantially no difference between heavy crude, new oil being developed as far as royalties or 

incentives are concerned, when one compares Alberta to the Province of Saskatchewan. I told him when 

he asked the question, I believe it was April 6, or 7, that I would bring some more precise information to 

this House and I expect to have that within the next day or two. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the Minister. The Minister has 

suggested and perhaps is hung up on the word 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2163 

 

documentation, is he saying to this Assembly that he has received no representation from the oil industry 

or from these associations and organizations associated with the oil industry in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, nor has his department received any representation, either personal or otherwise 

pertaining to the new oil royalty structure in the Province of Saskatchewan that he introduced in this 

Assembly a little while ago? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I took the Member’s words to mean that there had been representation 

made to me since he raised the question one week or so ago in this Legislative Assembly. If that is what 

he is referring to the representation or the communication, if it has been received by my office or by my 

department, has not been brought to my attention. Certainly previous to that time we have had 

discussions and communications between not only the parties that he makes reference to but other 

parties. I take it he is alluding now to some other communications. If he is I do not have that at this point 

in time. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if I might beg leave of your 

indulgence just to read or to quote a very brief comment by, for example, Gulf Oil Canada Ltd., the 

senior vice-president, for the Minister’s information, which I understand has been drawn to the attention 

of the Minister: 

 

Furthermore the rates continue to reflect the superiority of those affected in Alberta and finally the 

removal of the six-year limit on the new royalties is encouraging. However, the new regulations 

offer no new significant incentive to accelerate Gulf Canada’s exploration and development efforts 

in Saskatchewan especially considering the better economics in Alberta. 

 

Is the Minister aware of that kind of concern by the oil industry generally and by those members of the 

oil industry who might possibly be interested in assisting us in the development of our energy resources 

in Saskatchewan? Is he aware that kind of concern comes from these organizations, both independent 

and major? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Conservative Party makes reference to a letter 

from Gulf. I am not aware of that specific letter having reached my office. It may not as yet have been 

brought to my attention. I say again, as I said earlier, that there is substantially no difference between the 

incentives and the total royalty take between the Province of Alberta and the Province of Saskatchewan. 

It may be in some special instances modestly different but certainly not significantly different. I again 

say to the Member that I will, in the next day or two, hopefully no later than the end of this week, bring 

to his attention some specifics in regard to the situation in Saskatchewan in comparison to Alberta to 

document my statement. 

 

CABLE TELEVISION — OUTRAM 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, at the hope of a one-button answer 

rather than a two, I would like to direct a question to the Minister 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2164 

 

in charge of Environment and Sask Tel and ask him about the white elephant that has been located at 

Outram in southern Saskatchewan. I would like to ask the Minister first of all a short series of questions. 

Could the Minister tell me if the geographic location of Outram was selected specifically in order for the 

cable television import from Williston, North Dakota? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Telephones): — The answer to that is, Yes, Mr. Speaker. The 

applicants for licences made their application to the CRTC with the understanding that that was a 

desirable location and would be used by whomever was the successful applicant. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Would the Minister tell me, is it the habit of Sask Tel to invest $2 million of 

the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money without a signed agreement between any two parties who they are 

going to intend to provide services? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I understand the amount of the total investment in this system 

$2.5 million as I understand it is the cost of the improvements made to the inter-city microwave system 

with the head end at Outram being one part of that investment. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Supplementary. Would the Minister tell me what other possible uses are there 

for the installation that is now located at Outram and tell me what would be the cost of uprooting this 

installation and moving it somewhere else so that we don’t have a white elephant sitting down in 

southern Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member assumes that there is a white elephant at 

Outram. I am not prepared to accept that the head end at Outram is a white elephant. The applicants for 

licences for cable television understood that Outram would be the location for the head end and this 

would involve the construction program to upgrade the inter-city microwave system in the province. It is 

only in the last three or four months that some of the successful applicants, I understand, have been 

giving consideration to the idea that the head end at another location would be more desirable. I don’t 

know whether they have applied to the CRTC for a licence to construct the head end at another location 

or not. You would have to get the information from them. In the event that another location was selected 

it would take some years to design the additional hardware to re-route the system. I don’t think the 

people of Saskatchewan intend to wait that long for the jurisdictional problem to be resolved to receive 

cable television. I am still optimistic that the investment at Outram is solid hardware, not a white 

elephant and that it will be used. 

 

SYLVITE MINE — NEW MANAGER 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier and possibly the Minister in 

charge of Sask Potash. On April 11 we ran out of time with the Minister of Potash. He was just going to 

tell us the name of the new manager at the Sylvite mine which we are purchasing and what his starting 

date was. On April 13, I 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2165 

 

asked the Premier the same question and he did not know who the new manager was. Could the Minister 

in charge of Sask Potash tell us who the new manager is and his starting date, his salary? With the 

takeover only a few weeks or a few days away, I think this is very important. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister in charge of Potash Corporation): — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I recall 

the question in the House that was directed to me that day was whether or not we would have someone 

in place as manager for the Sylvite operation when we took it over. I indicated we would and the 

indication is still the same. I would expect that in the interim we have some people from the Potash 

Corporation in Saskatchewan who may fill in on an interim basis there as the manager of the operation. 

An announcement with respect to who it will be will be made in due course when we have signed the 

agreement. 

 

MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t the Minister feel that his new potential 

manager, the new manager should be in place at the present time working with management so that they 

do have a continuation of dialogue and which direction they are going? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I just indicated to the Member for Estevan that he is in place 

now and is working with the management when I indicated that we would in the interim period likely 

have someone from the head office of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as acting general 

manager and that may indeed be the person who becomes the general manager. There is no problem 

with respect to management there. You obviously can’t be in Sylvite managing now because we haven’t 

yet signed the agreement and haven’t taken over. I don’t foresee any difficulties at all. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Minister advise us who the 

individual is from the Potash Corporation who is now in Sylvite? What is his salary? You’ve indicated 

that he will at least be the person who continues the management; would you mind giving the Assembly 

his name? 

 

MR. COWLEY: — I did not, Mr. Speaker, indicate that anyone is in Sylvite managing now except the 

people who work for Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting. I said that I was prepared to give the Assembly 

the name and would make an announcement at the appropriate time when the agreement is signed and 

when we take over the operation at Sylvite; I am prepared obviously to make known the name of the 

individual at that point in time but not until then. With respect to his salary I think the Member full well 

knows the policy of this Government and previous governments with respect to salaries of employees in 

the Crown corporations, that is we have always been prepared to give the salary of the chief executive 

officer. I did that with respect to PCS in Crown Corporations. I am prepared to repeat it in the House if 

that is what the Member wants but that is all the salaries that I am prepared to give. 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2166 

 

WIDOWS — CIVIL SERVICE PENSION 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Is the failure 

of your Government to introduce legislation in this Session allowing widows to receive their civil 

service pension after they remarry and to continue this pension, an attempt to fight the rising 

government expenditures on the backs of a handful of senior citizens in this province? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — I answer that non-controversial question, by indicating that the 

total legislative program of the Government is not yet before the House and I think it is therefore 

premature to indicate what has or what has not been introduced at this Session. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. In view of the answer I wonder if the Premier or the 

House Leader is prepared to let us know when the total legislative program of the Government is going 

to be introduced to this House? We have been sitting here now for some time doing rather minor 

housekeeping chores. I wonder if as a result of that answer you could inform us when we can expect to 

have the rest of the legislation tabled? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that there are only a very small number of pieces of 

legislation yet to come before the House. As I indicated very early in this Session, one of those was 

pension supplementation by legislation. As a matter of fact the Bill will contain some other aspect to do 

with public service superannuation that will be coming along very shortly. There is really comparatively 

little left to come before the House in number; I am not qualified to indicate whether there is little left in 

substance. While I think they are not particularly controversial, I am not always able to rely upon 

Members opposite to concentrate their attention on matters which I think are important rather than 

matters that they think are important. I note that we are not quite through the Order Paper, since there 

are about 40 or 45 pieces of legislation which are not yet attended to, so I think that we are not near the 

end of work that we can usefully do. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier indicate whether or 

not the granting of pensions to widows who remarry will be part of the Government’s Pension Package 

and proposals? We think it is urgent. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not at all sure why the Member thinks it is urgent; whether or 

not it is that more widows are marrying this month than last month or a year ago. (But he may know 

more about widows than I do, particularly those who wish to remarry!) But in any case we hope to bring 

this matter before the House at a very early date. 

 

TAXATION OF RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT COMPANIES 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 31 of this Session, the Minister of Industry 

and Commerce (Mr. Vickar) in response 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2167 

 

to a question put to him announced that changes were coming with regard to resource taxation of 

privately and publicly owned resource development companies. I wonder if you could announce at this 

time what form those changes will take? 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have an 

announcement to make at this time. 

 

GOVERNMENT POLICY RE LAND ANNEXATION 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Last week the 

Premier was asked as to the position of his Government in regard to the proposed annexation of some 

16,000 acres of farm land by the city of Regina. At that time the Premier indicated that his Government 

has no definitive policy but would be examining the matter in the very near future. I should like to ask 

the Premier if he has received some sort of a formal representation from the city of Regina requesting 

this annexation and the approval of the Government and if the Government in the meantime has come to 

some clear definitive policy, not only in matters regarding the city of Regina but cities all over 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member asked essentially two questions. Have I received 

any communication from the city of Regina with respect to the proposed annexation? (I am glad it is 

properly styled annexation and not expropriation.) The answer to that is, No. I am not aware whether or 

not something may have been sent to the Department of Municipal Affairs. I have no knowledge of it. 

 

Secondly, are we able to announce at this time a definitive policy with respect to annexations of that 

nature. The answer is, No. As I attempted to indicate previously it is the intention of the Government, if 

a proposal is received from the city of Regina, to solicit views from all interested parties who may have 

something to offer with respect to an annexation such as this, including other agencies of government. 

When we have had an opportunity to assemble all of the information and to consider it with care we will 

be able to make a policy statement; but not before that. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier would you not consider it to be 

a bit of a contradiction when your Government is apparently expressing severe concerns about 

agriculture from the point of view of size of farms and who should own the farms and yet at the same 

time while you are evolving policies in these areas you seem to be very hesitant in coming to grips with 

perhaps an even larger problem, and that is urban sprawl. Would the Premier not consider that a bit of a 

contradiction on the part of his Government? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge fully the Member’s suggestion that urban sprawl, or 

the conflict of land use between expanding urban centres and surrounding farm areas, is a difficult 

problem. The fact that those who apparently suggest there should be no annexation have no firm 

proposal to put forward as 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2168 

 

to how the urban centres are to grow indicates the difficulty of the problem. I know that those people 

with land holdings now would wish to put a firm embargo upon the cities incorporating any additional 

land, with the result, of course, that existing land holdings would escalate in value very sharply. That 

would indeed protect farm land but may have other very serious social consequences. 

 

The conflict of land use with respect to urban expansion is a problem of which we don’t have any easy 

answer. I am not aware that anyone else has an easy answer. And accordingly, to the extent that we 

don’t have an easy answer to that question and we have formed definitive and satisfactory answers to 

most questions of government, it is indeed a contradiction. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — You have indicated that the Government would give ample opportunity 

to interested groups including other government departments or agencies to present their views prior to a 

Cabinet decision. In light of the problem, I submit, that you touched on in an earlier answer, would the 

Premier not agree perhaps the best way to formalize the opportunity for individuals to give their views is 

a judicial inquiry into the total question of urban sprawl and the encroachment upon prime farm lands of 

Saskatchewan, including in particular the proposed annexation by the city of Regina? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the proposal for a judicial inquiry is one which clearly 

might be considered. The Member will know that we have had two land use conferences, one just a 

week or two ago and one a year ago involving representatives of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and other organizations, 19 in all, at 

which they have wrestled with some of these problems. And this one was high on the agenda. The fact 

that they did not reach any resolution of the problem is perhaps not surprising but indicates that it is not 

an easy problem. It may well be that a judicial inquiry would have some merit. I know that the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs will be considering all appropriate avenues for permitting interested persons and 

organizations to present their views. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

FLOOR DAMAGE AGREEMENTS 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to announce the formal 

signing of two agreements under which the Saskatchewan Government and the Government of Canada 

will undertake joint programs that will reduce flood damage in this province. 

 

I signed the agreements on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and the Hon. Romeo LeBlanc the 

Minister of Fisheries of the Environment signed on behalf of the Government of Canada. 

 

The first agreement states the general approach which the two Governments are taking towards flood 

damage reduction. This approach recognizes that it is better to work with nature by 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2169 

 

discouraging development in the areas where the risk of flooding is known to be high. 

 

The second agreement is more specific. It will initiate preparation of maps and studies of the flood 

plains where flooding is likely to occur. These two agreements are a good start. And I look forward to 

the time when I can rise again to announce other cost-sharing flood reduction agreements with the 

Government of Canada. 

 

Saskatchewan needs better flood forecasting and flood warning systems, better flood proof techniques, 

more appropriate flood control works. During the present session of the Legislature, I introduced 

amendments to The Water Resources Management Act, to authorize a program for the improved 

management of flood hazard areas. Work undertaken under the agreements I announced today represent 

part of that program. The Department of the Environment has undertaken a broad new approach to flood 

plain management. Areas that are subjected to frequent flooding must be managed more effectively to 

prevent recurring damage, social disruptions to human and animal life, major expenditures for 

emergency measures and compensation to victims of floods. Part of this policy which the Government 

of Saskatchewan shares with the Government of Canada is a ban on financial assistance for new 

development in areas where the flood hazard is high, but even without investment incentives from the 

Provincial and Federal Governments, we anticipate continuing pressure for development in high risk 

areas. Flood plains when they are not under water, are attractive. The intent of Saskatchewan and the 

Government of Canada is not to stop all development but to achieve growth in flood hazard areas that 

recognize the dangers. In short, mankind’s use of flood plains must be in harmony with nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would appreciate it if you would give me a chance just to make a 

brief statement with respect to the matter which the Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley raised just 

to provide some supplementary information about this, which I received since he asked his question. It 

will be factual and brief. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Is the Minister providing an answer to a question or is he providing the balance of 

his statement? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — On a Point of Order, I would be delighted if he would respond. 

 

MR. BYERS: — It is new information in the form of a statement on a subject that was already raised 

earlier today. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Is it part of the Ministerial statement you’re dealing with? 

 

MR. BYERS: — No. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Then I think we’ll take one statement at a time. If it’s an answer to a question the 

Member should produce it during the question period. 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2170 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN: — In response to your statement on flood damage, I think over all, Members 

of this Legislature would have to welcome any initiative that is taking place by either the Federal or 

Provincial Governments to try and minimize the potential flood damage and danger in the future. One 

particular aspect of your announcement that concerns me is the rather negative approach that you take 

towards potential hazards; you state that your direction will be to discourage development of those areas 

(a negative approach) a ban on financial assistance to people that will be developing there. In view of 

that attitude plus Bill No. 48, The Water Resources Management Act that you have tabled in this House, 

the two of those combined, I think have the potential to cause citizens of Saskatchewan and residents of 

flood hazard areas considerable trouble with regard to your Government’s approach to this problem. I 

think probably the best approach to be taken and one which you indicated you are considering as well 

and that’s the study of potential flood hazard areas and means of preventing and improving upon the 

situation as far as flood control goes, this is the area which your Government must put the most 

emphasis on. In general, I am pleased to see it introduced and I hope you’ll proceed with caution on the 

first aspect of your statement that is a negative approach to discouraging development in those areas. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A short reply, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister. Seemingly the approach 

of simply discouraging developing in flood prone areas causes the Government to miss the root cause of 

flooding in various areas and I would hope that is not the Federal and Provincial Governments’ 

intention. Seemingly all we are doing is ‘glossing over’. It’s very easy for government to say, ‘no more 

building in a flood prone area,’ when we, in fact, could be making a more positive and a more 

substantive change by making the capital expenditures to actually stop the flooding or rechannel. It’s 

very easy, as I say, for a government to slap on freezes. I think the Government is well aware of some of 

the problems caused by freezes and I would hope that, should the Government proceed, federally and 

provincially, should the Government proceed, to discourage development that it be done with the full 

support of those affected and the full support with full public participation before any action is taken. 

 

CABLE TELEVISION — OUTRAM 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have permission to make another brief statement. In 

the last few days or weeks there has been some concern expressed as to whether or not the hardware that 

Sask Tel has constructed as part of the inter-city microwave system for cable television including the 

head end at Outram would be redundant in the event that another location was deemed more appropriate 

for a head end. With respect to the head end at Outram I want to assure all Members of the House that 

the tower at Outram is part of the national defence system and in the event that another site were 

selected, that tower would remain there and would remain in operation. 

 

With respect to the upgrading of the microwave system, the inter-city microwave system, the estimated 

cost of that hardware was in the order of $2 million and if an alternate site were selected this hardware 

would still be used and would not be wasted. With respect to relocation, if a relocation were necessary 

the cost could be, would be minimal and it would only 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2171 

 

be in the order of $17,000 at present day costs. So that we can be assured that, as I have read and heard 

in some places that Sask Tel may have ‘goofed’ in this construction program, that tower at Outram is 

part of the Canadian National Defence system and we do not regard that as a ‘boob’. The interprovincial 

hardware is there in place and can be used and that is not a ‘boob’ either. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I want to tell the Minister that we’re all on this side of the House, and I’m sure 

the entire public of Saskatchewan is delighted. In case of a third world war, you the Minister in charge 

of Sask Tel have provided all of the protection that Canada will need. Let’s be realistic, Mr. Minister, 

and I say this in all sincerity, when a Socialist Government turns around and invests $2.5 million of the 

taxpayers’ money to provide a service to some company or companies that are not socialist owned or 

controlled . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think, I should possibly re-acquaint the Member with some of the rules 

that govern the answering of statements, and if necessary I can bring forward the appropriate citations, 

but let me say, quite briefly, that the comments must be brief, factual and specific. And that the 

comments in response to the Minister’s must be brief, factual and relevant and that a debate cannot take 

place since there is no motion before the House so I would warn the Member to exclude any debatable 

comments he might have to make. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly abide by your rules and I hope that the Minister 

involved also took them. All I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is that I hope the Government 

has learned a lesson, and that lesson is very important on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, when you make those kinds of business errors when a private corporation which has the 

decision of selecting service from you or from an alternate source that before you invest the money, my 

money and the taxpayers’ money, you’d at least have a signed agreement. And when Sask Tel and other 

Crown corporations have learned a lesson, I’ll be very satisfied. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s common knowledge that the 

maintenance and building of equipment such as this, within the national defence system, is a federal 

responsibility. I suppose we can assume that shortly we can receive a $2.5 million cheque from Ottawa. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE — NEWFOUNDLAND 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day I have some announcements I wish to make. I 

inadvertently neglected to introduce the third member of the delegation from Newfoundland. He is Mr. 

Ron Penney, and he’s the law clerk and secretary to the Public Accounts Committee and he’s in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. I’m sure Members will join me in extending the same warmth and welcome to this 

Chamber as we have to the other Members. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2172 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

CONSTITUENCY OF PELLY 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Due to the passage of time, I can now make some formal announcements. I beg to 

inform the Assembly of the following vacancy and representation in the constituency of Pelly by the 

death of Mr. L.M. Larson, Esquire. 

 

CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 

received from the Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of the following election and returns of Harold W. 

Lane, Esquire, as Member of the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland, and of Garnet N. Wipf, Esquire, 

as Member for the constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 

 

STATEMENTS 

 

EXAMINING OF BILLS BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day, I have a statement I wish to make. A Point of Order 

was raised on Tuesday, April 12, 1977, questioning whether it was the Speaker’s duty to look into 

whether a matter is in order or not when no Point of Order has been raised on the matter and further, by 

what authority did the Speaker examine bills introduced by private Members as to their being in order. 

 

The duties of the Speaker in these areas are defined by both rule and practice. I refer all Hon. Members 

to the following citations which clearly set out the duties of the Chair. Rule 44 of this Assembly states 

that: 

 

When Mr. Speaker is of the opinion that a Motion offered to the Assembly is contrary to the rules and 

privileges of the Assembly he shall apprise the Assembly thereof immediately before putting the 

question thereon and quote the authority applicable to the case. 

 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, Citation 70(6) further states: 

 

That the Speaker is bound to call attention immediately to an irregularity in debate or procedure and 

not to wait for the interposition of a Member. Therefore, it is clear that a Speaker must not wait until a 

Point of Order is raised but must deal on his own initiative with any matter which in his opinion may 

be a violation of the rules of the Assembly. 

 

The question of whether it is the Speaker’s duty to examine all Private Members’ Bills brought before 

the House is also clearly in the affirmative, as it is the duty of the Chair to ensure that all bills are in 

order. I refer Members to Sir Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 18th Edition, page 225 which 

states: 

 

It is the duty of the Speaker to preserve the orderly conduct of debate by repressing disorder when it 

arises 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2173 

 

by refusing to propose a question upon motions and amendments which are irregular and by calling 

the attention of the House to Bills which are out of order and securing their withdrawal. 

 

May further explains the role of the Chair on financial procedures on page 690 as follows: 

 

In discharging its duty of disallowing any proceedings which would infringe on the rules of financial 

procedures, the chair relies in the last resort upon its power to decline to propose the necessary 

questions. It is principally by the action of the Chair that the financial practice of the House has been 

developed, its principles defined and any deficiencies in the standing orders such as those mentioned 

on page 691 are supplemented. 

 

Accordingly if any motion or bill or proceeding is offered to be moved, whether in the House or in 

Committee which requires but fails to receive the Queen’s recommendation, it is the duty of the Chair 

to announce that no question can be proposed on the motion or to direct the withdrawal of the Bill. 

 

It is a long standing practice of this Assembly and other Assemblies that the Speaker may defer a 

ruling on a matter until he has had time to consider it fully. This in no way indicates whether the 

decision will be to rule the matter in order or out of order, but is a practice followed to ensure that 

decisions are carefully considered. 

 

I am sure this will clarify the matter for all Members. 

 

POINTS OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, from time to time, on a Point of Order, 

Mr. Speaker, you do make strange rulings that seem strange to us on this side of the House. And I would 

point today to an instance where I had asked a question and a supplementary and was preparing to 

answer ask a third, when I was ordered to sit down and another Member in the Assembly was allowed to 

ask a supplementary to my question. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether the Member for 

Rosetown-Elrose last weekend has put you up a tree, that you feel that you must now bend very strongly 

the other way, or whether or not you don’t think my friends to the left are capable of thinking up their 

own questions. I don’t know, if so, communicate that to them. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that if you are 

establishing a new precedent today, in which case you are going to cut a Member off from his line of 

questioning and allow it to be taken over by another Member, I think you should inform the House so 

that we can prepare accordingly. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Members will agree with me that the rules of the Question Period allow the 

Speaker to pick and choose Members to ask questions as the Speaker sees fit. The basis on which the 

Speaker makes his decision about where the question should come from are based primarily on which 

Member rises and secondarily in obtaining a balance of Members asking questions. In other words, the 

questions should not be concentrated in one or two or three Members but should be spread throughout 

the Chamber. Also, in this particular Chamber, the questions should not be 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2174 

 

concentrated in one group. The record will show clearly today as was the case last Friday, or any other 

day, that on balance an average has been maintained. Now, the Member I believe is maybe referring to 

the question he asked about farm land annexation to which I allowed him a supplementary and then I 

allowed the Member for Qu’Appelle a supplementary. Quite often when I’m closing off a question, 

because I don’t feel it’s as pressing as some other possible questions that may be about, I will allow the 

other group to ask one cross supplementary. I’ve done this both ways across the Chamber, so it’s not 

uncommon. I’ve not changed any procedures today from the past. I think if the Member examines the 

records, he’ll find that’s the case. I don’t take into consideration abilities of Members to ask questions. 

I’ll take questions from anybody. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — On the Point of Order, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I 

could just make a comment. I agree completely with what you say as to questions per se and how you 

have to have a proper balance in the number that are asked. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it’s not appropriate 

for you to consider a difference between the main question and the supplementary question. Often, you 

will realize, of course that you have to develop a couple of questions before you reach the stage where 

you ask the final question. 

 

I think that it is sometimes inappropriate for Mr. Speaker, to disallow another supplementary and allow 

another Member to ask a supplementary. Now if Mr. Speaker feels that the subject matter that is being 

covered is not of importance or of urgency, I would suggest to Mr. Speaker that you then cut off all 

questioning rather than disallowing one Member a supplementary and going to another Member for 

another supplementary. It would seem to me to be somewhat contradictory if you are going to allow 

further questions on the particular topic. Surely the Member who introduced the topic, within reason, 

and I stress that — should be allowed to ask the supplementaries that he wishes to ask before you turn to 

another Member, who may have a very good supplementary arising from that particular question. It 

strikes me as being somewhat unfair to cut off one Member for supplementaries on the basis that the 

subject is not of importance or urgency but at the same time allowing another Member to reintroduce the 

subject through another supplementary. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Would you permit an additional comment on that question 

of order? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — A brief comment. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure is aware of the practices of the cuckoo bird. The cuckoo 

bird, as Mr. Speaker knows never builds its own nest but it awaits the construction of a nest by another 

bird and then settles in it. 

 

Now, in no small way, Mr. Speaker, the practice of the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) is to get in 

on somebody else’s questions with a lot of supplementaries. It’s a long standing practice and a kind of a 

cuckoo bird practice. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that’s not only a lack of manners, Mr. Speaker, it demonstrates a lack 

of energy and 



 

April 18, 1977. 

 

2175 

 

originality on his part and a practice, Mr. Speaker, I should think you wouldn’t want to encourage. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t know if that’s a point of order or a lecture to someone in the House. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservatives): — On the Point of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I might remind the Member for Regina South that the cuckoo bird’s 

purpose is to lay an egg. Now, lest anyone feel offended by that, I would say about today, I thought the 

supplementary question which I allowed the Member for Qu’Appelle was a good supplementary. 

Without passing any kind of judgment I thought it enhanced the original question by the very fact that it 

was a good supplementary. 

 

I might at some time, and I have in the past, cut off questions because I felt that the subject had 

deteriorated or it wasn’t important but at other times I have allowed a couple of supplementaries and 

then I have gone to the other group and allowed one supplementary there. I’ll try and not allow the 

perpetration of improper or poor quality questions in the House just because of that reason. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Since you are allowing both groups to comment on the various methods, I would 

like to make a brief comment on the Point of Order that has been raised, and as it relates to birds. I think 

the Member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) has referred to the wrong bird and I think he should refer 

to the dodo bird which is now extinct! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (Cont’d) — VOTE 32 

 

ITEM 1 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Chairman, the Hon. Members will recall vividly 

what happened in this House last Thursday evening when we were considering in Committee of Finance 

the Estimates of the Department of Health. Members will recall that among the things that provoked the 

discussion and caused the calling of the witness, the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital, Mr. 

Hewitt Helmsing, was the remark made by the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) when 

he said: 

 

We could bring documents to this House showing the hospitals which are supposed to be the holy 

sanctum of cleanliness, are filthy and because of the lack of money being put in to maintaining proper 

care adequately. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I thought that after we got finished with Mr. Helmsing that all of that was put to rest, 

particularly in light of the vote. Mr. Chairman, I am glad that the Leader of the Conservative Party (Mr. 

Collver) is here because it is 

 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2176 

 

very often that he leaves the House after the Question Period, and I would hope that he stays with us for 

a while. I am also glad that the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) is here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I was shocked to say the least on Friday morning that after we had heard the testimony of 

Mr. Helmsing, the Leader of the Conservative Party (Mr. Collver) appeared on the CBC morning 

broadcast in an interview and he repeated, again, some of the allegations or words that implied the same 

kind of attack without providing, again, the evidence or the proof. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to table with you a transcript of the CBC broadcast interview, I think, by Lorna 

Jackson, as I recall it, at 8:20 a.m. on April 15, that’s last Friday. I wonder if I can table that transcript. 

We were able to obtain it from the CBC. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I draw to the attention of this House the remarks of the Leader of the Conservative Party 

(Mr. Collver). I do hope that he stays with us, Mr. Chairman. He made a statement that there have been 

major cutbacks in health care expenditures and I am going to refer to that and then he carried on, let me 

quote: 

 

The Regina General Hospital is not at the brink of dangerous conditions as suggested by Mr. 

Helmsing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think Mr. Helmsing spoke for himself. I listened for that entire period. Nowhere, 

nowhere did I hear Mr. Helmsing suggest that the Regina General is at the brink of dangerous 

conditions. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Conservative Party on several occasions — and I have shown in the 

transcript — made reference that they were very concerned about the hospital cutbacks, made the 

reference that the Liberals and the New Democrats in the Legislature decided that they wanted to play 

on words. Mr. Chairman, I think we have demonstrated very conclusively that we are deeply concerned, 

the Liberals and ourselves about the allegations that were made and the proof was not produced by the 

Conservatives. 

 

He repeated that statement on several occasions, Mr. Chairman; he went on to state further that we have 

information that has not been raised at the moment. This was on Friday and he went on to say, ‘but we 

had information from other hospitals in the Province of Saskatchewan that the cutbacks have seriously 

affected their ability to keep their hospitals clean.’ 

 

Mr. Chairman, you will recall that on Wednesday evening Mr. Romanow, it was on Thursday afternoon, 

pardon me, the Attorney General repeatedly asked of the Conservative Party to produce any evidence 

that they had about the filthy hospitals. The only piece of information that they tabled was a letter from 

Local 176 signed by the president. Nowhere did he suggest that the Regina General Hospital was filthy. 

 

We pleaded with them to give us further information so that in the interest of the health care of the 

people of this province, the Department of Health could investigate those allegations. 

 

You will recall that the Attorney General, I don’t know how many times, asked the Conservatives to 

rise, to produce any 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2177 

 

evidence. They obviously didn’t have, at least I felt that they didn’t have any further information 

because they sat there; they did not respond. 

 

We asked, after the testimony of Mr. Helmsing, whether they had any further information, any further 

indication from any hospital that there were unhealthy or unsafe or unclean conditions. Not a single one 

of them came forward to produce any further evidence. 

 

I thought that the chapter of that history was closed and that we would proceed in this House to deal 

with the Estimates. Yet the very next morning the Leader of the Conservative Party (Mr. Collver) 

appeared on the media of the CBC which received the largest hearings throughout the province and 

repeated his allegations, distorted the truth as presented by Mr. Helmsing, saying that they have further 

evidence. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I ask the Conservatives again, that if they have any further information, in the interest of 

health services and in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan, in the interest of protecting the good 

names of the hundreds of hospital board members of the administration of the 132 hospitals, of the 

11,000 employees who work in the hospitals, for goodness sake, have the decency to produce the 

information or stop this harassment of the hospitals of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — It is unfair, it is unjust to spread these kinds of tales that have no substance to 

them. But if you have any information produce it in this House so the Department of Health can 

investigate and correct any problems that there might be. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on several occasions the Conservatives keep repeating about the cuts in health service 

and in hospitals. Mr. Chairman, let me refer him to the Estimates of last year and again this year. Last 

year in the Estimates we provided an increase of $70 million for health services. In the year before the 

estimate was $268 million. It was raised last year in the budget to $338 million, an increase of $70 

million. Hospital care increased by $39 million. This year again we are increasing funds for health 

services from $339 million from what was provided for last year to $404 million in the Department of 

Health and another $200 million for hospital construction and renovation under the Department of 

Government Services and a further $1.6 million in Northern Saskatchewan for close to $408 million in 

health services. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I believe the money we have appropriated last year and this year is an adequate amount 

of money. It is true because of collective bargaining settlements there were some slight shortages but 

during the year additional funds were provided. 

 

I am satisfied that this province is doing as well and better in providing for public health services than 

any province in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I invite the Hon. Members to conduct their own 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2178 

 

inquiries and their own investigations and I think if they have any decency or honesty or truth about 

them, they will find that to be the fact. 

 

But the key issue here, at the moment, Mr. Chairman, and I am glad that the Leader of the Conservative 

Party (Mr. Collver) is back because I am going to ask him to withdraw the allegations that he has made 

on the CBC that I am going to ask him to apologize to Mr. Helmsing for distorting the truth and 

evidence he gave before this House and that he stop spreading this big lie that the Conservatives have 

got on the kick in the last while, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of health care and in the interest of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I would like to remind all Members to be careful and cautious of the 

parliamentary language that we allow in here and I know that it’s an emotional subject, as I have said 

before, but I’m depending on the co-operation of you people to help see this thing through. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I have a question for the Minister of Health, I believe. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — The Leader of the Conservative Party, may as I indicated agree to withdraw the 

allegations and the statements that he made to the CBC, Mr. Chairman. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I have acknowledged the Member on his feet, the Member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. 

Lane). 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A question for the Minister of Health. You have had . . . 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — On a Point of Order, Mr. Chairman, the Minister 

of Finance (Mr. Smishek) today, the Premier on Thursday on two occasions accused the Conservative 

Party and their leader of lying. They have been invited on three occasions, the last of which was just a 

few seconds ago to respond to that charge. My Point of Order is, Mr. Chairman, are the Conservatives 

going to deny that charge? If not, do we then accept it to be the truth and get on with the Estimates? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would have to inform the Hon. Member that I do not consider this a Point of 

Order. It is a Point of Debate and the Member for Qu’Appelle . . . 

 

MR. MALONE: — On a Point of Order, Mr. Chairman. If anybody in this House accuses another 

person of being a liar, it deals with the order and rules of this House. I suggest, Mr. Chairman, it is 

something to be dealt with immediately and if not dealt with immediately or denied, we can accept the 

truth of the accusation and then we just proceed with the other order of business. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2179 

 

If that’s what the Tories want to do, I am more than willing to go ahead with it. I think we have spent far 

too much time on this particular subject as it is. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I believe that any statements that are made outside this House and I take 

it that this was made outside this House, we have no jurisdiction over that. Again, I call on the Member 

for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) to rise and speak what he has to say. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The Government has been under 

some severe pressure to allow the use of the drug or whatever one wishes to call it, laetrile. There is a 

very broad question involved and that is, let’s assume for discussion purposes that laetrile is not 

effective as there seems to be conflict on both sides of the issue. Would it not be proper for the 

Government in a situation like that when there are individuals who are terminally ill from cancer or 

another disease, to at least allow them the satisfaction, even if we assume it not to be plausible, the 

satisfaction and any hopes that they may get from such a drug. If that is the case and we do have a duty 

to grant whatever comfort there may be available, would it not be in order then for the Government, to 

allow the use, through the Medicare system or the Drug Program, the use of plausibles in that case, 

assuming that the particular drug is not effective, and I assume that is the Government’s position. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Health): — Mr. Chairman, we are, of course, dependent upon the 

Food and Drug Directorate of the Department of Health and Welfare with respect to finding out whether 

foods or drugs are proper foods or drugs to be used in Canada and they have not licensed the sale of 

laetrile and they refuse to license the sale of laetrile because they simply say that they have not been 

provided with clinical evidence to merit its usage in terms of control of cancer. I note here a news item 

from San Diego, California, the first person to get legal permission to import laetrile into California is 

dead, a victim of the cancer that he hoped the drug would halt and it names the person and his location. 

He died of cancer of the pancreas late Saturday, three weeks after winning permission from a federal 

judge to bring the controversial apricot extract into the United States from Mexico. Laetrile is banned by 

the Food and Drug Administration as ineffective in cancer treatment. That’s true in the United States; 

it’s also true in Canada. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, are you taking then the position that the drug is ineffective. That is what 

your quote would lead one to believe, that the drug is ineffective. Is that what you are saying? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We haven’t conducted any experiments ourselves. The information we get from 

reputable people in the United States and the governmental authorities in the United States and the 

governmental authorities in Canada indicate that it is not effective. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2180 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I revert to my first question. If a compound or whatever one wishes to 

describe the product is accepted as at least being an article of hope for those terminally ill, are you 

saying then that the Government has no duty to supply this product? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, I am saying we haven’t because we would be going against the laws of 

Canada and we happen to be part of Canada. 

 

MR. LANE: — How is it possible then for a doctor in Alberta to be distributing the product? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We haven’t any legal authority to do it here. We can’t speak for what they do in 

Alberta. 

 

MR. LANE: — Are they not under the same rules? You have quoted the Food and Drug Act, which 

applies consistently across Canada. I suggest that if individuals in Alberta are supplying the product, that 

you can’t hide behind the Food and Drug Act for your reasons for not supplying it. Now are you really 

just saying that it’s not effective and you simply do not intend to supply the product? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We cannot be held responsible for other people in another jurisdiction who break 

the law. 

 

MR. KWASNICA (Cut Knife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Chairman, I’m just a little bit concerned that the 

Leader of the Conservatives and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland hasn’t responded to any of the 

comments made today in the House. As the MLA for my constituency, I immediately took the 

comments made by the Leader of the PC Party on radio the other day very seriously after we had heard 

the evidence from Mr. Helmsing. I phoned the hospitals in my constituency. Now I have four hospitals 

in my riding and I thought that this kind of charge about the hospitals in the province needed to be 

looked into so I took the liberty to phone each of the hospitals this morning because this is serious, a 

serious charge. It has cast allegations on hospital boards, on administrators and I want to inform the 

Members, those Members on the opposite side over there who want to continue this type of 

rumormongering in the province. I phoned all my hospitals. I want to document the information that I 

received this morning by telephone. 

 

I started at Lloydminster and I simply talked to the Administrator there and I asked him whether he 

thought his hospital was filthy. And his answer was immediately, “It is definitely not filthy.” Then I 

explained what had happened in Regina and he said, “Yes I heard about it. I know what has happened in 

Regina the last few days.” And he said I want to make it definite that the health of the patient is not in 

jeopardy in this hospital in Lloydminster. 

 

The administrator in Lloydminster added information very quickly saying: “But, today as a matter of 

fact we are renovating in the hospital and we are putting in a brand new air 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2181 

 

conditioning system, or phase three of it,” and he said that the hospital may not be as clean as we would 

like it to be while renovations are going on and I would like to point out to the Members opposite, the 

Conservatives, that maybe they ought to take a look at this localized situation and not say, ‘aha, but on 

April 14 or 17 or 18, Lloydminster hospital was not as clean as it should have been.’ 

 

Now that’s one hospital. All I can say is that the administrator there was absolutely — he couldn’t 

believe it, he was dumbfounded. Then I phoned Maidstone. That’s a 22-bed hospital. The administrator 

there hadn’t heard about the squabble down here at all and he simply said, “I can’t speak for any other 

hospitals. There’s nothing wrong here. It’s definitely not unclean.” 

 

That was interesting so I went on to Neilburg, an 8-bed hospital there. I talked to the matron. The same 

questions were asked in the same order as I had been asking them all. How did they feel the cleanliness 

in their hospital was? She said, “I trust that ours is clean. We have been keeping the same housekeeping 

rules for the past several years. Cultures are sent, the water supply sample was just sent last week. 

Everything is the same as it was in the last four years. No problem here.” 

 

And then I phoned Cut Knife hospital and that’s a hospital not far from North Battleford. I thought that 

the comments made there by the matron were very interesting. First question was, “Do you feel your 

hospital is unclean, filthy?” She said, “Oh, mine isn’t!” And I said, “Well we had some problems in the 

Legislature here, statements being made by the Conservatives in this House that the hospitals in the 

province are not fit, they are unclean, they’re filthy.” And she was just absolutely horrified. She said to 

that, Mr. Chairman, and I quote, “Oh, fiddle!” And she said, “Well, I don’t know where they get that 

information from; it is just a malicious rumor, one of the many that have been spread around lately.” 

 

And that’s not me, an NDP Member for Cut Knife, speaking, that’s a matron in a hospital in my 

constituency and these are the very people that the Conservatives say, local autonomy, we’ll give you all 

the autonomy. Give it to them, let’s protect local autonomy. Where is local autonomy protected here in 

this House when the Conservative Members do the kind of things they have done in the last few days? 

They absolutely belittled them and that’s all. 

 

Now these are just some of the comments I had to place on the record in this House because I think it 

had to be done. I want to make it clear once and for all — all the hospital boards and all the staff in my 

constituency are free from this really false information that has been given in this House. They have 

insulted the staff; they have insulted the chairmen of boards, the boards, all the local people and I just 

can’t stand for this kind of thing. The credibility of the Conservative Party is absolutely down the drain 

today when they pursue this kind of tactic. Mr. Chairman, I am waiting to hear more from the Member 

for Saskatoon Sutherland who should apologize to the hospitals in my riding, to all the hard working 

people there and the people of Saskatchewan and stop this bickering and stupidity and falsehood that 

they have been spreading around this province like you wouldn’t believe. And I would like to hear some 

answers. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2182 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — I just want to say a few words on these health 

estimates and in particular on the actions that have been taken in this House in the past few days by the 

Member for Saskatoon Sutherland and in particular the Leader of the Conservative Party. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I thought it was bad enough when the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland cast an 

aspersion not only on the Regina General Hospital, but on all hospitals in this province when he called 

them filthy. He later said that he was willing to change that a little bit and maybe just heavily soiled 

would do instead. I think, Mr. Chairman, it was the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland who was playing 

with words, because it is one thing to say that someone’s house is heavily soiled and it is quite another 

thing to say that they are filthy. I think it carried a different connotation with it. But nevertheless we got 

into that debate here last Thursday and we went through it. We called for the first time in some quarter 

of a century, I think, a person before this House to testify. And following that we had a long, well I 

guess it was a rather short debate in which the Conservatives were so embarrassed they didn’t even take 

part in it. And we passed a motion. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that seems to me that we sort of had laid the matter to rest and I would have 

thought that then all Members would have left here, gone away and we would have put to rest the issue 

of the cleanliness of our hospitals. I listened very carefully to the statements made by Mr. Helmsing and 

I listened very carefully to the questions put by Members on this side and that side of the House, and I 

want to say, Mr. Chairman, it really bothered me on Friday morning when I looked at the transcript of 

the statements made by the Leader of the Conservative Party on CBC Radio. Here we had spent the 

whole day, in fact a day and a half in this Legislature, we had called before us a reputable witness, I 

thought that we had made it pretty clear to all the Members of this House that there were no particular 

problems with respect to cleanliness in the Regina General Hospital. I thought that it was patently clear. 

 

You know I listened to Mr. Bailey’s question. He said, and I quote, “Mr. Chairman, so then it is possible 

then, with working under such stringent conditions that the amount of care that was previously taken in 

general housekeeping could have somewhat been neglected?” Mr. Helmsing replied, “Certainly not in 

the patient care areas. I want to emphasize that in the patient care areas, where we are concerned with 

the treatment of critically ill people in our institution, that the level of housekeeping did not experience 

any problems.” 

 

Mr. MacDonald, the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley asked a question and in response Mr. Helmsing 

said, “We have not been concerned that the sanitary condition of this hospital has been a hazard to 

health.” Mr. Helmsing said later on, “The administration I do not believe has at any time indicated to 

officials of the department that the level of housekeeping at this point in time presented a health hazard 

as far as the operation of the hospital is concerned.” Later on he said, “Let me again emphasize that in 

the patient care areas that the level of housekeeping has been maintained.” 

 

The Leader of the Opposition asked a question. He said, “Mr. Chairman, I have just a couple of very 

brief questions to 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2183 

 

Mr. Helmsing. At this time, are you under any apprehension, if that is the correct word, that the standard 

of cleanliness at the Regina General Hospital is such that a serious health problem could result?” Mr. 

Helmsing: “No, not at this point in time.” Mr. Malone: “Indeed, Mr. Helmsing, if you did have that 

apprehension I spoke about, I assume you would immediately communicate that apprehension to the 

Department of Public Health and responsible officials?” Mr. Helmsing: “That is correct.” Mr. Helmsing 

said, “We have been faced with restraints which I think other areas have been faced with and we have 

had to work within parameters. And we feel that we have worked quite successfully within those 

parameters. That’s not to say that we wouldn’t appreciate more money — anybody would — but we 

have been able to maintain a good standard as far as I am concerned.” And later again, “I want to 

emphasize that at this point in time, there is certainly no health hazard as far as the General Hospital is 

concerned or any other institution that I am aware of and I have a lot of association with all the hospitals 

in this province.” 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t quarrel with those statements of Mr. Helmsing. I don’t quarrel with 

Members raising questions to Mr. Helmsing in this House. But I tell you I am bitterly disappointed and I 

do quarrel with the Leader of the Conservative Party who sat here through all of those questions and 

answers the very next day saying the Regina General Hospital is now at the brink of dangerous 

conditions as suggested by Mr. Helmsing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that seems to me to be just twisting slightly Mr. Helmsing’s statements before this 

House. That seems to me Mr. Chairman, to be a man in deep political trouble with his own caucus and 

the rest of this House, trying to billow himself out. That seems to me, Mr. Chairman, to be a Member 

who is too cowardly to sit in this House and respond to those charges. But when the issue is raised by 

the Minister of Finance, he toddles off out of the House and doesn’t come back. Mr. Chairman, I think 

that Members of the Conservative caucus have an obligation to lay before this House the documentation 

for the statements made by the Leader of the Conservative Party on the CBC or he should stand in this 

House and withdraw those remarks and apologize to Mr. Helmsing. 

 

MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Chairman, I think that it is very necessary that the 

Members of this Legislative Assembly look on what has happened in the last short number of days and 

reflect upon what it means in their respective constituencies and their respective communities. 

 

I happen to sit on the Moose Jaw City Council and some years ago I sat on the Moose Jaw Union 

Hospital Board. At that particular time we had an obligation as the Moose Jaw Union Hospital Board to 

look after the supervision and administration of that hospital which included the surrounding 

municipalities. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on Friday evening we had the availability of our Attorney General in Moose Jaw; he 

attended a meeting there. There were some 250 people at a banquet and at that particular meeting our 

Attorney General dealt with what had happened here on Friday previous and the Thursday and the 

questions that were asked in this House. Following that, I asked the people at that assembly at that time 

at that meeting whether or not they believe that the Moose Jaw Union Hospital was dirty and filthy. The 

answer came back loud and clear — it 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2184 

 

was not. I asked the people at that meeting whether or not they thought the Providence Hospital was 

dirty and filthy and the answer came back, it is not. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I do believe, as the other Members have suggested here today and previous to this day, 

that those people opposite and particularly the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) and 

particularly the Leader of the Conservative Party, have an obligation to the people of this province to say 

which hospitals are dirty and filthy, if in fact they are. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I am also suggesting that those people and those employees in Moose Jaw, both at the 

Moose Jaw Union and the Providence Hospital are represented by the Service Employees International 

Union. I asked the chairman of that organization whether or not in fact he had received any thoughts 

whatsoever or any information that those hospitals that they manage, that they clean, were dirty and 

filthy. The answer was absolutely not. The Member came into this House the other day with a letter 

from CUPE that did not say that the hospitals were dirty and filthy, but he insinuated that they were and 

he has repeated it many times since. The Service Employees International Union that look after the 

Moose Jaw Union and the Providence Hospital have said that those hospitals are not dirty and filthy. 

They have said that they may be short of staff, but at no time would they degrade their jobs to the extent 

that they would allow those hospitals to be dirty and filthy. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I suggest that if the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland and if the Leader of the 

Conservative Party do not stand up in this House and say which other hospitals are allegedly dirty and 

filthy, then we in this province could expect an epidemic to come upon us and they will be responsible 

for not telling this House if in fact any hospitals are dirty and filthy. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I should like to direct a question to the Minister of Health at this time. I am wondering 

whether or not his department has any drug called the truth serum which could be provided free of 

charge to the Leader of the Conservative Party and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I suggest at this time that this House cannot stand for half truths, mistruths and outright 

lies unless those people are prepared to stand up and say what they mean. I say that without hesitation. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Order, please! I have brought to your attention before, the word — I have 

never quoted it, but it is the word “lies” which has been used on frequent occasions and I am afraid that 

you apparently are not taking note of what I am saying. 

 

I would like to refer to Beauchesne, page 130, Item 3, Chapter 154: 

 

The imputation of bad motives or motives different from those acknowledged misrepresenting the 

language of another or accusing him in his turn of misrepresentation charging him with falsehood or 

deceit or contemptuous or insulting language of any kind, all these are unparliamentary and call for 

prompt interference. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2185 

 

So to all Hon. Members I am interfering with this type of language. I ask you to refrain from using it for 

the betterment of the Legislative Assembly, for the betterment of progress of all people, for the 

betterment of your constituencies which you represent. This applies to all of you. 

 

MR. B. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Chairman, on a Point of Order. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as you know I am a new Member of the Legislature and I am not familiar with all the 

rules. What is the way that a private Member would operate when he knows that a Member of the 

Legislature has deliberately lied, deliberately lied about a very serious question, public business of the 

province. He knows that he has lied; he can’t say that he has lied, he can’t tell the truth and say that he 

has lied because it is unparliamentary. What is the procedure that a private Member like myself might 

take under those circumstances? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Order please! As Chairman of the Committee I cannot proceed to give 

you the advice as to how you conduct your words. But I should like to quote to you, page 126, Chapter 

145: 

 

That it has been formally ruled by Speakers in the Canadian Commons that a statement by an Hon. 

Member in respect of himself and peculiarly within his own knowledge must be accepted, but is not 

unparliamentary to temperately criticize statements made by a Member as being contrary to facts, but 

no imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible. 

 

A statement made by a Member in his place is considered as made upon honor and cannot be 

questionable in the House or out of it. 

 

MR. G. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Chairman, would it be unparliamentary to suggest that 

the Leader of the Conservative Party and the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland consistently use the 

truth with wild and reckless abandon? I think, Mr. Chairman, if that is parliamentary, I think I would 

have to say that we on this side of the House, those of us who have been around for a few years have 

seen this Legislature subjected to a new low in parliamentary debate. If Members opposite, the Member 

for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Lane) and his leader, both in and out of the House are able to take 

positions that have been renounced in total on the floor of this House; if the Leader of the Conservative 

Party can go on radio the day following and repeat understandings and allegations that have been totally 

refuted by a member who sat on the floor of this Legislature and under oath gave that understanding and 

commitment to all Members of this Assembly; if Members of the Conservative Party believe that they 

are at liberty to repeat those untruths outside of the House and sit here, Mr. Chairman, like a bunch of 

timid coyotes unable to rise to their feet to defend themselves, then this indicates to me that they use the 

truth with wild and reckless abandon. 

 

They don’t have the courage, they don’t have the decency to stand in their place and defend the actions 

that they take in this House or out of the House. The Leader of the Conservative Party hasn’t got the 

decency to sit here and face the music! 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2186 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, that the proceedings in this Assembly have developed to a new low since the 

Conservative Party acquired at least one new Member. Whether he is setting the tone for the 

Conservative caucus from this point on, time will tell. Like the Attorney General, I think we are all 

perhaps inclined to despair, if that is the case. The Leader of the Conservatives doesn’t have the 

intestinal fortitude to stand and defend actions and defend statements which he made publicly over the 

radio on Friday, hasn’t got the decency or the courage to stand in his place and defend the position 

which he took, I say in a deliberate effort to confuse and to mislead the public. So I say once again, Mr. 

Chairman, if it is parliamentary, that the Conservatives, particularly the new Member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland and the Leader of the Conservative Party used the truth with deliberate wild and reckless 

abandon. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order please! I would say that it is quite in order for any Hon. Member (and I 

would hope that you would be all Hon. Members) to say something is untrue while it is false. According 

to the rules that are laid out for us to follow, I think that you cannot accuse a specific Member of quoting 

a deliberate lie. I have to make that judgment. I think many of your quotations and many of the things 

that you are saying perhaps are permissible if they are put in the right phrase and the right way of doing 

it. But I have to draw a line and this is what I am trying to do. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Member for Moose Jaw North asked if we had any truth serum available. We 

haven’t, but we have a few swine flu shots left. I think it would be appropriate if the Members would 

offer themselves for immunization. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. NELSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Chairman, I too am very concerned about the level of debate. The 

Members in this House unanimously adopted a motion last Thursday, stating that the charges of the 

Conservative Members concerning filthy hospitals were unfounded. That was a unanimous agreement, 

and they voted for it, to a man. We also heard, as the Member for Biggar has mentioned, and other 

Members have mentioned, that the witness was called and brought in this Chamber under oath to give 

his testimony. Now then, the Conservative Leader steps out of this House after voting for that motion, 

states that the Regina General Hospital is in a dangerous condition. 

 

Certainly that is not what he voted for in the motion. I say, Mr. Chairman, that that is a direct affront to 

the witness that was here, Mr. Helmsing. I say that it was a direct affront. I say that the conditions as 

reported in all of the reports that were laid before the Chamber concerning the Regina General Hospital 

definitely did not indicate that it was in any kind of a dangerous condition. 

 

I therefore say, Mr. Chairman, that the Conservative Leader by stepping out of this House, if he is in any 

way telling the truth, must say that the witness was a liar while speaking here under oath. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2187 

 

He also indicated that there were other hospitals that were filthy as well. I couldn’t help after hearing the 

Leader of the Conservative Party dealing with the question at 8:20 on Friday morning, I couldn’t help 

but consult the administrator of the Yorkton Union Hospital. There is no way that I want to have any 

indication that the hospital in Yorkton was at all unclean or unfit for use. I asked Mr. Parsons what he 

felt about the cleanliness of his hospital. He said he thought his was one of the cleanest in the province. 

He said it was because they have good housekeeping practices among other things. He said we have an 

excellent executive housekeeper, we have an assistant housekeeper who supervises the workers at all 

times in cleaning, scrubbing of floors, dusting and so on. Besides that, Mr. Chairman, the lab is 

continually monitoring the central supply, the food services centre, the morgue, etc., for all sorts of 

bacteria that may be present. Two checks, Mr. Chairman, supervision of workers plus a continuous 

check through the lab. Mr. Parsons stated further that he continually checks these reports. I would like to 

give you an example of a couple of those reports, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Oral thermometers are allowed a bacterial count from 0 to 5, the bacterial count on the oral 

thermometers was 1. Rectal thermometers, again allowable bacterial count 0 to 5, the actual count 0, that 

is on the last report that he had. The lab reports are continuously checked by the administrator of the 

hospital. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Chairman, but the city of Yorkton like the city of Regina carries out continuous 

checks on garbage, on dietary areas, and checks for rodents and so on. They take swabs and do a 

continuous check. Besides, like the Regina General Hospital, the Yorkton hospital has hospital 

accreditation. 

 

The Canadian Council on hospital accreditation sends two people who spend two days going over this 

hospital most thoroughly. Yorkton Union Hospital, I will state is fully accredited. If the Members would 

like I could take a picture of the plaque that is in front of our hospital and bring it to them and show 

them that it has full accreditation and again this year once more the hospital is coming up for its 

accreditation inspection. Mr. Parsons further stated that the inspection was a rough one. I, too, checked 

with the President of the local union, Mr. Grant Ross, of CUPE Local No. 600. He said, I can be quoted 

as saying that the cleanliness of the hospital has not deteriorated in any fashion in the past year. He said 

I haven’t heard any complaints at all about cleanliness. On the way out of that hospital I was, you know, 

rather disturbed in that I found some cigarette butts in the ash trays, Mr. Chairman. I guess maybe that is 

the filthy part that they were referring to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the performance of the Conservative caucus opposite is despicable. 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Continuing Education): — There is another aspect of this situation 

which disturbs me greatly and that is that Thursday, last, when the issue was in my mind, resolved in 

this Assembly, when we went to the extraordinary measure of having a private citizen come here and 

give testimony and then we passed a motion, all of the Members of this House passing that motion, I 

thought that would resolve the issue. Then to have a Member of this Assembly go 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2188 

 

out and give statements to the media contradicting what we as an entire Assembly had done the night 

before, strikes me that we are getting into raising questions of the sovereignty of parliament. I know that 

there are Members here who would have differing views in respect to the person of John Diefenbaker, 

but I don’t think there is anybody on any side of this House that would say that there is any man in the 

history of this country who stood more for the sovereignty of parliament than John Diefenbaker. I ask all 

Members of this House including those Members who like to call themselves Conservatives whether or 

not they think that John Diefenbaker the next day after parliament deliberating on a subject like this and 

making a decision, whether John Diefenbaker would then go out to the media with these misleading and 

untrue statements to the media. I wonder how many people then would think that John Diefenbaker 

would be back in the Assembly the next day knowing that his statements were being questioned, and 

Mr. Collver was here and knew that his statements were being questions, would then walk out and not 

have the courage or the honesty to stand up and defend what he had again repeated. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think that the sovereignty of parliament, the parliamentary tradition has never been 

brought to a lower point than by the present, and I hope temporary Leader of the Conservative Party in 

this province. When he is unwilling to stand and defend what he says in public in this House, when 

apparently he gives orders to his Members not to rise and defend him even in his absence, then I think 

this is a very low point indeed. And what further troubles me is whether or not the Conservative press in 

this province which has been so demonstrative in the last months, will have the honesty to represent 

what has happened in this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Education): — Mr. Chairman, I am deeply concerned with 

what has transpired in this Assembly, particularly what has transpired on the part of some Members of 

this Assembly after they leave this Assembly. I am concerned because I think we have seen now cast 

upon every Member of this House possibly, I think unfairly, and on politicians or people who are elected 

to Legislatures as a whole, some kind of a shroud of suspicion because of the actions of some Members 

of that Conservative Party seated on the other side of this House. 

 

There is a bigger issue here, Mr. Chairman, than simply that specific issue that the Member for 

Sutherland raised, as serious as that is. We have heard from time to time across this country as we have 

in North America, people questioning our democratic political system and when I see the kind of 

unacceptable and disgraceful tactics used by the Leader of the Conservative Party (Mr. Collver) and the 

Member for Sutherland (Mr. Lane) one can hardly help but understand why there are some people who 

think the way they do about it. 

 

There is another point here, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Sutherland raised. He obviously cannot 

substantiate it; he dares not substantiate it because he has nothing to substantiate it with, but I know that 

the Leader of the Conservative Party right after the Question Period or shortly after, left. He is out in the 

country I suppose saying the same 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2189 

 

things as the Member for the Conservative Party said in here which we thought were cleared up the 

other day by the testimony of Mr. Helmsing. That kind of political manoeuvring, Mr. Chairman, ought 

to be totally unacceptable. But it is not the first time that that has happened, because there have been 

other situations. There have been general allegations made without any substantiation provided to those 

allegations. We have heard the Conservative Party talk about, for example the educational system and 

we have heard the critics and the Member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) say the curriculum is a 

mess. And when I got up and asked him what he means by that, he had no answer. And we have heard 

them say, Mr. Chairman, that there are problems in our public library system in the same way that they 

say that our hospitals are filthy, but when you ask them what they mean they have nothing to say. It has 

been made clear or obviously been made clear the kinds of deceitful things they’ve been talking about 

when they talk about the people on the welfare rolls, the old people and people who obviously need to 

be there and they throw them all into the same pot. If you ask them to substantiate it, Mr. Speaker, they 

cannot substantiate it. Now they have done it with the hospitals of Saskatchewan. By doing these things, 

Mr. Chairman, they have cast blame and suspicion on boards of hospitals, of school boards or members 

of school boards, on every teacher in Saskatchewan, on dedicated people who serve of their own free 

time, on our public library boards, so this is not an isolated case. It shows us something about the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. It shows us the very dangerous side of the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

We heard a speech in this Assembly in the Budget Debate about the Conservative Party that used to be. I 

know it’s a long time ago, 1929 thereabouts. Some of the Members opposite rose and said we had 

nothing to do with that. But let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, that what we have seen happen in the last 

several days, clearly shows that there is no difference, there has been no change, there has been no 

transformation and the kinds of things that happened in ’29 where people were pitted against people, 

where organizations were pitted against organization, where certain people were not allowed to come to 

this province because they came from the wrong part of the world, those kinds of things, Mr. Chairman, 

clearly are still the kinds of things that those Members opposite stand for because they have not yet had 

the courage to substantiate what they say, to get up in this House to either deny it or provide the proof. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, this afternoon I started debate on this item, I started because I was 

very concerned about what happened last Friday. At that time the Leader of the Conservative Party was 

here and so was the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland. I thought it was important to draw to the 

attention of the House, after we heard a witness who gave evidence, in respect of the Regina General 

Hospital. The very next day the Leader of the Conservative Party, I think totally misrepresented the 

evidence, as the evidence will show, when he said on CBC at 8:20, “The Regina General Hospital is 

now at a brink of dangerous conditions, as suggested by Mr. Helmsing.” Nowhere did I hear Mr. 

Helmsing suggest that. Mr. Helmsing said the exact opposite. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2190 

 

He went on to say that the Conservatives have further information to show that there are hospitals that 

are dirty. We begged them on Thursday and I beg them again to give us the information. It’s probably 

during the period of that discussion that I simply asked the Leader of the Conservative Party to provide 

the evidence, to withdraw the remarks that he made, or stop spreading the big lie. Mr. Chairman, I’m 

prepared to withdraw that remark, because I don’t want to use that word. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it seems to me by the Conservatives, by the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland, by the 

Leader of the Conservative Party, saying what was said on Friday, after the evidence was presented 

here, it seems to me, and I’m not a lawyer, (we do have a half dozen lawyers) it seems to me if a person 

was in court and gave evidence or heard the evidence and the next day did what the Leader of the 

Conservative Party did, I think he would be held in contempt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I withdraw the reference that I made to stop spreading the big 

lie, but, Mr. Chairman, I do want to substitute that the Conservative Party or Members and particularly 

their Leader, stop holding this Legislature in contempt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if much more can be said 

on this matter, but I feel obligated as well to enter into the debate very briefly on this particular point. I 

do so because this has been alluded to, at least I think it has been, while I stepped away out of the House 

for a moment this afternoon, because I don’t really know where we turn in politics or political life after 

the situation that we’re in today. The situation that we’re in today, as of this afternoon, as I see it, really 

is this. There is an allegation, subsequently there is, what I would say, a modified withdrawal of the 

allegation. There is an outside witness, first in 25 years, called in to give evidence under oath. There is a 

resolution passed unanimously in this House. That I think would have ended the matter. 

 

After that sequence of events took place, the Leader of the Conservative Party appears on CBC radio 

and makes the comments with respect to the brink of collapse already alluded to by my colleagues, 

totally in contempt of the proceedings of the Legislature. 

 

I suppose the mechanism that really should be followed is to bring in a motion for contempt or a motion 

of censure of the Leader of the Conservative Party, as I would bring it in or perhaps as some Members 

might consider bringing it in. 

 

I think when the Legislature takes a decision and when a Member goes out and wilfully and purposely 

ignores that decision, what other judgment can be made, but that it is contemptuous of parliament. I 

guess that we’ve gotten to that point of affairs in political life, now in Saskatchewan, that we treat what 

takes place here with indifference. We view that whatever takes place or whatever is said here can be 

interpreted in one’s own special way. It seems to me that the MLAs and the media all share some of the 

blame for what I have described to be one of the lowest 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2191 

 

states of affairs in Saskatchewan politics that we’ve been in for a long time, brought about by the 

Conservative Party, basically because of this issue, although it’s not the only issue. 

 

I am troubled after the sitting on Thursday night when I picked up the Friday morning paper, the day 

after. I read only the summary on page one of the Leader-Post, the Friday Leader-Post paper, April 15, 

1977, had the following quotation: 

 

After the sitting Lane (referring to the Member for Saskatoon Sutherland) insisted that he was correct 

in his initial statement about hospitals . . . 

 

If you could just take that statement out, the initial statement was to the transcript that I have in front of 

me, 

 

We could bring documentation into this House showing that hospitals which are supposed to be the 

holy sanctum of cleanliness are filthy. 

 

And it goes on. And a Member outside the Legislature, having heard all of the evidence, having voted 

with the motion, having said, it has been a debate or perhaps an unfortunate choice of words in cool, 

calm, quotation unless it’s a misquote and I haven’t heard him say that it is, gets up and he insists that 

his initial statement about hospitals was correct. 

 

Now, what are we to do, Mr. Chairman? I don’t know what we are to do and then in the same story, 

referring again to Mr. Lane, the Member for Sutherland, I quote: 

 

He also said the matter was not over and the PCs would comment further. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman there are a number of issues one can see readily. There is this issue of what I say is 

the contempt of Parliament exhibited by the Conservative caucus. Mr. Chairman, this is from a caucus 

which says we are not punishing our criminals, that there is a lack of law and order and yet this 

Legislative Assembly which is the highest elective body in Saskatchewan, when it in effect promulgates 

an order or comes to a decision, it’s the very same Members who talk about contempt of law and order 

and respect for our institutions who walk right outside the Assembly and say, I don’t care what the 

decision was, I don’t care what the remarks are, here is what I’m telling you for my political purposes 

the remarks are. Is it a wonder that things like crime and law and order and all of these issues are things 

which are fundamentally now at issue, when you get the elected representatives of whom we are to 

expect our public to follow, who our public expects to lead, taking this kind of a position. I don’t know 

where we go from here. That’s one issue. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is another issue on this matter as well. That is that statement that I quoted earlier, 

that the matter was not over and the PCs would comment further. Mr. Chairman, I think that it is fair and 

proper and correct for me as an MLA and as a Member of the Legislative Assembly and as a Member of 

the Government, to say that if that statement is true, that information must come forward now on Item 1, 

Health Estimates. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2192 

 

I think it is perfectly proper for me to say that I can’t tolerate the suggestion that somebody might have 

some evidence that hospitals are filthy (scratch the word filthy) that they are unclean, put any word you 

want in there, less than clean than they should be, affecting patient care, and an MLA to say that I will 

not table that documentation until I see fit to do so, for my political purposes. What happens if we get 

finished with Health Estimates, Mr. Chairman and then some documentation is purported to be tabled, 

forgetting about the fact that a potential health hazard, if there is such evidence, may have continued for 

some days or weeks, forgetting about that? What does the Minister of Health do by way of rebuttal? 

How does the Minister of Health put forward his side of the story? How do we check into the matter to 

try and get it cleaned up? 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what in the world we’re to do. I don’t know what the public will say of 

this or what the press will say of this. It’s our only way to get to the public. Sometimes I think I regret 

that I voted against televising the proceedings in this Assembly, having watched this important debate. I 

don’t know what we should do. I just am perplexed at what I consider to be the sad state of affairs. If 

somebody in the Conservative Party got up and said, look we categorically withdraw these statements, 

then I think it would go a long way to at least taking away the concern of hospital boards. It would take 

away our concerns as Members of the Government. It would at least restore some kind of respect for the 

institution which is parliament, some kind of respect for the institution which is law and order, which we 

as legislators, seek to pass. They don’t do it; they won’t do it and I predict, Mr. Chairman, that it’s more 

than that. I predict that if there should be a letter, as hastily drafted as such a letter may appear in hand 

writing, dated the day after the issue arose as per your telephone request, whatever the issue is, that we’ll 

come back again and we’ll be hit as a government unfairly again. The press will ballyhoo that again to 

the largest scenario that they can and they’ll dismiss that as those NDP guys who are always paranoid 

about the press or whatever. That’s what will happen. Mr. Chairman, I say that that is really a second 

issue in this matter. 

 

I want to close my remarks, Mr. Chairman, by saying one more thing. I think that if there is nothing that 

this debate has proven apart from the fact that the Conservative Leader shows a contempt for parliament, 

apart from the fact that there is no credibility in the Conservative Leader, none. Credibility, 

Conservatives talking about a political sail and they have a political sail in the wind. They may have. 

Mr. Chairman, 1979 is a long way to go. Credibility of a leader and of a party is key to 1979. I say that 

when a leader gets up and shows that incredibility, if it was at all properly reported, I wouldn’t count 

very much on that wind being in that political sail, unless you show a total contempt for what the public 

thinks out there, from what the public, really you feel can understand about this. But I say over and 

above those two issues of contempt of parliament and credibility of the Conservative caucus and I think 

there will be other instances to illustrate this too, there is this issue of concern for health. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I submit to the people of Saskatchewan and this Legislature, that for the party that talked 

about putting care back into medicare, what their silence today has demonstrated is no care for medicare. 

No concern for hospital patients 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2193 

 

who may be concerned about their irresponsible and wild statements. No concern about documentation. 

No concern about directly or indirectly smearing Mr. Helmsing or other hospital board directors. No 

concern whatsoever for that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this is not a party that is concerned about medicare and hospitalization. This is a party 

that doesn’t know the fundamental philosophical basis upon which medicare and hospitalization is 

based. This is a party which seeks to adopt to its own bosom something which it would have opposed 

and indeed many of them did oppose in 1962 and earlier when the legislation was passed. This is a party 

which tries to clutch this principle of medicare and hospitalization when it shows a total disregard for 

that concept, not even knowing what it’s about and a contempt for the Legislature and a contempt for the 

people who are concerned with respect to their safety in this whole debate. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is a fundamental issue. I say that on this issue alone I wouldn’t count on too much 

political sail, if I were the Conservatives in 1979, because I don’t believe that the people of 

Saskatchewan will for one moment entrust, that’s the word it is, trust, the Conservative Leader and the 

Conservative caucus with medicare and hospitalization, based on what I believe to have been one of the 

shabbiest performances in the last several years in this Saskatchewan Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I don’t really know how to 

begin this. Perhaps I should begin by saying, a plague on both their houses. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Why, what have we done? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, a couple of things. First of all I’m going to say that I think there are two 

sides to this issue. First of all I am extremely disappointed and we sat here on Friday, Members of the 

Liberal caucus, last week for two days and listened to this debate go on. The Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Malone) proposed a motion and tried to bring some common sense and bring the Assembly back to 

order. The press came out afterward and said that the Liberals and the Government ganged up on the 

Conservatives, because we voted for a particular resolution that all three parties voted for. We have 

stayed out of this particular battle for two reasons. First of all I have absolutely no respect for a party 

that will permit themselves to be called a liar on five or six or seven or eight different occasions and 

none of them have enough guts to stand up and say they’re wrong. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s number one. I can have no support for a party whose Leader will permit 

a young, new member to come into this Assembly and make a mistake, serious and grave as it was, 

compounded then by the statements of his own leader and then when a resolution comes forward, that 

leader doesn’t even have enough courage to stand on his feet and defend that new Member. I should like 

to suggest to anyone, had he or she been in this Assembly a few years ago that when a man named Ross 

Thatcher 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2194 

 

was here, the fight would be going from now until Christmas before any new young Member would 

have been attacked in that fashion by anyone opposite. And I would like to hope that nobody in this 

Assembly will ever attack one of my backbenchers and I speak for all of us, for the battle would go on 

until Hell freezes over. And I say that in all honesty. I can have no respect for a political party and the 

use of the word ‘filthy’ in a hospital situation was a serious and a grave one. I believe it was 

compounded, as does the Government, by the statement on the CBC and perhaps that was even more 

serious, even more serious. 

 

However, Mr. Chairman, I think we have flogged a dead horse. And what concerns me equally as much 

as my Members to the left, is the fact that the Government is using this issue to try and get off the health 

issue and get the people of Saskatchewan off their back for the very bad job that they did over the past 

year. And I make no apologies to this particular party for the stupidity of the actions that they have 

undertaken in the last three days and the gravity of the charges. But what bothers me as much is their 

inability, is the fact that the Government by spending three days about the one issue and the one estimate 

has successfully kept the debate off the thing that is of concern to the people. There are many, many 

issues in health that transcend the idiotic accusation of filth on the floors and corridors because no one 

would tolerate that and no one would stand for that. I would think that at any time and at any day in any 

week of the year that anyone could walk into the Pasqua or the General right after visiting hours and 

find it in a pretty unclean state, simply because 1,000 people had just walked up and down the corridors. 

 

Gentlemen there are issues in health that are far more important and that’s the thing that bothers me 

most about the Tories. They thought they had a real big issue, to talk about whether or not the 

maintenance staff swept the floors of the hospitals once or twice or three times. And that’s the state of 

the capacity of their ability to oppose and point out the weaknesses of the government programs, 

particularly in the Department of Health. And for that reason, Mr. Chairman, I suggest to you that you 

went far beyond the laws that permit you to be a chairman of this House and I say that with due respect, 

when I hear Member after Member get up and make accusations of untruths and use the word ‘liar,’ and 

as I say, I say that with all due respect. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there are issues in health that are serious. I am going to start now and turn to one of those 

arguments so that I don’t become involved in this debate that has gone on for three days. 

 

A week ago the Annual Report of the University Hospital was tabled in this House, a report that bore 

witness to everything and every accusation that had been against the NDP and its treatment of health and 

the near collapse of health services in this province. I want to read from just the beginning of it: 

 

The year 1976 can best be described as a year of strikes, threats of strikes, budget restraints, staff cuts, 

late advice on operating budget and significant stress within the medical staff in regard to facilities 

available for service and teaching requirements. It is sincerely hoped that the day to day crisis decision 

making will not occur again in the magnitude experienced in 1976, which had never before been 

recorded by University Hospital to this degree. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2195 

 

Never before in the history of Saskatchewan or in the history of that University Hospital had they found 

the strains the mistreatment and the challenge to a base hospital which was also a teaching facility. Mr. 

Chairman, the Minister got up a few moments ago and the press reported that there was a surplus in 

Regina hospitals, as did the University Hospital report that there was a surplus. And he says in 1976 

there were 1,145 fewer patients discharged from the University Hospital, which is a 9.4 reduction from 

1975 and the Minister got up and said that. This is the lowest number of discharges in the last eight 

years. This reduction in in-patient activity was a direct result of budget restraints and an experiment with 

summer closure of our hospitals to reduce vacation relief expenditure. Of course, the use of the hospital 

wasn’t carried on. Of course, there was a surplus at the end of the year. Of course, there was a surplus at 

the Regina General and Pasqua, because it hooked and strangled it. The administration, by reducing its 

budget was forced to cut back on beds and forced to cut back staff and the administration of the 

University Hospital makes it very, very clear that the reduction in patient care was a direct result of this 

particular problem of cutting staff. 

 

I have a brief here from the Medical School and I will take full responsibility for it because I am not 

going to give the name of the person who gave it to me. I don’t want to jeopardize his job or his future. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — It’s not the Liberal Party in power . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s precisely why they’re afraid. The total budget for the University of 

Saskatchewan Medical School is approximately $5.5 million a year. Approximately $2 million of this is 

supplied by the earnings of the full time clinical staff, and he goes on to describe that the teaching 

members of the medical school are forced to practice medicine in order to pay for the upkeep of the 

hospital, that they are forced to go out and earn dollars to turn it over to the administration in order to 

pay the overhead of the University instead of teaching the medical students and providing education for 

our doctors. 

 

And he goes on to give me the figures in 1973 and 1974 showing the University budget and its source. 

And he goes on to show the resources, for example, he says 5.9 millions Manitoba, 3.9 Saskatchewan, 

MCIC 2.1, 1.9 and so forth. What he goes on to say, the yearly average clinician earning, with more 

time and a higher fee schedule in Manitoba is $16,000 and $23,000 in the University of Saskatchewan in 

the medical school in Saskatoon. 

 

He goes on to point out in his letter about the gravity of the situation when medical people, who are 

supposed to be teaching young new doctors are forced to go down and practice medicine in order to pay 

the salaries of the maintenance people and the dieticians and the hospital workers. And then you turn 

around and talk about health care and you get so sensitive when any person or any individual talks about 

health care in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so you know something? The budget this year is the biggest demonstration of the truth of exactly 

what I am saying, because I am going to ask the Minister to please get up and explain how you can turn 

around and give us 60 per cent increase 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2196 

 

the University Hospital from $10 million to $16 million. In other words, the very thing that these doctors 

have been saying that the annual report of the University Hospital stated publicly is proven by the fact 

that the Minister in an effort after the bird has jumped through and flown out of the cage, has turned 

around now and they’re trying to correct the measure. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a few questions. The Leader of the Opposition asked if there was an 

investigation in the Medical School in the city of Saskatoon. And then the Premier got up and he said, 

‘well there isn’t but I’ve had some of my staff do some inquiries.’ I want to know the name of the 

individual because I have been told and it certainly doesn’t come from the Premier’s staff. I want to 

know if he has provided a written report which the Minister has seen? What kind of instructions did he 

receive to go and interview, for example, all the professors or all the teachers in the medical school? 

What was his name, what was his purpose and where are some of those recommendations, Mr. Minister, 

that that person came forward with when he completed that investigation? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley refers to the 

University Hospital Board report and he quotes from some criticisms and that is quite valid; there is 

nothing wrong with that. We don’t object to the fact that they have some criticisms, but he refuses to 

quote the good points in the report and there are a number of them which we could easily cite and they 

are quite apparent to any person who wants to peruse the report. 

 

He talks about a lot fewer patients through the hospital but the hospital was closed on a summer closure 

basis of their own volition. They made that decision. Their hospital board made that decision and 

obviously that would have some impact in terms of the total number of patients that would go through 

the hospital in a year. He continuously talks like other Members opposite about the cutbacks. If you look 

at the actual expenditures, the increase in expenditures is in excess of $5 million to that one hospital 

alone, in one year, up from $20,555,000 to $25,103,000. Now obviously we have to have some reasoned 

control in relation to the allocation of funds to hospitals and all we do is set standards. We look at the 

University Hospital, we set standards comparative to other teaching hospitals across the country and on 

that basis we arrive at certain standards which SHSP takes to the hospital. They are then given a global 

budget. Within that global budget, they may vary, they have flexibility. It’s clearly stated in the report 

and the Member knows that. The increase is 25 per cent in one year. That’s the same Member over 

there, Mr. Chairman, who was standing not too long ago congratulating us for attempting to get some 

control on health costs and claiming that we should go out into the rural areas and make all the savings 

on the rural hospitals. 

 

The only place you are going to save any money is in the large hospitals which spend 75 to 80 per cent 

of the total budget in any event. There is nothing new in the way the medical faculty of the College of 

Medicine is paid. It’s exactly the same as it has been for 15 years or more. Those problems have been 

around for more than 15 years and he knows it. Part of the remuneration is from the University of 

Saskatchewan and part is from MCIC billings which goes into a pool from which are paid those sums of 

money, such as travel and conferences for faculty. He knows that. He is just trying 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2197 

 

another political ploy. I would like the Member to face up to the facts. We don’t mind the criticisms as 

long as they are valid reasons, sound criticisms. But you can’t just pour millions upon millions of 

additional dollars in there and not expect to get some results. Obviously we have to have some 

consultation with those people. 

 

I think you asked a question with regard to an investigation. It is not an investigation as such, but there 

was a committee set up, with terms of reference being continuing education and health. Dr. Graham is 

on that committee. I don’t know Dr. Glynn; I haven’t met him. Dr. Wallace, Mr. Fyke, the Associate 

Deputy Minister, he was in the department when you were in government, a capable civil servant. Mr. 

Adams, who is the Assistant Deputy Minister of Health is on that committee. They met with the 

president; they met with the Dean of Medicine and people from other teaching hospitals and the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons. Those problems have been around for 15 or 20 years and the Leader of the 

Opposition knows that and so does the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

We don’t say things are perfect. We have never said they’re perfect. But we say that we have funded 

those hospitals well and that they have not suffered from what the Liberal Members are pleased to call 

so-called ‘frill programs.’ And all you have to do is look at the statistical facts if you want to read them 

and pay some attention to them. You will know that it clearly illustrates that progress is being made on a 

reasonable basis in terms of providing them with the necessary funds. I stress again that the 21 largest 

hospitals are on global budgets; they have flexibility within those budgets and you know they have 

flexibility within those budgets. 

 

We had a hassle in the House the other day with regard to the Regina General. Regina General had a 

surplus of $78,347. They could go and hire more housekeeping staff if they wanted to — nothing to stop 

them. They have control of that budget. Incidentally their budget exceeded $19 million or will exceed 

$19 million in the current year. That hospital and the University Hospital, the two largest in the 

province, take up a very, very substantial amount of the total hospital budget. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Opposition): — The Minister has nicely skirted the issue. Sure 

problems have been there for years. But I’ll tell you what hasn’t been there for years, is that the staff at 

the University of Saskatchewan Medical School have not had to devote most of their time to practice as 

distinct from teaching and research. The reason that those people are at that medical school is to teach. 

Now supplementary to their teaching is research, supplementary to that is practicing. One of the reasons 

they practice, of course, is to raise money. Another reason that they practice, of course, is to have 

somebody there to use for the teaching function they go through with the students. Now, of course, there 

is always a problem as to the amount of time divided between teaching and practicing. What has 

happened at the University, as I am advised is that the professors are spending approximately 75 per cent 

of their time practicing and trying to divide the rest of the time, the other 25 per cent, between teaching 

and research. And that is the problem. 

 

Now, as the Minister well knows, because of that situation morale at the University was very, very, low. 

He knows very 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2198 

 

well, as well, that many of the professors at the University were considering leaving the University 

because they were there to teach not to practise. If they are going to be in the situation where they 

devote most of their time to practising they might as well go downtown and make more money doing it. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Minister, what is unusual about the situation is that it was only when the Dean of Medicine 

wrote to the Premier and brought the situation to his attention that anything was done about it. And I say 

that that is indeed unusual. Now why was it necessary for the Dean of Medicine to go beyond your 

department, or beyond the Department of Continuing Education and go to the Premier with the problem? 

I suggest the reason was that he was getting no action from your department or the Department of 

Continuing Education. And you say that there was no inquiry involved and I suggest to you, Mr. 

Minister, when you have a number of people like you have listed make an investigation inquiry, ask 

questions, whatever euphemism you want to use, it demonstrates that there is a problem. And what we 

are trying to illustrate is that there was a very real problem. What I am trying to find out now is whether 

you have done anything to solve that problem because I believe at one time people in Saskatchewan 

took legitimate pride in the medical school at Saskatoon. I fear very greatly that they will not be able to 

take that same pride in the years ahead unless something is done to improve the quality of teaching 

there. You have very confident and able people on staff and if they are not allowed to teach, if they are 

not allowed to perform the function that they are there to fulfil, the quality of the medical school is going 

to go down. You know it as well as I know it. 

 

I am going to ask you two or three questions which I hope you can answer. First, did this committee 

which I understood was chaired by Mr. Adams, prepare a report and if so are you prepared to table that 

report? Secondly, whose function is it to administer the College of Medicine? Does it come under the 

Department of Public Health? Does it come under the Department of Continuing Education or does it 

apparently come under the Premier’s office because it appears only when the Premier becomes involved 

that there is anything done? Thirdly, would you not agree that it would be much better for the College of 

Medicine to be administered only by one department be it Continuing Education or be it Department of 

Health? Now I wonder if I could get answers to those questions? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, perhaps we should point out to the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition that all medical schools engage in teaching, research, service and administration, all of them, 

no matter where they are. The University of Saskatchewan Medical College is not unique in providing 

some service to patients. It is necessary to become proficient in their particular field. I note that the 

Member said that 75 per cent of their time was spent on teaching; that is a totally incorrect figure; it is 

less than 50 per cent. 

 

MR. MALONE: — . . . Practice! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I am sorry, in practice. Less than 50 per cent of their time is spent in practice. They 

claim they are practising too much. That’s true. That claim has only been made recently. The committee 

was set up before the Dean of Medicine wrote to the Premier and well before and we in the Department 

of Health 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2199 

 

have no authority over the University Hospital and the College of Medicine. They are run by the 

University of Saskatchewan. It is the President of the University of Saskatchewan who is in charge of 

that operation. Nobody is complaining about the amount of time. 

 

Now have I missed any of your question, please repeat them? 

 

MR. MALONE: — I have more things to say but I ask you if you will table a copy of the report, if 

there was a report from the committee of inquiry or whatever euphemism you want. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We can’t table it because we haven’t received it yet. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Would the Minister not agree with me though that by the very nature of the fact 

that such a committee was established, it indicates that there is a problem. I am not suggesting the 

problem can’t be solved, is irreconcilable but I suggest to you when the Dean of Medicine has to take it 

upon himself to write to the Premier, not to the Minister of Health, not to the President of the University, 

not to the Minister of Continuing Education but to the Premier, indicates to me that there is a very real 

problem. I suggest to you as well that the Dean had written to all those other individuals involved and 

didn’t receive satisfaction. Now whether it is up to your department to give him satisfaction remains to 

be seen but I am suggesting to you that there seems to be a very, very great problem. 

 

Now, the figures you gave me earlier about 50 per cent is spent in practising and 50 per cent in teaching. 

What that is the overall figure, all faculty members. Now many of the faculty members because of their 

particular specialty or because of their particular interest don’t have to practise at all. But most of the 

ones that are involved in obstetrics and general practice and the more common things that are taught at 

the medical school, I am advised both by students and by teachers that these particular individuals are 

required to practise to such an extent that they can’t properly fulfil the role of teaching. And I might 

advise the Minister that this doesn’t come to me by way of a leak or by somebody feeding the 

information that is perhaps improper. It comes to me by way of university students at the College getting 

in touch with me during the Sutherland by-election and expressing their concerns, graduate students, as 

well as several of the faculty member expressing their concerns. 

 

Now I am not trying to make political headway or political points on this particular issue. What I am 

trying to do is demonstrate to the Minister that there is a problem at that particular College. I fear very 

greatly that if the Minister’s attitude of, ‘well, it’s not for the Department of Health anyway, or there 

was an investigation already going on before the letter to the Premier arrived,’ if that type of attitude 

prevails there is really going to be no solution to it until somebody else looks into the situation and 

comes up with some more meaningful suggestions for a solution. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are quite willing to admit when there are problems and we have said that many 

times and we have not tried to say that there weren’t problems. You raised the question 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2200 

 

that because the committee was set up there must have been a problem. Of course, governments set up 

committees all the time, all across Canada because they have problems to study certain situations. The 

Dean of Medicine went to the Board of Governors first where he would logically go and they said to 

him, if you are not satisfied go to the Department of Health, so he came to us. And that is when the 

committee was set up. And then because I suppose he had some considerable concern with respect to not 

getting quick answers he contacted the Premier, and what’s wrong with that? 

 

MR. MALONE: — He didn’t get the answer. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — What’s your question then, what specifically is bothering you? 

 

MR. MALONE: — It strikes me as very apparent from what you have just said that one of the problems 

is that the Dean doesn’t know who to go to. You talk about him going to the Board of Governors. Now 

obviously there is no satisfaction there. I’m not putting any blame on the Board of Governors. He comes 

to your department, there’s obviously no satisfaction there. I don’t necessarily put any blame on your 

department. He gets to the Premier and finally it appears something is done. Surely this illustrates to me 

that Medical School is neither fish or fowl, as nobody seems to take the responsibility for solving the 

problems that occur. I’m advised that if somebody in that faculty takes the problem to the Department of 

Health it is usually shunted to the Department of Continuing Education and vice versa. Now would you 

not agree with me, that perhaps the College of Medicine, because of its unique situation, because it’s 

partly a teaching institution, a practising institution, and uses, I don’t know how many millions of 

dollars of taxpayers’ money, could be under one Cabinet office or another, so that when problems do 

arrive or arise, they can be dealt with in an expeditious manner. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Dean reports to the President of the University. The 

problem is he doesn’t like the answers he’s getting. So he goes elsewhere. I’d like to remind the Leader 

of the Opposition that in 1969, under a Liberal regime the College of Medicine complained about 

funding. I’m not being critical in that sense, I’m simply reminding you of it. And the Government of the 

day made an input of $500,000. But they did not cure the basic problem, which the committee is now 

investigating. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Will you give me an undertaking then if you can that when the committee 

completes its investigation which I understood it wasn’t doing, it was doing something else, but we now 

have an admission there is an investigation, that you’ll table the results of the findings of that 

committee? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes. I see no reason why we wouldn’t. 

 

MR. MALONE: — When do you expect that investigation inquiry to be completed? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2201 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — When we get it. The Dean’s been away for a month. That’s a bit of a problem. 

 

MR. MALONE: — There seems to be a sort of an innuendo that this is being brought about by the 

Dean and he’s acting improperly. And I don’t think that dignifies the Minister in any way . . . your 

reference to him being away for a month, I suspect he’s away on business or probably a well deserved 

holiday. But would you please just tell me when you expect this report to be completed and whether 

you’ll table it upon its completion? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, we want to review the recommendations with him. How can we review them 

with him, if he isn’t here? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister there are a couple of other things I want to bring up. I want to ask 

you specifically if you have made allowance in your budget to reduce the amount of practice time for 

those people who are teaching at the University Hospital? Let me read you again what this individual 

said: 

 

The University Hospital operations cannot be separated from the Medical School function. 

 

You say that we agree. 

 

The University Hospital is the main teaching centre. In spite of this, the Provincial Government 

continues to finance essentially as any other hospital in the province. 

 

That’s the point that the Leader of the Opposition and I are trying to make. 

 

Little allowance is made for the enormous teaching requirements and the many very special services 

that any University Hospital Centre must supply. 

 

He goes on: 

 

The recent cutbacks in staff and funds with little allowance for capital expenses and none for 

replacement for worn and obsolete equipment is a threat to the continued safe management of patients 

and adequate teaching at the hospital itself. 

 

Can the Minister tell me specifically have you reduced the requirement for the teaching load or practice 

load or the clinical load of members of the teaching faculty of the Medical School? The Minister turned 

around and said they received a global budget. He said they turned around and said they had vacation 

time. The Minister knows that’s not true because we’ve got the report here. And it’s just like everything 

else. When you come to the Department of Health, you put yourself in a little shell, into protective 

custody, you say, look because we gave medicare in 1962, they’ll say anything about hospitalization or 

medicare. This is what the report also says: 

 

Surgical operations are down 6.3 which relate directly to the drop in the number of patients. Bed 

closures due to staff decreases in the hospitals have created problems with increasing waiting lists, 

reducing the number of patients 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2202 

 

available for student teaching and indeed reducing the number of elective cases admitted and place the 

more urgent acute cases. 

 

I could go on and on, and this report as I said, is an indictment, an indictment about the Government. 

Can you tell me, Mr. Minister now, before we go on to another subject. You’ve agreed to give us the 

report I take it, when it is tabled, from your inquiry. That’s number one. Second, can you tell me if you 

increased the budget of the University Hospital so that people teaching in the Medical School will not be 

required to spend as much time in practice and clinical work as they have in the past? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, we do not treat the University Hospital the same as 

others because it is the largest budget; it has the largest per diem in the province and it gets most of the 

elaborate equipment. We don’t apologize for delaying the purchase of a CAT scanner. The obsolescence 

factor in those is fantastically great, and it made some sense to wait a year. He asks if we have increased 

the budget so they can decrease teaching. No, we don’t control it; that’s through the University. They 

bill MCIC. We don’t control that. How could we? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, I am going to get off this subject now until we get your inquiry 

and then we’ll have a great deal more when we get your report, because we are going to take that inquiry 

and compare it with the problems and recommendations of that inquiry and then see what you have. We 

know how the university operates. We will be prying into the University Hospital and Medical School. It 

is very difficult to do it through the Department of Health. All I want to point out to you is that 

everybody is aware of it and your budget increases this year just demonstrated it, grants to the 

University Hospital from $10 million to $16 million, right in your own Estimates. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Strictly construction. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Is that strictly construction? And your increase is 20 to 25? So there we have 

$5 million in operating and $6 million in capital. It clearly demonstrates that everything these people 

have said is true, everything. It’s far beyond anything else you’ve done in any other department. And all 

I am saying, Mr. Minister is that it is the morale and threat of resignation from the Medical School in 

Saskatoon that was real. It was of such a serious nature that the Premier personally intervened. You have 

now an inquiry; you have investigated it yourself . . . before. Pardon . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Before they contacted . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! May I just remind the Hon. Members that any reply they make, if 

they make it from their seat will not be on the tape. I would appreciate it if you would rise to make a 

reply. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to get off that and, as I say we would 

appreciate it very much if when the inquiry 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2203 

 

comes in after the Legislature is over, if you would forward it to the Opposition office. 

 

Now I want to talk about doctors and the numbers of doctors. We have on record the number of doctors 

that are coming and the whole philosophy of immigration or bringing in doctors to the Province of 

Saskatchewan. You have a bill before the House which for some strange reason you are not proceeding 

with, the Medical Profession Act, and of course it’s brought about very simply as a majority of the 

complaints in the medical profession indicate are caused by a very simple policy in Saskatchewan, the 

fact that doctors in Saskatchewan that come to the Province of Saskatchewan do not have to write the 

same exams as college graduates or medical graduates in Saskatchewan and throughout the rest of 

Canada. They can come into Canada without writing, from what I understand it, and I want the Minister 

to tell me if I am correct, without them writing the general examinations for Canada across the country 

and that we are the only province in Canada, as I understand it that does this and the Minister can inform 

me if I am correct in this assumption as well. 

 

There is a great deal of concern by the medical profession and I don’t think it’s a question of 

discrimination. It is the fact that Saskatchewan treats doctors from foreign lands differently from other 

provinces in Canada. They don’t have to write that examination when they first come to the Province of 

Saskatchewan as they do in other provinces in Canada. This can, first of all, hurt the quality of 

standards. Now I want the Minister to comment on this. 

 

Second, is the percentage of doctors that are of foreign extraction in Saskatchewan higher than any other 

province in Canada? They inform me that it is. I wonder if the Minister can tell me exactly what is the 

percentage of doctors who were born and educated outside the Province of Saskatchewan as compared 

to those of Canadian background and Canadian education. 

 

Could the Minister tell me that and could he inform me what is the specific complaint of the medical 

profession in relation to examinations. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, first if I may I would like to go back to the Member’s comments 

with regard to the hospital and he is now using the argument that we were pressured into spending a lot 

more money. When we applied some restraints to hospitals, that Member was one who praised us for it. 

We had to get some control and we were giving out too little for a while, at least he happened to express 

this view and now when we make large increases he criticizes us for that. I wonder where the logic is in 

this approach, both sides of the coin. 

 

He asks questions about the physicians. There are 860 physicians in the province. If he looks on page 48 

of the MCIC report he can work out the percentages for himself; they are all listed there and where they 

came from, Saskatchewan, other provinces, United States, United Kingdom, etc. Page 48. If he had read 

the report, Mr. Chairman, he’d have this information in advance. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — First of all I am going to tell the Minister, don’t say that I said that about the 

University Hospital. In fact, let’s get down and I’ll tell you what I did say. I said, you 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2204 

 

generated a lot of programs for political reasons and you threatened basic hospitalization and medicare 

programs, that’s what I said. When I talked about hospitalization I said there are two areas of the 

province that need hospital beds, one is Saskatoon and the one is Regina and the rest is in rural 

Saskatchewan. They are not the same kind nor the same quality of beds and it’s about time you tried to 

direct the beds into Saskatoon and Regina. That’s right . . . that’s right! You should tell the folks back 

home, tell the folks back home, because that’s why you people are doing such a bad job in health, that’s 

why everybody in Saskatchewan is down your back. It’s because you spread the health dollar so wide in 

Saskatchewan that there’s no money for hospitals, no money for medicare. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it your intention to proceed and I ask this in all honesty, is it your intention to proceed 

with that particular bill so that doctors who immigrate into Canada and come to Saskatchewan will have 

to pass the MCC examination? Is that what you call them? Is it your intention to proceed with that? Do 

you agree that this is a concern? There is getting to be a surplus of doctors from foreign countries as 

compared to Canada and I use all countries, England, Great Britain, wherever they may come from, the 

Far East, wherever it may be. Is it a concern of the Department of Health that there is a surplus? The 

balance is getting too heavy one way or the other. From what I understand there are about 40 per cent to 

45 per cent, I haven’t figured your percentages out. I knew where the page was. I wanted you to tell me. 

 

Would the Minister suggest there is an overbalance and is it your intention to proceed with the Bill? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I first have to go back to his argument about hospital and medicare, 

that the basic programs have been starved. They have not been starved. They have never had as much 

money. Their increases have been in the range of 20 per cent per year or more and that’s higher than any 

province in Canada and he knows it. 

 

Let me talk about The Medical Professions Act. It will come into the Legislature in due course. There 

are two kinds of licensing, discretionary and mandatory. Ours is mandatory. We have a concern about 

the fact that when other provinces do not have mandatory licensing with the exception of ourselves and 

Newfoundland, that doctors funnel into, if they are registered with the General Medical College in Great 

Britain, then they can be registered from the West Indies or Africa or India or any place else. There is a 

tendency for these people, because they want to get out of these countries to come to Canada and if it’s 

mandatory they be licensed in Saskatchewan and not in the other provinces, it’s natural that they come 

here. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — One other question. Does the Minister think that there is an overbalance? Are 

there too many doctors of foreign extraction or foreign education and background in the Province of 

Saskatchewan as compared to Canadian medical students or those from the Province of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are not concerned with the balance of so-called foreign doctors; we are 

interested in the quality of doctors, what value they give us in terms of good care. We are concerned to 

some degree with regard to graduates out of our own colleges 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2205 

 

who may have some difficulty finding placements in future years because there are surpluses appearing 

out of the medical colleges right across Canada. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — One final question. Is the Minister convinced that we have enough doctors in 

the Province of Saskatchewan at this time? Is there a continued shortage? I noticed there is an increase. 

Can the Minister give us an indication as to whether or not if he passed the Medical Professions Act, 

will it jeopardize small communities or will there become a shortage of doctors? Have you enough 

doctors now, in your evaluation? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I’ll quote the executive director of the College of Physicians and Surgeons who 

says there are enough. We admit the distribution is difficult but that’s difficult in many provinces and 

it’s bound to continue that way. 

 

MR. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I was hoping earlier to make some 

comments and fortunately tonight is probably one of the great political events of all times and that’s the 

Conservative Nominating Convention in Pelly which I must attend. However, I’ve got a couple of 

comments. 

 

There was a very noticeable lack in the Government’s attack today in attempting to cover up some of the 

things that Mr. Helmsing said the other night. We seem to be avoiding, as was mentioned by the 

Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, the real issue and that is the inadequate efforts of the Government 

opposite to come to grips with rising health costs. Today was just an example of the vindictive approach 

of the Government opposite. I can recall a year ago when the nurses wanted more money and the 

Minister of Health was going to kick the heck out of the nurses, how bad they were for demanding 

money. I can remember last March in this Assembly before the Minister went . . . avoided the House for 

some time when there was a cutback at the University Hospital and a cutback of five per cent across the 

board, the staff was laid off at the University Hospital, whom did he blame? He blamed the University 

Hospital and he blamed the individual boards. 

 

There were serious morale problems stated by the Director of the Regina General Hospital. Not one 

Minister over there dared to answer that. 

 

I am going to quote from Mr. Helmsing, on page 128, 

 

To this date we haven’t seen any evidence of that. That is not to suggest that we might not have some 

difficulty but I would have to say that I would not want to see the level of funding of those positions 

cut any less than they are at the present time. I think that we would be in a position that we would not 

be able to live with that kind of a situation. 

 

Now if you don’t say that that’s borderline, then you are being blind to the fact. The fact is that when the 

Hon. Member for Saskatoon Sutherland asked you the real issue on which you are burying your heads 

like ostriches; it is the fact that health care is deteriorating under management of your Government and 

that’s a fact and that’s what the people of Saskatchewan know and that’s why they are down your back 

and that’s why they are angry at the Government opposite. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2206 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could go back to a year ago when the Government opposite cut back on health beds by 

five per cent at one time and then I believe a second five per cent. Who did they blame? They blamed 

the nurses; they blamed the hospital boards and they blamed the Government of Canada, not bad 

management by the Government opposite. 

 

We had at the introduction in the Debate of Item 1 a comment by the Minister which I think is indicative 

of the blind approach of the Government opposite. He made the statement that the Government opposite 

underestimated the demand on SAIL when the program was started. Underestimated the demand on 

SAIL, I think was basically the tenor! The demands were far greater than you expected. Any person with 

any administrative or marketing ability could have told you that if you set up a program you create 

demands, you establish a situation which creates demands and you are bound to have a greater use of 

services when you supply something like that. You know it and yet for some strange reason you didn’t 

take that into account. 

 

When the Saskatchewan Medical Association criticizes the Government opposite you attack the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. You don’t say whether or not their criticisms are fair and that you 

are studying them. All you say is that they are bad guys and we’ll reply later, that they are unfair. It’s 

impossible and the public of this province has learned that it’s impossible to get into a reasonable 

discussion with you about your handling of the health situation in this province. The fact is that you are 

so defensive, you are so defensive about your position that you strike back with a vindictive, narrow, 

negative approach, not attempting to come to grips with a specific problem. You have cut back on vital 

equipment and I think — Mr. Minister, I could give a list — I think it has been well documented 

publicly and I am referring to the SMA brief. I quote. 

 

The SMA stresses that these budget restrictions make it impossible for the health care centres to keep 

pace with those enjoyed by the rest of North America. 

 

Now that’s what they say. You obviously disagree but what you do is, well, is that a fair criticism; it’s 

too general; it’s not specific and they are a bad bunch of guys. 

 

Doctors, and I am quoting from the Leader-Post, Thursday, April 7, where a doctor, J.D.R. Whittick in a 

letter to the Editor called the Minister insensitive and I think that’s right. I think that’s right! He says that 

Mr. Robbins is totally insensitive to the concerns of physicians about the present and future health needs 

of the citizens of Saskatchewan. He should not be the Minister of Health. That’s what a doctor says. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the fact that has become obvious is that the Government opposite really doesn’t 

know what to do with increasing health costs. The fact is . . . 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:00 o’clock p.m. to 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you I would like 

to introduce to all Members of the Legislature about 20 or more 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2207 

 

young ladies who are members of the Sherwood Brownie Pack No. 28, seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

These young citizens of Regina North West are accompanied by their chaperons and leaders, Carol 

Foltz, Ruth Cooke and Marilyn Ochitwa. We are pleased that they have taken the time to come and visit 

us and we hope that their stay with us is pleasant, educational and informative. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Department of Public Health cont’d 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I have one or two questions because I don’t know where to ask 

them. If I recall, in the last election campaign, the NDP made a great promise about a chiropody 

program. Has there been any progress in this? Has the Government made any moves in this regard at all 

or what is the situation or do you have some immediate plans to open up and expand another frill 

program? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, we have reviewed this situation. We don’t propose to proceed 

immediately with a chiropody program because we have given higher priority to a home care program. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, Mr. Minister, have you done anything in this regard; have you made any 

public expenditures in the chiropody services or have you just done nothing? Is it at a complete 

standstill? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, we had done some advertising for staff and secured some staff, but we were 

unable to retain this staff. They left. We have about $30,000 worth of equipment which has been in 

storage and the program will go into effect later. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I thought maybe there were a few dollars spent in this program. 

 

Would you tell me where you got the staff from and how long they were employed? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There are no chiropody schools in North America. They came from Great Britain. 

We had six of them and they left. Some of them stayed a few months; some stayed up to a little over a 

year. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Let’s see if we can get this straight, Mr. Minister. Did you advertise for them in 

England and recruit them in England and bring them over and pay their expenses over and so forth? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We recruited them in Great Britain. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Now, you recruited six people in England, brought them over, paid their 

expenses to come to Canada and bought some equipment. I understand the equipment is out in an office 

in the Golden Mile Plaza. Is that correct? Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, if that equipment is sitting 

there? You just mentioned that it was in storage. You brought six people over, 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2208 

 

I wonder if your officials could tell me what it cost to bring them over? I wonder if you could tell me 

also why these people were not retained? Did you dismiss them? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, we didn’t dismiss them. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What was the reason that they left the department? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Some of them left because they felt they could do better in terms of setting up their 

own practices and some of them returned to Great Britain. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Now let’s be a little more frank, Mr. Minister. Now you recruited six people in 

England, you brought them over to initiate a chiropody program, you brought them over here, you 

established them within the department. In a very few months, they left the department. Some went back 

to England. How many went back to England and how many are still in the country, in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Sorry, Mr. Member, I gave you some incorrect information. We had six positions; 

we only recruited four. One returned to England, one is in Moose Jaw, one is in Prince Albert and one is 

in the community clinic in Saskatoon. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, their names were Butler, Walton, Worby and Graham is that correct? 

Now you brought these people over from England. Have any of them, have you any chiropodist or 

whatever the word is, working with the Department of Health? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I understand you retained one to take a survey for a while, is that correct? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, there was a survey with a number of people involved in it. The results of the 

survey haven’t been finalized. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The results of the survey have not been finalized. Well, then, what made you 

decide not to proceed with the chiropody program? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It is pretty hard to proceed without any chiropodists. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s be honest, the reasons that the chiropodists left the 

department was because there was no program, is that not correct? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — That is partly true but the other side of the coin is that physicians can look after 

foot care problems of people 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2209 

 

and do, a goodly number of them do and because of cost constraints and the fact that we were running 

into some problems in terms of federal cost sharing we just gave it less priority and gave more priority 

to some other programs. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Could the Minister tell me or have his officials tell me what was the total cost, 

and I am sure that you will have those fairly close, of the advertising program, the movement from 

England to the city of Regina or the Province of Saskatchewan and the total salary bill for those four 

people that were recruited? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We haven’t got them easily available but we can provide it for you. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — May I perhaps do some evaluation and some estimates? I would suppose to 

recruit those four people, bring them over from England, I’m in the travel business, I am sure that it 

would cost you probably a couple of thousand dollars depending on whether they were married with a 

family and what they brought with them. I would suppose you would have to pay them in the 

neighbourhood of $15,000 or $20,000 a year, and you would have to set up the machinery. You said you 

spent $30,000 on equipment, would have set up the office with the desks and the typewriters. I suppose 

you wouldn’t bring four chiropodists in without putting in two or three girls, secretaries and so forth. 

Would it be fair to say, Mr. Minister that what you did cost you $100,000 for that kind of a very costly 

mistake. Would that be a fair estimate? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are going to get the figures for you. We don’t accept your figures at all. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — It may well be more, but the point I want to make Mr. Minister . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It may well be less too. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — It could, but you told me the equipment alone was $30,000. You brought four 

people from England and you paid them. Mr. Minister, I just want to use this as another illustration of 

the kind of poor business management that is going on in the Government. We watched the Minister of 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications (Mr. Byers) here this afternoon invest $2.5 million for an 

installation that is down at Outram, Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. BYERS: — That is false! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — We’ll get him in here. Get the two button . . . 

 

MR. BYERS: — $35,000, not $2.5 million. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, $2.5 million you told us this afternoon, Mr. Minister, and we 

are going to have more to say . . . 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2210 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, $2.5 million! Now we watched you also do the same thing and 

the interesting part about it is that you recruited the people. 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Chairman, a Point of Order. The Hon. Member has suggested that I told this 

House that Sask Tel spent $2 million for a receiver and an antenna at Outram. That is totally false; the 

cost of that equipment was $34,000. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I think the point is well taken. I think we are all out of order. I would ask 

you to address your remarks to Item 1 of the Health estimates. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I will do so, Mr. Chairman, I just used that as an illustration of bad 

management by the Minister in charge of Sask Tel. 

 

Now I would like to refer to the same thing, the tragedy of what you did with the chiropodists. You went 

over to England and you recruited them, you brought them over to Canada, you set them up in your 

department, you bought them equipment and then you decided to take a survey to see if you needed 

them. Well, you certainly didn’t have the results of the survey. You know that is true. If you want to 

stand on your feet and deny it I will let you stand on your feet. You turned around and brought four 

people over here to set up a program because it was a political promise. 

 

I am just going to read you a letter from another person just to show the political frills that I am talking 

about and the kind of political health program that the Minister is becoming involved in and the NDP 

will be becoming involved in. Here is a news release, Thursday, April 14, that is about four or five days 

ago. 

 

Ideology is interfering with the effective provision of health services. It is a strong but constructive 

attack on Saskatchewan Government health policy. 

 

“Dr. Clive Dennis, Executive Director of the Prairie Institute of Environmental Health said Thursday 

that the emphasis being placed on health programs, conceived for ideological reasons, with little thought 

to the actual health benefits of the Saskatchewan population has had three noticeable results. It has made 

the health profession redundant and unnecessary in the planning and direction of programs. Two, in a 

period of fiscal restraint it is diverting much needed financial resources away from essential health 

services, noticeably the long term care of the elderly. It is delaying the effective integration of the public 

health and family physician services without which progress towards an effective preventive health 

service will be slow.” 

 

It goes on but all I am pointing out, Mr. Minister, that here is another frill which was a political election 

promise, a political election promise to set up chiropody services in Saskatchewan. So what you did, you 

brought over four 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2211 

 

chiropodists, you bought a bunch of equipment and hired a bunch of people. You flew them from 

England, you paid them a salary, then you decided to take a survey, or at least a survey that was to 

establish the need was never even completed and then all of a sudden you began to realize that it was a 

frill, that all of a sudden, you didn’t have the money. You began to cut back in the other services and 

here is another illustration, and it is a practical illustration, and a real illustration of the kind of thing that 

the NDP has done with the health care program in the province. 

 

I have one more thing to ask you, Mr. Minister on this chiropody subject. You told me you have no 

chiropodists working for the Department of Health. We would like to know when you get them, the 

figures, on the total cost of the advertising, the recruitment, the sending over from England to Canada 

and the total cost of the salary bill plus the equipment and any rented space and the support staff that 

goes with them, the whole business. I would like you to send it over, if you will. Now Mr. Minister is 

there any intention of proceeding with the chiropodist program in the Province of Saskatchewan in this 

year’s budget? Has there any money been set aside for it? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, we didn’t set aside any money in this year’s budget. When we proceed with the 

program, we will announce that in due course. I want to point out, Mr. Chairman, that the Member talks 

about a chiropody program. This was a start only. We would need a lot more than six positions if we 

were going to have a full-fledged chiropody program. It was, in effect, an attempt to get started in the 

program and see how it would work. The equipment isn’t lost, the money isn’t lost. We could sell the 

equipment today for perhaps more than we paid for it. We applied necessary restraint. We had the 

intestinal fortitude to delay the program because we were caught in the situation of needed restraint in 

relation to cost-sharing with the Federal Government. We don’t make any apologies for that at all. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the Minister just about the 

chiropodists. Normally when you are recruiting some people from outside of the country, the expenses 

of recruiting these people are a condition of employment. When they come over they must stay with the 

Government so long before they have a refund or they owe the Government for a certain time before 

they get their way paid over. Is the Government of Saskatchewan entirely obligated for the complete 

moves and possibly even the returning of these people to England? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We’ll double check it. There is an obligation for them to pay back part of these 

expenses. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, in the case where it is partially the Saskatchewan 

Government that is opting out or not going through with, or not carrying on with it, then would I be safe 

in saying that the obligation would fall almost entirely on this Saskatchewan Government, on this? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There would be some obligation on them and some obligation on us. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2212 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, one more question on Item 1. The Opposition, I believe, asked the 

odd question on the Drug Plan and did some comparing with Manitoba. I wonder if the Minister could 

tell me because there is some controversy on which is the better plan. Are you studying the Manitoba 

plan so you can implement the best of both plans? If there are some weaknesses in our own Drug Plan 

can we make some improvements by learning from their experience? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We studied the Manitoba model before we ever started our plan. The basic 

difference perhaps is in our plan. Proven therapeutic drugs are the ones that are covered. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

ITEM 2 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Could the Minister tell me how many sanatoria are still operating? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We don’t operate any sanatoria. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is this strictly a grant? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you assist me? In the Saskatoon Sanatorium there are very few TB patients 

left. I understand there are about 12. Are negotiations going on to move them into the University 

Hospital and therefore have none left at the present sanatorium? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Not to the University Hospital. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — What hospital then? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The proposal is to transfer the inpatient treatment of tuberculosis patients to some 

selected general hospitals. They will mostly be in the northern areas, La Ronge, Ile-a-la-Crosse, places 

like that. Most of the people who suffer from this particular ailment are native people. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Do you have any involvement, for example, in the buildings or are they the 

property of Government Services, the sanatoria? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Department of Government Services provides the facilities. It is owned by the 

Government, yes. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask the Minister a series 

of questions about the use of laetrile in that Mexican clinic. May I ask you if the National Government 

to your knowledge has done any studies of the clinic in Mexico and has it, itself, done any studies of the 

effectiveness or otherwise of this laetrile treatment? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2213 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Our understanding is that the Federal Government requires anyone who wants to 

prove that laetrile is an effective drug or useful in terms of treatment of an illness, must provide clinical 

evidence. I am reading from an extract of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare. 

 

Laetrile is an unapproved new drug. It is not the subject of any current new drug application and 

investigational new drug. It may not be shipped within the jurisdiction of the Federal Food Drug and 

Cosmetic Act for any clinical use. 

 

This is in the United States. 

 

The most recent attempt to secure authorization for such shipment was made by MacNaughton 

Foundation of California which was submitted (and they go into some technical detail) on April 6, 

1970. It was terminated on May 12, 1970, because of serious deficiencies in the clinical data provided. 

 

The second one, Western Journal of Medicine, “Vitamin Fraud and Cancer Quackery,” by David 

Greenburg: 

 

Some lay the claim that laetrile or amygdalin has the properties of a vitamin, is shown to be false from 

the normal properties characteristic of vitamins. There is no substantial evidence that any vitamin 

prevents the development of or has the beneficial effect on the treatment of neoplasms. The published 

literature does not support the assumption that cyanide presumed to be released from decomposition of 

laetrile has a specific action on neoplastic cells. 

 

The last one is a news release from Health and Welfare Canada, Departmental Position on Alleged 

Cancer Drug: 

 

Mr. Lalonde said that taking into account all known facts the Health Protection Branch cannot permit 

laetrile to be distributed in Canada. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — May I say I appreciate what the regulations are from the National Department of 

Health and Welfare and as you know there are the proponents of the Mexican clinic and the proponents 

of the use of the drug have a whole series of sort of medical opinions that they use in advancing their 

argument that it is effective and I see, of course, arguments traditionally made by the medical profession 

against the drug not suggesting in any way that the drug is harmful in use but simply indicating that it is 

of no value. But my question really is: do you know whether the National Department of Health and 

Welfare has conducted any of its own studies or tests or indeed even examined the clinic and if so what 

the result of those tests were? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are not aware that the federal department has conducted any clinical studies. 

They ask for clinical studies from research foundations and groups of that type. I read you Mr. 

Lalonde’s statement and I can read you more of it if you wish to have it. They are simply saying that the 

Health Protections Act cannot permit laetrile to be distributed in Canada. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2214 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I can well appreciate that. In other words, I am fully aware of the fact that they 

are taking, in effect, a passive attitude, that is to say, they say, come forward and show us the proponents 

of laetrile, that it has some effect, that it is an effective drug, satisfy us on that ground and we then 

would take a look at licensing it. That’s a passive role. I am wondering if they have taken a more active 

role? That’s my first question. And secondly, whether if any of the Ministers’ conferences that you have 

had, whether there has been any request from any of the provincial Ministers of Health to the National 

Government to take a more active role in examining the usefulness or otherwise of that drug? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, in answer to your first question, not that we are aware of. We did bring it up at 

the last Health Ministers’ Conference because there seemed to be a lot of pressure in this province and 

the other provinces were not really concerned about it and we couldn’t get any real response from any of 

the Health Departments. I would like to make it clear, Mr. Chairman, that we do not say that a person 

couldn’t have laetrile and give it to the physician and if their physician is willing to administer it to them 

that they couldn’t have it. We don’t say that. It would be up to the physician to make the decision 

whether he did or didn’t and the same thing could apply in hospitals in that regard. We are simply saying 

that because it comes under the Food and Drug Directorate in Ottawa, it is not permitted in Canada in 

terms of sale. It can’t be sold to people. It can’t be distributed to drug outlets or drug stores. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Again you misunderstand me. I appreciate your position; yours too has been 

essentially a passive position instead of an active one. By passive I mean to say that you accept, in 

effect, the dictum from the National Government which says this drug cannot be sold in Canada because 

it has never been proven to our satisfaction to be useful. Provincial governments it has been my view, 

across the country are taking that same sort of passive position with respect to the use of that drug. Now 

I am wondering, have there been any kind of studies conducted by the American Government that you 

may be aware of of that clinic or of the use of that drug? 

 

MR. M. KWASNICA (Cut Knife-Lloydminster): — While you are waiting for an answer I would just 

like to make a comment or two. I have been doing some reading on laetrile in Mexico, and not that I am 

an expert on it, but I am surprised that the Hon. Members call laetrile a drug, when really it is nothing 

more than B17, Vitamin B17, and you can get it in various strengths and you can administer it through 

tablet form or through intravenous systems and whatever, but all under the jurisdiction of a doctor. You 

might be interested to know, too, that laetrile is taken in large quantities by the Hunza, the people who 

live in Pakistan in the Himalayan Mountains; they will sit down and eat apricot kernels that are dried 

and they will eat 40 or 45 after a meal. They won’t throw the kernel away. Apricot kernels particularly 

contain B17 in large quantities. It is interesting to note, too, that that society, that culture has no cancer 

at all. They just don’t have that particular ailment that we do. But that is off the record and it is not 

authentic but these are the things and I have been able to find out. It’s a vitamin, it’s B17 and I think that 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2215 

 

Many of us really are missing it in our diets and probably that is one of the reasons why we are very 

susceptible to cancer. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the Member asked if there was any further evidence from the 

United States. I believe and I read again from the Department of Education and Welfare, Public Health 

Service, Food and Drug Administration, Washington. They say and I am simply quoting them: 

 

Laetrile contains cyanide, one of the most toxic substances known. Some sources of laetrile frequently 

publicized by its proponents are seeds or kernels which when crushed can release the cyanide. These 

sources include the kernels of apricots, peaches and cherries. The scientific literature contains several 

reports of fatal and nonfatal poisoning due to the eating of apricot kernels. Because the margin of 

safety between the fatal and nonfatal dose is slight there is a distinct possibility that reported cases of 

nonfatal poisoning may point to many more unrecognized fatal poisonings. Certainly laetrile is not a 

vitamin as its proponents have insisted. Two federal courts, one in California and another in New 

Jersey have ruled that laetrile is an unsafe food additive and a drug that is dangerous because it can 

delay treatment. 

 

We have a letter addressed to Mr. Andrew L. MacNaughton, and incidentally he visited us here not too 

long ago, of the MacNaughton Foundation in California and I would be willing to send you a copy of 

this. It is from Marc Lalonde, the Minister of Health and Welfare in Canada, if you would like a copy of 

it. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Well, I tell you what I was going to ask of you and it’s this. It occurred to me 

some months ago when I saw a committee in Saskatchewan being formed and saw some of the material 

they put out with respect to it. Now clearly what is happening in connection with laetrile is what 

happens so often. You get a group of people, in this case the MacNaughton Foundation and 

MacNaughton as we all know originates in this country, you get those people as proponents of the use of 

laetrile and, of course, they make all sorts of claims about the effectiveness of it and the medical 

profession being sort of a dinosaur in its attitude in not accepting what they’ve been saying about it. 

That’s on the one hand. 

 

Then, of course, you get on the other hand, the sort of traditional medical view which is, it has never 

been proven to do anything really and as far as we are concerned it is still useless. I noticed you 

indicated in the quotation from the American source that it is considered dangerous because it delays 

effective treatment. And that is true; that is one of points of the opponents of laetrile. One of the points 

they make is that one shouldn’t sort of rely on it or think that it is in any way useful because people may 

be drawn to do that to accept laetrile treatment when they really ought to be getting some treatment of 

some other variety which is more effective. But I wondered at the time if we aren’t in respect to laetrile 

and the Mexican clinic in one of those traditional sort of early periods about something where you get a 

group of people being strong advocates of the use of the thing and the traditional medical view being it 

is useless. In the meantime governments which should be perhaps playing a more active role in this 

sense are sort of lying back and saying, well, we are not 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2216 

 

satisfied. Nothing has been brought to us to satisfy us that it can be effective. That is the traditional 

passive role of government. It occurred to me at the time and I wondered whether we ought not in 

Saskatchewan to, as we have leadership in respect to cancer treatment and that is recognized across the 

nation, whether we shouldn’t commission a task force of three or four experts in this area to examine 

first hand the clinic in Mexico and the treatment that they give to people and to take a look as best we 

can at the substance whatever it is, drug or otherwise, that they are using there. I wonder whether you 

would consider, as a matter of fact, in the course of the next year, in panelling a task force of this variety 

with recognized Saskatchewan people in the area of cancer, to go down there personally and have a look 

at it. 

 

Now, it may well be, it may very well be that the traditional medical view is correct, that is to say it is a 

useless substance. The claims that are made in respect of it are really misleading to people and they are 

falling sort of prey to exaggerated claims and so on, that may very well be true. On the other hand I 

suppose it is possible that some of the claims being made by the proponents of the treatment in the clinic 

in Mexico may have something too. At the moment none of us is really coming to grips with that in 

terms of government to take an active look at it. I wonder whether it wouldn’t be money well spent for 

us to send three or four people of long standing experience in the cancer area from Saskatchewan to 

have a look at that clinic and have a look at the treatment and what results if any, they are getting from 

it. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We had that suggestion brought to us. We took it to the experts and the experts 

advised us against it. That’s all I can tell you. I try to keep a very open mind about these things but we 

obviously can’t research all of the things that come as possible cures. In addition we have had 

consultation with the deputy minister in Ottawa with regard to it and I must stress again that it comes 

under the control of the federal authority. Surely no one is going to say that we should be importing it 

here against that authority. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — No, no, look . . . 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, on a Point of Order. I wonder under what conceivable pretext we 

are discussing laetrile under Item 2 which is Tuberculosis Sanatoria and Hospitals Act. Now I could 

understand the discussion of that subject under Item 1, which is already passed or probably under Item 

17 which is the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission, which this compound has been purportedly alleged 

to be a cure for cancer, but I don’t see how it can be considered as an item under Item 2. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I agree that the Minister makes a point but the Minister of Health was answering 

questions on it until now. I would ask the Hon. Member to try to relate it to the proper section. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I am happy enough to defer my questioning until some other item. I suppose I 

could make an argument that this is the proper place to do it and I might even persuade you. Maybe I 

ought to make the argument that it is entirely unrelated to 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2217 

 

the kind of things we do in respect of TB. We may be in 1977 where we were in respect of TB in 1927. 

But I will ask my questions if you prefer to have them later under some other item sure. 

 

Item 2 agreed. 

 

ITEM 3 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Chairman, just one question. I see there is a 

$40,000 increase in the air ambulance service expenditures and I have no particular quarrel with that. 

My question is: would some of this expenditure be to look at the feasibility of perhaps using helicopters 

for air ambulance? I don’t know if this is feasible or not but it seems to me that there are certain 

advantages inherent in helicopter use as opposed to fixed wing use, but maybe the cost is prohibitive, I 

don’t know. I just wondered if you had done any looking into this particular aspect? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We have looked at that. They use helicopters to some extent in Alberta. We 

recently had a patient who was transferred 272 miles from Medicine Hat to Calgary by helicopter. The 

cost was $892.86. The cost if we had taken the patient in our own ambulance plane would be $266.56. 

We can’t see any advantage. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, in talking about ambulance services in general, I appreciate that 

this is their ambulance but perhaps we can save some money or add some money by not having them fly 

all the time. I have had a great deal of discussion with ambulance operators in rural Saskatchewan. A 

genuine concern is being expressed that unless something is done to increase the remuneration there are 

not going to be any ambulance operators in rural Saskatchewan whatsoever, and I think you can 

appreciate the reasons why. The Minister is probably aware of them more so than I am because I don’t 

deal with the subject all the time. 

 

First of all the cost of vehicles and equipment is going up very dramatically. Wages and salaries are 

going up very dramatically. Fuel and costs of every kind of variety are going up. Has the Minister had 

any exploratory talks? Now, I understand there is a meeting, if my memory serves me right, some time 

early in May, with ambulance operators in Saskatchewan. Could the Minister indicate what the purpose 

of this particular meeting is? Is there some way that there is going to be an attempt to salvage the 

operators on a private initiative basis? I think there is only one way to do that and that is to recognize 

that an ambulance operator in rural Saskatchewan may only take one patient Tuesday but five on 

Saturday. But the fact that the vehicle is there and the operator is there and the service is required is one 

of the difficulties that is going to be there. Can the Minister give me an indication what the Government 

has in mind in this because if we don’t do something we are going to have to use those two planes to fly 

from Lumsden because we are not going to have anyone else to do it. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We certainly share your concern. We know there are problems in the ambulance 

field and we intend to be meeting with the ambulance association immediately after the House closes. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2218 

 

If you shorten these questions we will get to it quicker. We can tell you that a minimum subsidization 

program would cost at least $2,000,000 and if you got to an ideal overall system it would be 

$10,000,000. Now, you may call that one of the frills after we get it started. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — See that is what I call the basic programs that are keeping the people in the 

hospital. If you are saying now a minimum subsidy program would be in the neighborhood of 

$2,000,000, can you give me an indication as to what kind of subsidization we are talking about at a 

$2,000,000 cost? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Not really at this time because this is a subject of discussion with the Ambulance 

Association. I just would like to add one other point if I may. We know that they do have some financial 

difficulties but we think they are far from collapse in many instances. We know the rural areas where the 

populations are sparse are a bigger problem, obviously. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — One further question I’ll get to. I did hear some rumours that the Government 

was thinking of reducing air ambulance operations. Is that correct? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Road ambulance people in the North have asked us to cut back on the use of air 

ambulance because it interferes with their business in terms of road ambulance. That is the only 

indication we have of a request to cut back on air ambulance utilization. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The people in the North? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Some of the road ambulance operators in the North are arguing that if they didn’t 

have to complete with the air ambulance they could do better with their road ambulances. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, are you talking in the . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Up at La Ronge, that area plus Meadow Lake. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Has the Government made a decision in this regard? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — On the air ambulance, Mr. Chairman. I spent a bit of time at the airport in 

Saskatoon and was informed by the air ambulance pilots that those aircraft are being lost to them and are 

going to be used by DNS this summer for fire control. Are you aware of that? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Department of Government Services and CVA control the aircraft. They move 

them about. They also guarantee we will always have aircraft available. Were you there as a visitor or as 

a patient? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2219 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, I also know they are looking at helicopters to replace them with. When you 

gave that $800 figure were you referring to your cost because you have an airplane on full call all the 

time or were you hiring a machine for one special occasion for which the costs are always higher? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are talking about a bill we received from Alberta for the use of a helicopter in 

relation to one of our patients. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Now was it a private helicopter or a Government of Alberta helicopter? I am 

trying to figure out if it is a commercial rate you were paying. If you had a machine on a 12-month basis 

it wouldn’t be as high. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They don’t own them; they use private helicopter. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, just one more question on ambulances, and I agree, I believe it is a 

universal problem with respect to the price of keeping up ambulances. I know there are some 

municipalities in British Columbia where the municipalities run the ambulance service. For instance, at 

Port Alberni, the municipality has the ambulance service and no one has privately entered into it at all. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The British Columbia system is a total system. It is run by the province. It may be 

used in the municipalities and is very expensive. We would like to see the municipalities involved and 

some of them are already, I believe even in the Member for Indian Head’s area, maybe in his old area 

down around Milestone. 

 

MR. LARTER: — The reason I ask that is as you mentioned some of the municipalities are involved in 

it. At Estevan the municipalities are involved as well as the city and although the ambulance is naturally 

striving to get a higher fee all the time I think it is working out fairly satisfactorily. They are striving for 

more money for it all the time, but it might be worth looking at this sharing. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, we are aware of that. Estevan is one of the brighter spots in the province, that 

is other than the Member. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — On the air ambulance, could you tell me if this figure includes the bringing of 

patients by a conventional ambulance to the place where the airplane lands and taking them from the 

airports to the hospitals? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — This is exclusive of any ground ambulance cost. 

 

Item 3 agreed. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2220 

 

ITEM 4 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps this is an appropriate item for me to raise the concern I 

was talking about earlier to the Minister of Health because it would involve recruitment of people. When 

I asked you earlier whether you had considered, as a matter of fact, taking a first hand look at the clinic 

in Mexico and trying to come to some direct assessment about the use of this material in cancer 

treatment you had indicated that you had considered that and the experts had said no, I gathered from 

your comment that you left it there. What I want to ask you is, why would one be so readily deterred by 

the experts that say No? Why did they say No? What danger or hazard or risk is there in taking a look at 

it? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well obviously, I must get my advice from people who are involved in the field in 

the Cancer Commission. These are people who are well trained medically and their advice was there 

was no evidence and they were opposed to going to Mexico in order to do some investigation at this 

time. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I can appreciate the need to seek and the need to follow advice in respect of the 

question, is it a useful treatment, or is it not a useful treatment? Certainly, there is a wide area of error 

for expert advice to you. The question though is not that question. The question is: should the 

Department of Health of the Government of Saskatchewan investigate first hand that particular 

treatment to determine in a first hand way whether or not there might be some usefulness in that 

treatment? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well again, I come back to the experts. The people in the Cancer Commission who 

have experience in this field say they can’t find a shred of evidence to prove there is any value and they 

advised against sending people down. Why would we send other than people out of say the Cancer 

Commission who are trained in the treatment of cancer and they didn’t want to go. They felt it was 

irrational to spend tax dollars to go down there to get involved in a study which would have to be 

conducted over a long period of time because you would have to have test studies and monitoring of a 

group of people for a good number of years into the future and they advised against it. I can give you 

advice today with regard to cancer. I suggest if you quit smoking cigarettes there is less chance of you 

getting lung cancer but you may not pay any attention to it. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Well, I say to you again, if the question you put to them was, is there any 

usefulness at all in this drug, and they had had a first hand examination of the treatment and the drug 

itself and they came back to you and said, no there isn’t, that’s one approach. The other approach though 

is this that there are many people, some of whom are responsible people, who are saying that the 

traditional medical view in this area is wrong, that there is evidence, and they point to all sorts of 

evidence. It isn’t for me to assess it. I have no idea whether their views are soundly based or whether 

they aren’t but I do know there are a number of people that do say, as a matter of fact, that that treatment 

is of some value. Now I know that 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2221 

 

traditional medical treatment on the other side says, no it isn’t, it’s useless. Now, my question is: in 

those circumstances where the group of people, some of whom are very responsible people, say we 

ought to have a look at it, and then the group on the other side saying, oh no, it is of no value anyhow. 

Then I think it behoves us as public men in administering public departments to take a more active role 

than what we have been taking, just in case, just in the small event we may be overlooking something 

here and as you know there are many Saskatchewan people with cancer in sort of desperate moments 

who are going to Mexico and seeking treatment there currently. 

 

As a matter of fact, I think what I would like to see us do, believe me I am even halfway reluctant to do 

it, but it does occur to me that just on the off chance that there might be something there I would like to 

suggest that the Department of Health in Saskatchewan, which I said earlier has had a traditional sort of 

leader, played a traditional leadership role in the country in terms of cancer treatment and in North 

America, should empanel a group of people knowledgeable of this area to go to Mexico and take a first 

hand look at that clinic to see what they are doing, investigate the claims that are being made and come 

back with some sort of better answer having looked at it first hand than we currently have. To that end I 

am going to ask the Assembly to consider, not forcing your hand in any way, but to simply consider this 

proposition and accordingly, Mr. Chairman, I move seconded by Mr. MacDonald: 

 

That this Committee urge the Minister of Health to consider empanelling a three or four member task 

force of experts in cancer treatment to investigate the use and utility of laetrile to include a first hand 

on-site inquiry of the Mexican clinic currently treating cancer with laetrile. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, just before you call the vote I just want to make one comment 

and to realize exactly what the motion is, presented by the Member. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, I find the motion in order. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I just want to finish the argument that I was about to present to the Assembly 

and to the Minister in particular, if you notice the motion is very carefully worded. It doesn’t try to 

instruct. It doesn’t try to make any kind of a confrontation as to the political sides of this Assembly. It 

merely asks the Minister and his officials to consider carefully the advisability of going down and first 

hand seeing and generating some interest. You know from experience the practical results from such an 

investigation could be very widespread. You might really encourage the Federal Government to take 

some leadership and some actual clinical analysis and so forth. I sincerely hope that the Minister and the 

Members of the Assembly will accept the recommendation of the Minister from Regina South. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I should just make a comment on it. The Member said he 

was in no position to assess the value of this product and, of course, neither am I. He says 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2222 

 

we should be dependent on experts. We are dependent on experts and we have already considered this 

and asked our experts about it and they advised us against that approach. That is all I want to bring 

across to you. The experts that we have contact with are the people who work on cancer in the Cancer 

Commission. Who else do you suggest we go to? I notice the Hon. Member for Regina South says, 

responsible people. I wish he would name some of them. I am not arguing whether laetrile is useful or 

not. I don’t know, and I have no way of assessing it except to go by the advice that was given to us by 

the people who work in the field. If those are the experts you are referring to, if those are the experts we 

have already gone to, we’ve already considered this project or this proposal. They advised us not to do 

it. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Chairman, now let’s be fair about this. I asked you a series of questions 

before I made this motion. Those questions were asked for a good reason. They were asked to determine 

genuinely what, if anything, your department had done; what, if anything, other provincial health 

departments have done and what, if anything the National Department of Health and Welfare has done. I 

didn’t ask those questions idly; I asked them to determine whether there had been a first hand 

examination and study. 

 

I think it is a fair assessment of what you told me in response that your department had not conducted a 

study, that you knew of no other provincial health department that had done so, that the National 

Department of Health had not done so. I kept saying that the governments are playing a passive role in 

this respect and I think that you were agreeing with me that they were. Okay, that is what I received by 

way of response to the many questions I asked you. That being the response, I then suggested to you that 

maybe what we ought to do, even if there is even a small scintilla of possibility here that those people 

may be right, that we ought to spend the few public dollars it takes to go and have a first hand look at the 

thing. Give me a little while and if you give me a chance to think about it and make some contacts I will 

be happy to recommend one or two people to you. Medical people, I think could be persuaded in the 

interests of the province, to spend some time looking into this thing first hand. 

 

As my seatmate has indicated the Motion is worded carefully. It is merely asking you on behalf of the 

Members of the Assembly to consider, consider anew, taking a look at empanelling a group of three or 

four people to go down there and have a look at it and determine the use to which it is being put and its 

possible utility. 

 

I would hope that you wouldn’t take a sort of negative attitude toward that and I hope that if Members of 

the Assembly would ask you in that way to consider it, that you would give some pretty good weight to 

the views of the Members of the Assembly in that consideration in doing that kind of thing. As I say, 

seriously if you are worried about the people, if you give me an opportunity I will contact some people 

and try to make some recommendations to you. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The only point I was trying to make, Mr. Chairman, was that the Member is asking 

that we consider sending three or four people to Mexico. I said, previously, that we were approached 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2223 

 

with that kind of a suggestion, which actually came from Mr. MacNaughton. I said I had a letter here or 

a reply from Mr. Lalonde and I was quite willing to send it across to the Member for Indian Head-

Wolseley. People in the Cancer Commission, who work on cancer all the time, trained doctors, some of 

them with many, many years of experience advised us against that approach. Now that is not to say that 

we didn’t have a study or that we did have a study. We didn’t have a study but that was their advice. 

Who else are we going to get advice from with respect to this approach? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say one thing and I don’t say this disparagingly 

about the medical profession. But their traditions, by nature must be cautious. They want it to be 

demonstrated that before they become involved with a new drug or a new technique, that they must be 

very, very careful. The history of medical advances is not necessarily related to the traditional comments 

of the medical profession and I would hope that the Minister would take that into account when 

considering this Motion. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I am still asking that that point be considered on the basis of the fact 

that these people are the people who work in the field and they advised us against it. I want to make that 

very clear. The Member for Indian Head says these people are cautious and maybe they are, but I know 

of people in this city who have passed away as a result of cancer and I know other doctors who, when 

approached outside of this province and approached with respect to whether or not laetrile should be 

used, said, No. I don’t know why they came to that decision except that their training and their 

experience and their beliefs in relation to this particular product is such that they don’t believe that it 

could be usefully used. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, just a few remarks on the Motion. 

 

I don’t think there are too many families even in this Legislature who are immune from being touched 

by cancer. I personally know a number of people who have used it. I think what the Member for Regina 

South is trying to say is, let’s not leave any stone unturned if there is a ray of hope. I don’t think that as a 

province which is supposed to be one of the forerunners in the treatment of cancer, that we especially 

should go on the judgment of someone else. I think we should look personally and look first hand at this, 

if there is just one ray of hope that possibly there is something there. We have looked so long and so far 

for cures for cancer, let’s not just overlook this one ray of hope. There are a lot of people being treated 

with this and swear by it. Rightly or wrongly it might not be what it is doing, but let’s not take away that 

ray of hope. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I must read from a news release, “The National Cancer Institute of 

Canada has evinced extreme concern about the publicity purporting to show therapeutic value for 

laetrile. On the basis that this drug is of no proven clinical value, therefore, the institute considers the 

promotion of this drug may constitute a cruel hoax at least and may even be harmful by delaying or 

preventing access to treatment of known value. An identical position has been taken by the Canadian 

Medical Association.” 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2224 

 

I don’t know who else to go to to get information with respect to cancer treatment other than the medical 

people. 

 

MR. KWASNICA: — I am rather interested in this particular Motion and I don’t think that the laetrile 

debate belongs to any particular political party and I would like to see all Members examine this 

particular Motion which is not really doing anything that’s startling. Many Members on this side of the 

House are aware that there has been pretty heated debate in our particular annual conventions about 

laetrile and I think there is a resolution that has been passed calling for us to do something in this regard. 

 

I should like to see, on this particular motion, two lay people go along, for the simple reason that the 

Minister has mentioned that if you ask the people who work in the Cancer Commission they advise 

against it. I don’t have anything against professionals, but all these professionals know is their particular 

training which is cobalt or whatever device and that is all that they have ever been trained in and the 

blinkers are on, once you get a specific training. I would really like to see this particular Motion passed, 

perhaps with the addition of two lay people. I am sure like the Hon. Member has suggested he can give 

names. I should like to point out, too, that perhaps one of the reasons why laetrile has been condemned 

by the United States Public Health Service, Food and Drug in the United States, and certain 

organizations in Canada, is that the cancer research in the United States, as all of us ought to be aware, 

more people are making a living off trying to find a cure for cancer than there are that die in cancer in 

one year in the United States. 

 

When you have an organization that has been rooted in this kind of a system, is making a living off 

doing lab experiments on rats which is totally useless, what have they proven in the last 20 years? Here 

they have laetrile which has not been, in my estimation, all the reading that I can do, properly tested 

because it is always used as the last resort. The medical profession will say, okay we give up, you have 

three months to go. Then the person goes to some other source usually the clinic in Mexico and they say, 

gosh what do you expect us to do, you are so far gone now there is no chance for laetrile. 

 

Now there are books available and there are doctors in the United States who are medical doctors who 

can vouch for this particular treatment for cancer and really I don’t see anything objectionable to this 

particular Motion, with the exception of putting two lay people on, and not experts. Lay people who are 

knowledgeable we can find easily to take a look and go down there. I would say, too, that in my own 

constituency two cases have come up in the last year that point out the need to look for something other 

than the surgery and the cobalt treatments because that is not the end of the line by a long shot. If we are 

that narrow and think that is the only way to go and to find some sort of help and cure for cancer, then 

we are really missing the point. 

 

I would urge Members to support this Motion. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2225 

 

YEAS — 16 

 

Kwasnica 

Feschuk 

Faris 

Allen 

Koskie 

Malone 

 

Stodalka 

Clifford 

MacDonald 

Cameron 

Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg) 

 

Anderson 

McMillan 

Larter 

Berntson 

Katzman 

 

NAYS — 20 

 

Blakeney 

Bowerman 

Smishek 

Romanow 

Messer 

Snyder 

Byers 

 

Baker 

Kowalchuk 

Matsalla 

Robbins 

MacMurchy 

Mostoway 

Whelan 

 

Kaeding 

Rolfes 

Cowley 

Shillington 

Vickar 

Nelson (Yorkton) 

 

Item 4 and 5 agreed. 

 

ITEM 6 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, on Item 6, I wonder, there are only four positions more, from 321 to 

325 and the budget in this case is up $1,177,910, I wonder what this amount of money is made up of 

besides regular salary increases? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The 1976-77 base from which we began was $3,936,180. There were some 

deletions, minor, $36,240. We had an adjusted base of $3,899,940. Now the salary adjustments, there 

was a 14 per cent increase on average the year before totalling $703,710 and there were increments of 

another 4 per cent — $155,990. 

 

There was some additional staff, four, and there is provision for an increase in the current Estimates 

when the settlement is made, coming out to the figure of $5,144,090. 

 

Item 6 agreed. 

 

ITEM 9 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister a couple of questions on this one. 

 

First of all I notice that there is an increase of seven staff members from 26 to 33, which is an increase 

of over 25 per cent in the personnel in one year in the Hearing Aid Program. I notice, also, that the total 

cost of the program has gone up something in the neighbourhood of a quarter million dollars. Can the 

Minister tell me first of all, what the reason is for increasing the number of positions by 25 per cent in 

one year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There are two audiologists and two audiologist technicians who were temporary. 

They were transferred into permanent. We added one audiologist technician and one hearing aid 

repairman. In terms of the volume, the demand was heavy and to catch 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2226 

 

up and get rid of the backlog particularly in some areas of the province it was necessary to hire some 

additional staff. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Can the Minister tell me now how many people received a hearing aid through 

this hearing aid plan? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — In total or just the last year? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Last year. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There were 2,568, with 4,855 being tested, given audiology tests. Some 2,000 or 

more of them were advised not to get hearing aids. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — There were 4,000 tested approximately. Can the Minister tell me what was the 

wholesale cost or the purchase price of hearing aids? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — That is $94.32. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — All right, $94. Now can the Minister tell me how much he evaluates the total 

cost or how much does amortising over a year — we are talking about $1,200,000, we are talking about 

$2,258. How much does he figure it costs for one test for one individual; and what is the total cost for 

the hearing aid, not only the wholesale cost, but the spreading of the staff salaries, the travel expenses, 

etc.? What is the real cost of one hearing aid device and what is the real cost of one test? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The cost of the hearing aid was $94.32, of the total cost in terms of evaluation, 

audiologist testing and that sort of thing, it was $128.65 for a total of $222.97. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, I don’t quite agree with the cost of your programs. I have just 

taken the total number of hearing aid devices, okay, that you gave out last year. It came to 2,568, 

correct? Is that what you said? All right 2,568. So I assess that you will service that many people again 

this year and we are saying that approximately, and it may be up or down a hundred figures. It may even 

be fewer. We are also taking the cost of this year’s estimates, $1,217,470 and that cost comes to — if 

you divide those two it comes to $475. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — You are looking at the estimates coming up. These are the people already serviced 

a year ago. You don’t know how many people are going to be serviced this year. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I am using this as an assessment of what it may cost this year. It should in all 

probability be fewer which would increase the cost. I am saying that if the same number of people 

received hearing aids this year, approximately, and I think that is a fair assessment, you want to tell me 

that there is going to be more or less of what your estimates are, I would think in all probability there 

would be fewer, because you must be catching up now. The program is two or three years 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2227 

 

of age. In fact you might well be down to 2,000. If you divide that into the total estimate, the estimated 

cost of the program this year would be $475. 

 

I am not talking about the test. There are another couple of thousand people here who are tested, but I 

would suppose that test if I went down town to get that test . . . perhaps a hearing aid doctor could give it 

to me. I would pay even $25 for the test or whatever it may be. But it is still an awfully costly program, 

Mr. Minister, isn’t it? Wouldn’t you estimate that if this year we serviced the same number of hearing 

aids as last year, we are talking an awful high cost for a hear aid. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the Member is missing certain points. There were 2,287 

people who had hearing aid tests by trained audiologists. Those tests cost $128.97 each on average. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — How much? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — $128.97 . . . I am sorry $42.80. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That is more like it. If that is the case, Mr. Minister, and I am doing a very 

rough calculation, we can knock off $100,000, that’s all. So we are really talking about $42, 

approximately 2,000 people, we are talking $84,000, we add a little bit because there were a few more 

than the 2,000, so let’s take $100,000. Deduct $100,000 from $1,217,000 — it is a very expensive 

hearing aid, a very expensive hearing aid! Mr. Minister, you have just said that it costs $42 for a test. 

You calculate it for me, over 2,000 tests, we will give you $100,000. We then take $1,117,000 and we 

will take 2,500 people. Will you tell me what its costs for a hearing aid? That is the problem whenever 

you get into government programs. I wonder if that is all the hidden cost. What about space, all the rest 

of it, is that all in it? 

 

I am going to ask the Minister a couple more questions. We have that calculated now to $455. You must 

be turning around now and doing some jumping around. Now tell me this, Mr. Minister, in that 

$1,217,000, does that include space? Does that include depreciation on capital equipment? Does that 

include everything or are there some additional hidden costs in there? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, it doesn’t include space. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — So, it doesn’t include space. Does it include capital cost, depreciation of capital 

cost or amortization of capital costs? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, if the Member would look on page 20 and 21 he would have all 

those figures, he wouldn’t have to work with a calculator and make all the mistakes he has made. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister don’t tell me I am making mistakes now. We want your answer 

Mr. Minister because we don’t agree with your report. It seems that every time you talk about one of 

these programs that you say you don’t include space, you don’t include this. We have calculated 

approximately $450 for a hearing aid in 1977-78, according to your estimates and if the same number of 

people get a hearing aid next year it will cost 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2228 

 

$450. It doesn’t include space, depreciation and how many other things we don’t know. I would say in 

all honesty it might well be costing $500 per hearing aid. I think that is a fair and honest assessment. If 

we are talking $500 I tell you that the Minister of Health should recommend to the Minister of Finance 

that you scrap the program, bring back the private operators and give them $400 and you will save 

yourself a heck of a pile of money. This isn’t counting the tests, because we have deducted the tests, so 

don’t say that the tests are involved. I think you could get the Elks Club of Canada to come in here with 

one of those good testing units and probably service a lot more people. If you wanted to give a private 

operator the $100,000 or the $42 that it costs to test them I am sure you can get the testing done. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that is the cost and you certainly haven’t demonstrated that it isn’t 

because my figures don’t agree with your report. You told me it cost $220 or whatever it was for a 

hearing aid and $94 and then you gave me $222. I just think it is double that. I am just pointing out that 

that is what we talk about when the Government gets involved in these frill health programs. For 

example, I am very interested in what it is going to cost you for SAIL, because the Red Cross claims that 

it is costing the Government a fortune compared with what they would have provided that service for. I 

have talked to people in the Red Cross and they say it is costing more. I would like the Minister to tell 

me what is the real cost. You told me $42 a test, that is $100,000. Now you tell me how much it is going 

to cost in real costs for a hearing aid from the Saskatchewan Government Hearing Aid Plan next year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Last year the real cost was $222.97. You can project all you like into the future. 

The figure you are looking at includes $469,000 of hearing aids and inventory, batteries and things like 

that which are there for resale, which you missed entirely, of course. 

 

The Member talks about getting them cheaper from private individuals. I know people who are buying 

hearing aids who were paying $600 and $700, three, four and five years ago. They didn’t get proper 

audiological tests either. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — From what I understand there are still quite a few people going and getting 

$700 and $800 ones, because they want good ones. Let me ask the Minister this question. You told me 

you had a big inventory. Has there been any waiting period for anybody to get a hearing aid in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — In Regina, yes. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — But that is a lot of inventory when you are talking $94 for a hearing aid. You 

tell me you have half a million dollars worth of stock. That’s what you told me. It costs $94 for them to 

buy one, you have a half million dollars worth of stock. You tell me that you have to wait in Regina. 

Where the heck is this half million dollars worth of stock? That is an awful lot of hearing aids. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the people who get hearing  

 

 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2229 

 

aids have to have a proper audiological evaluation before they get the hearing aid. The waiting period of 

two and one-half months or so in Regina is related to people who are lined up waiting to get their 

evaluations. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Isn’t it the same in the country at a lot of places where people have to wait? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Do you want them read off? As of March 31, 1977 there were none on the waiting 

list in Saskatoon, none in Rosetown or Kindersley, 30 in Melfort-Tisdale; 29 in Prince Albert; 20 in 

North Battleford; 227 in Regina; 57 in Swift Current; 27 in Weyburn-Estevan; 90 in Yorkton; and 65 in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, I am going to make the same speech again. I am telling you you 

can calculate 2,500 into $1,117,000 and even somebody in Grade Two will get $450. It doesn’t include 

space; it doesn’t include depreciation and how many other costs I don’t know. All I am suggesting, Mr. 

Minister is that it is a very expensive program. If you want to call it stock, whatever it is, I will tell you 

that that is an expensive program, a very expensive program and it will be rather interesting when we get 

to the next one, like the dental plan as well. I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that program is a costly one. 

It is not saving the taxpayers of Saskatchewan anything. I think you could probably get that program 

cheaper from a private operator without any question. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the Hon. Member keeps referring to what is going to happen in the 

Estimates next year. He doesn’t know how many people are going to be serviced. If he looks at the facts 

in the annual report he finds the cost is $222.97 per person on terms of those tested and hearing aids 

supplied. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he talks about what one could do in the private trade and perhaps it could be done 

through the private trade but people did not get the proper audiological evaluations. I have teachers at 

the School for the Deaf telling me in Saskatoon that those children now get proper evaluation in terms of 

audiological tests. They didn’t get them before. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, let’s have a couple of questions. One of the things I was 

wondering about is how this new microwave tower at Outram is going to tie into your hearing aid testing 

program? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The second thing I want to . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We should provide you with a hearing aid for nothing. Maybe you would then hear 

things properly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Would the Minister tell me this. Can you give me what 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2230 

 

your department estimates the requires will be for senior citizens for hearing aids? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Between 2,500 and 3,000 but we must do some revaluations in terms of people who 

have come back for repairs for their hearing aid etc., so it’s a continuous program in that respect. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s what we thought. You agree with my figures, 2,500. You said between 

2,500 and 3,000. I say between 2,000 and 2,500. How’s that? We’ll split the difference at 2,500. Okay, 

and that gives you $450, exactly what I indicated. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m not going to comment. We’d like to get into the next sub item now and then maybe 

we’ll sum up these frill programs at the end and do the calculation of the cost of them all, so maybe it 

might be very interesting. 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Chairman, I just have one question. At what intervals in the 

rural areas are people available to test ears for your Hearing Aid Programs? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There is a clinic in every regional health office one week out of each month. If 

there is an additional number of people coming, they will stretch it to two weeks as they’ve done in 

some places like Moose Jaw, etc. 

 

MISS CLIFFORD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Rosetown-Kindersley area I was informed that it has 

been up to two months, first for the fitting or the testing and then for the fitting. So my only suggestion 

is that perhaps your department could look at better accessibility in service in the rural areas, even 

though you are having some problem in the cities as far as waiting. When it gets further than two 

months, or over a two-month to three-month period, it’s a little long for this type of service. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We appreciate that comment and that’s why we’ve added some staff, to meet those 

problems. 

 

Item 9 agreed. 

 

ITEM 10 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Chairman, would the Minister indicate as to whether 

or not he’s going to extend the program or has he officially announced whether you are going to enrol 

people beyond the years ’67, ’68, ’69, ’70 and ’71, as I believe they are already enrolled in the program? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Adding one year, ’72. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — You’re adding one year. Well then the Minister should be able to give us a pretty 

good idea as to how many people or how many students will be enrolled in this particular program 

during the next year. He already has the five years the ’67, ’68, ’69, ’70, ’71. Could you give us an 

estimate 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2231 

 

as to how many you expect will be enrolled in the program this coming year, including those in that 

additional year, whom you are taking into the program? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — 77,799. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I wonder, while we’re trying to make some calculations here, whether you would 

tell me, Mr. Minister, how many positions are covered by Other Personal Services? It moved a lot from 

last year into Permanent Positions. I’m just wondering how many are left over? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The equivalent of 39 temporaries. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Of the graduating students from the college this year, will you be absorbing all of 

the graduates within the Dental Program? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — As near as we can tell, yes. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Of these positions, I believe it adds to 451 when you take the Other Personal 

Services in with the Permanent Positions, would you tell me how many of these positions, 415 are filled 

by dentists, dental nurses, dental assistants, dental hygienists and equipment technicians? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — As of April 1, 1977, approved? Do you want this broken down? 376. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Are you telling me that all of the people provided for under the plan are 

professional people? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I’ll list them if you want them: 21 dentists, 145 dental nurses, 2 dental hygienists, 

165 dental assistants. Other Personal Services include medical accounts clerks, stock clerks, dental 

equipment technicians, storekeeper, systems analyst, clerk typists and there are 34 of them. 

 

MR. MALONE: — In the way that you’ve given me the figures, I can’t follow, when I’m following the 

report. The report would seem to indicate that there are five categories of professional workers, if I can 

use that word, that is trained people — dentists, dental nurses, dental assistants, dental hygienists, and 

equipment technicians. Now what I’m asking you for is the total that fill those particular categories. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Have you copied them down, 21 dentists, 145 dental nurses, 2 dental hygienists, 

165 dental assistants, and 7 dental equipment technicians. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Now, Mr. Minister, could you tell me a little bit about the Dental Program, just 

so you can give us a little bit of an indication. How many times is every child that’s taken in — now 

we’re talking about taking in the ’72 children this year, the ones born in ’72 — how many times will 

each of those 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2232 

 

children be seen other than for treatment itself? What I’m referring to is, how many times will each of 

those children be seen at a minimum, those that are being brought into the program, 1972? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Four to five visits each. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Each child, regardless of whether he or she gets anything filled or anything, 

four or five times? Now, can you tell me how many visits would the children that were originally put 

into the program in ’67 get? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Two to three in that category. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Two to three. Now what percentage of the 77,000 children received treatment? 

When I say treatment, I mean filling or whatever else that has to be done, specialized treatment. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — 86.1 per cent. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — 86.1. Now, would the Minister like to define for us, treatments, so that all the 

Members of the Assembly will know what you are talking about when you talk about treatment? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Dental examinations, dental health education, topical fluorides, which I suppose is 

some treatment of the teeth, tooth brushing and restoration and fillings. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Of those treatments, how many are given in a group rather than individually? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It’s all individual. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Another question. I want to know now, how many, what percentage, what 

number of children actually receive fillings? I know and I appreciate the education on how to brush 

teeth. It’s important, down and up and sideways, and so forth, very, very important. I’m not in any way 

being disparaging about the need for hygienic treatment in the mouth, or hygienic education for the 

treatment of the mouth, but how many now, of the five categories, how many of those 77,000 children in 

a year receive actual fillings and actual dental work within the mouth? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Approximately 90 per cent of the children receive fillings or restorative care. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — 90 per cent you said. Now can you tell me another thing. I know that you have 

these in the school; do you pay the school boards any rent for facilities? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I’m informed, no. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — You don’t pay them anything for the heat, or the light or the water? It’s all 

supplied free of charge? Is that correct? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2233 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Correct. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — In this amount of money again, is there any depreciation of capital equipment 

involved? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Good. Now why is it that in one program you have depreciation and the other 

one you don’t, Mr. Minister? Some time we have to get into that discussion. So is there any other 

additional cost that might not be included in the thing, because then I would assess, if you paid for 

space, I would think it would be somewhere between $90 and $100 a child? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The rental space in the schools is in the Education budget and it shows in a note on 

page 30 in the Dental Report, the Department of Education covers the costs of establishing dental clinics 

in the elementary schools, and gives the figures of $1,081,459.47. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — So, really you would add another million to the costs here. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — But this is going to be used over 20 years. How could you add the whole cost in? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Aren’t you renting? Don’t you pay rent or upkeep and heat and light? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Depreciation is computed on . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What would you suggest we do with it when you have space in the school? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — But I’m saying that you can’t add a million dollars in costs in one year. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What would you say? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, obviously it’s going to be used over many years. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — How many? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Who knows. When we get up to 18-year old children, it might be going for 40 

years. It’s been going on in New Zealand for 30 years. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, Mr. Minister, why would the Department of Education charge a million 

dollars? Wouldn’t that be for heat and light and space or is that all capital you are talking about? 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2234 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The capital cost works out to $1.77 per child. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s what is in the million, is it? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Might I suggest you read the Annual Report. It’s all in here. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No, I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, because you give some backward 

statements. We just want to know. In other words you are talking about a million eight there. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — $1,081,000. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — All right $1,081,000. Is that strictly capital or is it capital and heat, light, 

maintenance, etc.? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The cost of establishing dental clinics in the elementary schools. It is the capital 

cost. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Thank you. That’s what I asked you. Now, could you tell me is there any 

charge for maintenance, for heat, light, water, for space requirements, etc.? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, it’s part of the school. It was already there. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I know the school was there, but you know when you rent the school 

gymnasium out after hours, you charge for it, because that pays for the heat and the light. Now, Mr. 

Minister, I calculate that somewhere around $86.3 per child without accounting for any of these other 

factors that we’re talking about. Perhaps I would think when you’re talking $1.75 per child, would $90 

per child be a fair assumption of the actual cost? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It’s $107.86. If you look in the report you will see it. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — We’re talking next year, 77,000 kids. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We don’t know what it will be. We think it will be down lower, yes. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Don’t be so glib. We’re trying to help you out. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — That’s your calculation. Well, don’t try any more. You’re not helping me at all. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — We would estimate that last year it was much more, but this year, remember 

you have made some great pronouncements about how much it’s going to cost as the more children you 

include. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2235 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Costs are down from $158 to $107 in one year. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That’s pretty good. So we’re suggesting, you are suggesting it costs $107 per 

child. I would agree that that’s approximately what our calculations would indicate that it would have 

cost. Now, once again I’m going to suggest to the Minister, that that’s a pretty high cost. However, the 

service is provided, so we’ll just take a look and we’ll have to watch that as the years go by. How many 

of the treatments or the fillings are actually supervised by the dentist? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — All of them. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Has the Minister ever done a study as to what the average Saskatchewan family 

was spending per child? When I hear $107 for somebody in the age group of seven-year old, eight-year 

old, nine-year old, ten-year old, I know, being a family man that I don’t think we had many dollars 

worth of expense at the time with our children when they were in that group. The expense came later on, 

when they became teenagers and yet the amount of $100 and some per year seems excessive even in the 

case of teenagers. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The fact is most of those children weren’t getting any dental care at all. Here’s an 

example. Here is a child that had two teeth looked after. The cost was $708.60. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — What did they do? If they were under the Dental Program and had any 

orthodontic work done you’d probably have $700 or $1,000. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We paid for it, but that was the cost. If they are getting two fillings, they will pay 

up to $100 for them. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I think we’re still running around though aren’t we? We’re talking about what it 

costs the average child and it’s $107. Is that not an excessive figure, $107 for a pre-teen child? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, it isn’t. It isn’t in today’s world at all. 

 

Mr. Chairman, may I point out to the Members opposite that in 1969, that the children born in 1969 had 

an average of five decayed teeth. You look at the cost. You go to a dentist today and find out what it 

costs to fill one tooth. It will be in the range of $40 or more. I saw one the other day with two teeth 

filled, $85. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I should like to make a couple of comments before we leave Item 10. 

I realize that in the case of Item 9, there were only a few people involved and there wasn’t too much of a 

fight put up to prevent this happening with the Hearing Aid Program. I know, in the case of the dentists, 

I know that in Item 1 the Minister of Health mentioned why didn’t the dentists offer a program; they 

didn’t offer us a program. I 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2236 

 

know that the dentists of Saskatchewan were willing to go along with any program that you suggested to 

them or had stated to you and had given their willingness to work with a dental program with you and it 

would have given everyone in Saskatchewan a choice of dentists. I don’t know how well your Dental 

Assistants Program is working out but I know that the dentists of this province did offer this to you and 

they were rejected entirely. You said that it would have been too expensive or they didn’t offer us a 

program. I suggest that your department could have set up a program and that these dentists were willing 

to go along with it. I believe they even made overtures to whatever rate set within reason; they were 

willing to go along with that. I should like to have your comments on this. 

 

The other day you mentioned that the dentists didn’t set up a program; they wouldn’t set up a program, 

or they hadn’t set up a program. I still suggest to you that they were willing to look at a program that 

you would set up and were willing to go along with it. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We refer children to private practitioner dentists and that is the one that I just noted 

here — $708 for some treatment. The point that we think that should be faced up to is that Saskatchewan 

has never had enough dentists, particularly in the rural areas. We simply say that those children would 

not be getting the dental treatment, even if you had a private program with dentists and we have some 

proof of it, because if you go to Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Quebec and 

Manitoba, those are the ones who have the programs besides ourselves, the three that use private 

practitioners and a fee for service, have serviced 36.4, 28.4 and 35 per cent of their eligible children. In 

our plan we have serviced 86 per cent. Manitoba has a plan somewhat similar and they have serviced 82 

per cent and Prince Edward Island, which has the progressive Liberal Government has serviced 85 per 

cent. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I am not arguing that. I know that you have a higher rate, but all that 

I am suggesting to you is that the dentists were willing to go along with the program and I realize that 

these other provinces may not have programs set up. I am suggesting that if the Government has set up a 

program, the dentists were willing to go along with your program. Granted, these other provinces may 

not have these programs. What I am suggesting is, here you couldn’t set up this program, but you want 

to get involved and you have to be involved in almost everything to do with people in this province. You 

can’t stay out of it. I am suggesting that the dentists were willing to go along with a program of your 

choice. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, the Swift Current Health Region is presently operating a program 

for children that are under 14 years of age. Has the Minister any figures as to what it is costing the Swift 

Current Health Region per person that is enrolled? The Minister has given an indication to us that there 

aren’t any other plans in which people, of course, can get this service. The Swift Current Health Region 

has had these plans for years and years and anybody under 14 years of age in the Swift Current Health 

Region has this service available. Have you any statistics, any figures, that show what it is costing the 

Swift Current Health Region per student in that area? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2237 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, we haven’t because they won’t supply us with the figures. I know they have a 

dental tax. I believe it is $14 per year for family and they pay 50 per cent of the College of Dentistry fee 

schedule. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I would suggest then that the Minister should get some of the information from 

that area. For $14 I am able to insure three teenagers. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They also have a 56 per cent enrolment. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I believe you have been lining up your staff for next year. Have you any 

indication as to how many new dental nurses you are going to be hiring during this coming year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman, we couldn’t hear the question. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please! 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I understand that you have been lining up your staff for the next year and you 

have been placing your people in this program. How many new dental nurses are you going to employ 

this year, how many people, in other words, out of the graduating class that is coming out of the 

institute? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Ten new positions, but we expect there will be 50 dental nurses hired because of 

vacancies. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — How many graduates are there in the institute this year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — About 50. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — In other words all graduates of the institute will most likely find employment in 

Saskatchewan this year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes. 

 

MR. MALONE: — How many graduates will there be next year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We think about 50 again. 

 

MR. MALONE: — The point is, Mr. Minister, are you intending to absorb all the graduates every year 

as they graduate? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We can’t prevent them marrying and quitting their jobs. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Well, if you want to prolong the agony, just keep answering like that. Is it your 

intention to absorb every graduate as he or she graduates from the college? 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2238 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, it is except that we have an agreement with Manitoba and we supply them 

with some positions too. 

 

MR. MALONE: — How many are going to Manitoba this year? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — About 20. 

 

MR. MALONE: — If 20 are going to Manitoba and 50 are graduating, and you are hiring all 50 . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There are 50 from Saskatchewan and 20 from Manitoba. That adds up to 70. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Yes, but the question is: how many people are graduating? You may be having a lot 

of fun over there, joking with your officials and so on. I asked you, my colleague from Maple Creek 

asked you, and the answer was 50. Now you tell me there are 70 graduating. Give us straight answers 

and we will get through these Estimates. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Fifty for the Saskatchewan Plan and 20 for Manitoba. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, how many graduates, not for the Saskatchewan Plan. Why didn’t 

you say that in the first place! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Thought you could add it on your calculator! 

 

Item 10 agreed. 

 

Item 11 agreed. 

 

ITEM 12 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I don’t know if this is the appropriate section or not, but you have been doing a 

study on the nursing care centres that you established throughout Saskatchewan a number of years ago. I 

think of one that was in our area at Fox Valley at which you had a nurse attached to a small facility that 

you had in the area. Are you going to continue this particular program? Is it something that we can 

expect that the nurses will be replaced in the homes? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The answer is, No, not at the present time, We are awaiting the report of the 

committee, which will be down on April 26. 

 

Item 12 agreed. 

 

ITEM 13 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I have a few questions here and I suppose this particular one on vital statistics 

could generate an awful lot of questions, but I will ask just one or two. Is the birth-rate 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2239 

 

16.6 per thousand, a slight decrease over 1974, but a little bit higher than 16.3 as it indicates, the lowest 

ever in Saskatchewan? Also, talking about the marriage rate, it is going down. However, the fact of the 

birth rate being lower, can you tell me and I just want few figures on abortion statistics in Saskatchewan 

and some relationship to some of the medical services provided, can the Minister give me (I understand 

the abortion rate in Saskatchewan is down) the 1975-76, 1976-77 figures? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — 1,236 in 1976 and 1,063 in 1976. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister that is pretty dramatic, and when I say dramatic at least it is a 

substantial reduction of some 200. Does that mean that your Government has tightened up the 

regulations of the Department of Health? Can the Minister give me any reason for that reduction? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It is the position of the committee that operate in these hospitals and we don’t 

interfere with them in any way, shape or form. They make the decisions. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I have only one other observation and that is, on Table 4, Page 42, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission, there are a few things — and I am not much of an 

expert on these, I’ll be the first to admit it — but there are some very substantial increases in some of the 

D&C operations, tubal ligations and this kind of thing, if you notice, D&C from 8,144 in 1975 to 8,597 

in 1976, which is quite a very substantial increase. We are talking here about 400 whereas the number of 

abortions was only down 200, if I understand the figures correctly. You get into the tubal ligation and 

there it was 3,296 this year; it is up to 3,408 and I am wondering is there any relationship; has your 

department any feeling about this, even though the abortion committees may be tightening up in the 

hospital itself, in the decision-making as to abortions. Is it actually becoming more easy for a woman to 

get a D&C or a tubal ligation and this kind of thing? Is there a relationship and I am not suggesting that 

you have any responsibility for the number of tubal ligations, but it is a social problem that we are 

talking about; do you think there is any relationship here? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — To the best of our knowledge we are not aware of any change from previous years’ 

procedures; that’s just the statistic of what occurred. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Could the Minister tell us something else which I really think is the significant 

thing about abortions, and I won’t prolong the discussion on it. Could the Minister — he says that it is 

related to the Abortion Committees in the hospitals, and I am sure it is, they have to give the approval — 

could the Minister indicate the number of applications for abortions to these abortion committees in 

1975, 1976 and 1976-77, which would really give us an indication as whether or not they are doing a 

tighter job? 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2240 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The information is not reported to us by the hospitals. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — You have no idea of how many cases the abortion committees sit on? Is this 

not a statistic that would be of some value to the department and perhaps to the general public? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We don’t ask how many tonsillectomies or any other medical procedure. We don’t 

necessarily get that information. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I fail to understand that. You certainly do ask. You have a whole list of 

selective procedures here, with the number that you do provide the information. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — You are missing the point. What I am saying is that we don’t know how many 

people came into our hospitals for tonsillectomy and the tonsillectomies weren’t performed. How could 

we? Or any other medical procedure. And the same thing is true in terms of abortion. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No, let’s get away from the apples and the oranges here, because someone 

comes in and is diagnosed to have a required tonsil operation certainly is not the same as somebody 

coming in and making an application for an abortion. You say then that you carry statistics for one and 

why should you for the other. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I said that we had no way of knowing how many people came in who are potential 

tonsillectomy operations, who actually didn’t get a tonsillectomy operation and went away. We don’t 

know how many applications they had. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Why not keep a record of the number of applications? Surely there has just 

been a major research program in Canada. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It is possible that you could have an application turned down by the original 

physician and that person would go to another physician and it is performed. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What I am asking is how many; I didn’t ask you if there was a repetition of 

applications between someone in Saskatoon or Regina. I am asking you a very specific question. How 

many applications were presented to the abortion committees in the hospitals in Saskatchewan for 

approval in 1975-76 as compared to 1976-77? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We don’t know; it is not reported to us. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — It is unfortunate, Mr. Minister. Would the hospitals object to that kind of 

information being transmitted to you? 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2241 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We don’t know whether the hospitals would do it or not. We don’t require them to 

do it. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Have you any figures on the number of abortions or does your department take 

any evaluation or estimate of the number of abortions performed on Saskatchewan citizens outside the 

Province of Saskatchewan? Do you have any information in that regard? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It looks like 64, MCIC paid for 1,127; 1,063 occurred in the province and therefore 

it would be 64 outside. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Now, 64 have been performed outside of the Province of Saskatchewan. Could 

the Minister indicate where those occur, in other words is it at the border line, Medicine Hat? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I didn’t say the number performed; I said the number we paid for. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — How many did you pay for? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, 64 is the difference between the 1,127 that MCIC paid for in 1976 

and the 1,063 that were performed in the province as reported. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I appreciate that Mr. Minister; now I would like some supplementary 

information in that regard if you don’t mind, in order to find out if that is where they are going and as to 

the reason they are going. Would the Minister indicate, I am sure that MCIC would have some kind of 

an indication, as to whether these were paid for in Medicine Hat or on the border, somebody from Maple 

Creek perhaps going to Medicine Hat. You don’t have any idea or any . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — MCIC records would have it, but that is confidential information. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — As to where the bills are paid to is that confidential? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Confidentiality is related to the claim and on whose behalf it is paid for etc. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — We are not interested in who the claim is. Could the Minister find out the 

geographic location of the claims paid in a general way? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We think it would be quite an expensive procedure to dig that information out and 

we really don’t see any point in having it. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I just think it would be interesting because it would 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2242 

 

indicate to us if the abortion committee was really tough, it would force people to go to New York or 

somewhere in that area. However, if you don’t have it, it is unfortunate. Maybe you could give us a little 

further information before we get off this. Under what set of circumstances would MCIC pay for an 

abortion outside of Saskatchewan for a Saskatchewan citizen? Could the Minister give me that because 

most bills that MCIC pays are outside? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They get paid at the same rate as they would have been paid had the medical 

procedure been performed in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, suppose for example, somebody would go to Winnipeg to get an 

abortion. Why would MCIC pay for that? That is not an emergency. It is not the same kind of 

circumstances as somebody gets into a car accident or when he breaks a leg. Why would they pay for 

somebody to go outside the Province of Saskatchewan and have an abortion? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It would be the same as if you went to Winnipeg and had your appendix out. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Is there any approval procedure in this regard? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — If you went to Winnipeg and had your appendix out, your physician would be paid 

on the same basis as if that operation was performed in Saskatchewan and you don’t have to have prior 

approval. You don’t have to have it for an abortion. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am going to get off this. Maybe some of my colleagues 

have another one but there is a principle here that I am referring to. Abortion is controlled on a national 

basis and if an abortion committee refuses to accept an abortion in the Province of Saskatchewan and 

that patient goes outside the Province of Saskatchewan to get an abortion then there is something wrong 

with the application of the law. Similarly, if someone comes to Saskatchewan to get an abortion that has 

not been approved in some other province and that was really what I was trying to get at and I am not 

sure what that means or what it doesn’t mean but it seems that the application of the law would not 

perhaps be the same in all provinces, that . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I just say those committees operate under federal law. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I think it is very obvious what the Member is trying to get at which you are nicely 

dancing around. Let me pursue it. The abortions that were paid for by MCIC that were conducted 

outside of this province, did MCIC make any inquiry to see if the person receiving the abortion has 

applied to have the abortion in Saskatchewan and was refused by the therapeutic abortion committee at 

the hospital that she applied to? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — That would be considered an invasion of the privacy of the individual and MCIC 

would not make an investigation. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2243 

 

MR. MALONE: — You don’t go beyond. If somebody from Saskatchewan has an abortion in Calgary 

or Winnipeg or whatever, a bill comes in you just pay it? There is no investigation or anything else, is 

that correct? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No investigation. 

 

MR. MALONE: — What you are just saying then is that an abortion is available to anybody from 

Saskatchewan anywhere in the world if she shops around, let’s say in Canada, if she just shops around 

and finds a therapeutic abortion committee that will approve that particular abortion, whether she is 

refused in Saskatchewan or not? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It would be no different if the reverse were true and the person came from 

Manitoba to Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What you are really saying is abortion on demand as far as MCIC is concerned, 

isn’t that what you are saying? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, I am not. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Just a minute. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The federal law is consistent across the country. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Suppose somebody flew to New York, and you just said you didn’t investigate, 

to avoid the Canadian law or to Philadelphia and she just sent in the bill, MCIC pays the bill. Isn’t that 

abortion on demand? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It is an insured service under the federal Act. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I ask the Minister if MCIC paid for a single abortion 

performed outside of Canada? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It is likely we have but we have to check to find out. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Well, let me ask you then the serious question about how MCIC could pay for an 

abortion performed outside of Canada when that abortion would then be illegal, that is it would be 

contrary to Canadian law? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Treated exactly the same as is treated with all other provinces under the federal 

law. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Don’t you have to distinguish between abortions performed within the Canadian 

jurisdiction and abortions performed outside? For this reason abortions performed within Canada have 

to be performed within the four corners of the Criminal Code, that is to say they have to be approved by 

a therapeutic abortion committee in a recognized hospital. Before abortion can be 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2244 

 

performed lawfully in this country you have to have the approval of the therapeutic abortion committee 

in a hospital. Abortions can be performed outside of the country in New York and in London without 

requiring the approval of the therapeutic abortion committee. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Insured service. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I am astounded. I would like to ask you if you can give us the numbers of foreign 

abortions that MCIC paid for? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We will get that information for you. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Would you consider then something else? Am I right in making the assumption 

that a woman who could not get an abortion under Canadian law, who sought and got an abortion 

outside the country could submit claims to MCIC and be paid in respect of it? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, and it is not different than any other province in Canada. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Just one other question while we are on the subject and then we will get off it. You 

indicated in your figures about the number of therapeutic abortions for 1976 that it was down from 1975 

by I believe 37. I am surprised the Minister doesn’t have these figures in his head. He rattled them off 

just a minute ago. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, 73. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I’m sorry, 73. I wonder if the Minister would tell me in the year ending 1975, not 

1976, 1975 how many D&Cs there were to terminate pregnancy? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It will be in the 1975 Annual Report. We haven’t got it here right now, but we 

could get it, or you could check your old one. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I just happen to have it here. And I note that in 1975 there were 320 D&Cs 

performed to terminate pregnancy. In 1976 there were 540 D&Cs to terminate pregnancy, which is more 

than the drop in therapeutic abortions. I wonder if the Minister could explain the reason for the increase 

in that one particular year and whether or not you would conclude that that increase came about as just 

another method of obtaining a therapeutic abortion? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I am informed that the D&C operation does not necessarily, is not necessarily 

connected with the pregnancy. It could be for many other reasons as well. 

 

MR. MALONE: — If that is the case then why do you show it in your statistics as being done to 

terminate a pregnancy? That is 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2245 

 

how you show it, and a number of other reasons too. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Tell us where. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Page 58, obstetrical procedures, D&C to terminate pregnancy, 540. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — What are you reading from, the SHSP report? 

 

MR. MALONE: — That is right. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I am still quoting from the MCIC report page 42. You are reporting from page 58 

of the SHSP report. The figure in the other report, of course, is much, much larger in total because it 

includes other than cases connected with pregnancy. You were looking at SHSP report and I was 

looking in the MCIC report. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I put a proposition to you which I will repeat. You earlier said that the number of 

therapeutic abortions were down and I noticed that and I think that that is a good thing. At the same time 

that I note that they are down I note that the D&C to terminate pregnancy category is up significantly, if 

I can use that word, from last year, it is up from 320 to 540, some 220 surgical procedures up in one 

year, which is far more than the number of therapeutic abortions that dropped. So I am asking you if you 

would not conclude that this has just been another method being used to have therapeutic abortions? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We have no knowledge of why there should be the variation at all. We simply get 

information with regard to D&Cs and with regard to abortions and that is reported. We have no way of 

knowing why that should occur. 

 

Item 13 agreed. 

 

Item 14 agreed. 

 

ITEM 15 

 

MR. MALONE: — Could you explain what this item is for Mr. Minister? Just explain what this service 

is, health promotion? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It used to be health information and promotion grants plus the Aware Program and 

it is now consolidated into one. 

 

MR. MALONE: — How much of it is Aware? What percentage? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, $331,720. 

 

MR. MALONE: — So the Aware Program is not funded through the grant to the Alcoholism 

Commission? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2246 

 

MR. MALONE: — I have often wondered why not. It seems to be a logical place to put it. Is there 

maybe some good reason? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Because it is a health education program and not related strictly to people with 

alcohol problems. It is related to the general population. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — How much of this total expenditure is straight for advertising on television and 

radio? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — $276,000. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I didn’t hear that figure. I was busy . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — $276,000. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Could you ship over one of those $450 hearing aids? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They only cost $222. I think you need a few ‘222s’. 

 

Item 15 agreed. 

 

Item 16 agreed. 

 

ITEM 17 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Is this where the CAT Scanner is going to be located, the University Hospital 

is it? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, it will be in the University Hospital. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I think we can still talk generally about equipment and so forth in this Item. I 

would presume, Mr. Chairman. Can the Minister tell me, has the Cancer Commission requested any 

equipment last year that was not approved by the Department of Health? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Some was deferred. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Could the Minister indicate what was deferred and the value of it. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — It was deferred I should point out by agreement with the Commission. The 

simulator was deferred; it cost about $175,000 and it was deferred based on the CAT scanner being 

ordered later, because there is a connection between the two. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That is the only equipment requested by the Cancer Commission that was 

deferred? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — This time, yes. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2247 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — We are talking about the last fiscal year. 

 

Has there been any equipment requested by the Cancer Commission for the next fiscal year that has 

been refused. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The next fiscal year, No. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — So we don’t have to worry when you slash and hack and cut your budget and 

all the rest of it, that you are going to do that to the Cancer Commission. You will see that they get the 

equipment that they want and they require. May I make that general conclusion, Mr. Minister. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — If we were slashing and cutting and so on we wouldn’t be up to $404 million would 

we? 

 

Item 17 agreed. 

 

ITEM 18 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the Minister, we are up $1.5 million here on this 

one. I see there are 22 new employees. If you go on to 14 and 4 per cent ratio on wages boosts it still 

doesn’t take it up anywhere near the $1,501,000. I wonder if you can give me the difference? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Well, we started out, Mr. Chairman, with the base in 1976-77 of $2,969,000. There 

were some deletions. There were minor — $78,000; salary adjustments were $525,210, a 14.2 per cent 

increase. There were 4 per cent additional sums $115,610 for increments in the agreement; there were 

additions in terms of staff as you already noted costing $439,810. And we made provision for an 

increase in the current contract which is being negotiated coming out with the figure of $4,163,067. 

 

Item 18 agreed. 

 

Item 19 agreed. 

 

ITEM 20 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Just a couple of quick questions here. How many patients are left in Weyburn? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We are talking about the Psychiatric Centre not SVECH, as you are aware, and the 

number of patients as of December 31, was 38. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That is $2 million to operate for 38 patients? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Those are in-patients; they are coming and going all the time. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Could the Minister tell me — the reason I left it for 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2248 

 

Weyburn as I am not too familiar with your psychiatric centre program — how many people are left in 

North Battleford in the hospital, the mental hospital? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — About 320. 

 

MR. LARTER: — A question, Mr. Chairman, the patients that have been let out into the various homes 

in the southeast from the Weyburn hospital, this shows up under social services is this correct? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — They are financed through the Department of Social Services once they are placed 

in an approved home. 

 

MR. LARTER: — I am trying to find out if these people that have some of these people in their homes, 

if it is being budgeted for this year for increases for these people. It costs us $60 to $90 a day to keep 

them in the hospitals and they are only getting $12 to $20 a day. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — There was an increase on April 1. I can get it for you I think . . . Level I went from 

$190 up to $230, an increase of $40 per month; Level II from $240 to $290, $50 a month; Level III $300 

to $360, $60 a month. Of course, there is more care required as you go up on the levels. 

 

Item 20 agreed. 

 

Items 21 and 22 agreed. 

 

ITEM 23 

 

MR. MALONE: — One can’t help but comment on the fact that the Government through taxation will 

receive, estimated in this current fiscal year something like $65,500,000 from taxes on the sale of liquor. 

Yet it is prepared to grant to the Alcoholism Commission only the sum of $3,200,000, just to round it 

off. I do compliment the Minister by allowing for the slight increase of about $1 million. 

 

I wonder . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — One week’s profit! 

 

MR. MALONE: — One week’s profit as the Member points out. 

 

I wonder if the Minister could . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, Order, please! 

 

MR. MALONE: — I see the Government is rather touchy about this particular item and I don’t blame 

them for being sensitive. They certainly ought to be sensitive about the niggardly amount that they have 

granted to the Alcoholism Commission. I wonder if the Minister would undertake to advise this House 

whether he agrees that this amount granted is sufficient for the Commission to carry on its duties, 

particularly in view of the fact that the Government, by various methods obviously 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2249 

 

encourages the purchase of liquor and in doing so, of course, the Government gets the biggest reward 

from it because of the amount of taxes it brings in. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The increase, of course, to the Alcoholism Commission is about 33 per cent, if you 

look at it. Figure it out. That is not the total amount of money spent by government in terms of alcohol 

problems. There is a grant of $3,191,000 to the Alcoholism Commission. There is $331,720 spent on the 

Aware Program. There is $482,000 spent in the budget of Northern Saskatchewan with respect to 

alcohol. There is $117,700 spent in the Department of Education in the Driving While Impaired 

Program. There is $1,104,030 spent on in-patient care for alcoholism through SHSP. There is $422,120 

at St. Joseph’s Hospital in Estevan through SHSP. There are out of province hospitals, Heartview 

Foundation Mandan, N.D., where $65,000 is spent. The total through SHSP is $1,595,650. Through 

MCIC the Alcoholism Psychosis, $13,500; principal diagnosis $181,250; cirrhosis of the liver, $47,650; 

Department of Social Services and the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development another 

$439,770. The Department of Social Services on behalf of the patients at Calder Rehab in Saskatoon; 

Meyers House in Regina another $51,500 for a total of $6,452,070, which is 10 per cent of the assumed 

profit. And if we could only convince you fellows to quit drinking we would get that profit down. 

 

MR. MALONE: — The Minister has again demonstrated his only answer to problems, and that is to get 

up and quote figures. That is what you have been doing ever since these Estimates started. 

 

Nobody is denying the fact that you have spent that amount of money, but I wonder if the Minister 

would not agree with me that alcoholism is a growing social problem, that alcoholism is a problem that 

really is a sociological medicine in this day and age. I wonder if the Minister wouldn’t agree that 

perhaps even more should be allotted from government funds to meet this problem whether it be grants 

to the Alcoholism Commission, ads for Aware and a number of other programs that you have 

mentioned. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, and we would like some sharing from the Federal Government because it is a 

major problem, particularly with the native population. 

 

MR. MALONE: — That is your answer is it? If the Federal Government will share you will spend 

more. Is that the only answer you have to give this House? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We will consider it if they put up some money. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I wonder then if the Minister feels that way, if he would move a resolution to that 

effect. As the Minister knows it is impossible for us on this side to move a resolution about government 

spending or we would do so. But seeing the Minister is so sincere in his remarks about this problem, I 

wonder if he would be prepared to present a resolution in this House for the consideration of all 

Members. I think he would find a receptive ear on this side of the House in the Liberal Party. I would 

ask the Minister to move such a resolution. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2250 

 

Hopefully if we pass the resolution the Government will do its utmost to implement it. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Chairman, I noted with interest the comments 

made by the Member for Lakeview and I know that neither the Minister of Health nor I are lawyers and 

we have trouble drafting resolutions. There is no difficulty at all for the Member on that side or indeed 

the Leader of the Opposition to draft a resolution urging the Government to spend more on alcoholism 

research, publicity or whatever the Member wants. I am sure that he wouldn’t want this House to do 

without his legal talents and so I am sure seeing as there is no problem with respect to the rules, with 

respect to this, that we can see forthcoming very soon a resolution from the Member for Lakeview. 

 

MR. MALONE: — If anybody on this side of the House drafts a resolution calling for the spending of 

money the Chair usually rules it out of order but if the Minister would like to just give us a moment and 

stand this item, indeed we will be prepared to draft such a resolution and I hope you people will be 

prepared to support it. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, we have made representations to Ottawa on many occasions. We 

had discussions with the Department of Health with respect to this sort of thing and I want to point out 

that we are the only province, at least initial province, to start out with an Aware program in an attempt 

to alert people to the problems in alcoholism. 

 

MR. MALONE: — You are begging the question, though, Mr. Minister. The Provincial Secretary has 

indicated that he would be prepared, I gather, to support such a resolution, but these are your Estimates, 

you are the Minister involved. Would you be prepared to support such a resolution? In fact I would be 

glad to come over and sit down with you to discuss the wording of it. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I should like to see the resolution first. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Can we just stand this item then, Mr. Chairman, and we will draft such a resolution. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Is the Committee agreed to stand this item? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I will talk while he is drafting. Mr. Minister there is one other 

item . . . We will wait until the Minister comes back . . . 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to move a motion, seconded by the Member for Regina 

South (Mr. Cameron): 

 

That the total amount of the expenditure of the Department of Health related to alcoholism and alcohol 

related diseases be no less than 25 per cent of the estimated receipts from the Saskatchewan Liquor 

Board. 



 

Committee of Finance  April 18, 1977. 

 

2251 

 

I wonder if the Minister of Health would be prepared to second such a motion? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I have examined the motion and I find that it would be committing the 

Government to extra expenditure. I refer to page 217 of Beauchesne, or 251, Item 4: 

 

Private Members may introduce resolutions that do not directly involve the expenditure of public 

money and have no operative effect but simply express an abstract opinion on a matter which may 

necessitate a future grant. 

 

I have examined the resolution and find that it would be committing the Government, so I would have to 

rule the motion out of order. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I certainly respect your opinion, Mr. Chairman, and I think it is a proper opinion. I 

was trying to say to the Members opposite a moment ago that no such resolution by a Member from this 

side of the House would be accepted. I congratulate you for not giving in to the pressure that was put on 

you by the Members opposite to make such a resolution be in order. But there is a very easy cure to the 

situation, Mr. Chairman, the Members opposite have indicated their interest in this type of resolution. 

The Member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley), of course, felt that it was an appropriate resolution and I can only 

suggest, Mr. Chairman, that unless one of those Members introduce a similar resolution that we can 

assume that they are not interested in providing any more money for the treatment of alcoholism and 

alcohol related diseases in Saskatchewan. So I invite the Members opposite before the Attorney General 

tries to adjourn the House to introduce such a resolution and let’s run out the clock, Mr. Chairman, and 

debate the whole issue. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if we could stand the clock for a few minutes. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to call it 10:00 o’clock. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: No, no! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I am sure the Hon. Member would agree . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I might inform the Hon. Member about the alcoholism programs in 

Saskatchewan and what has really happened. When we took office there was no more than $500,000 

being spent on the Alcoholism Commission. 

 

MR. MALONE: — On a Point of Order. Mr. Chairman, the Point of Order is that there was a resolution 

coming. I would not have to bring this to your attention. There is no resolution forthcoming apparently 

so I bring it to your attention that it is 10:00 o’clock. 



 

April 18, 1977.  Committee of Finance 

 

2252 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — It seems to me in all fairness that when the Member for Lakeview made a speech, I 

am sure he would like to hear a rebuttal, but there is always another day, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 o’clock p.m. 


