
























































Hansard: May 01, 1978


2145 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
MAY 1, 1978 

 
The Assembly met at 2:00 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Seventy-fifth Anniversary Pins 
 
MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina-Victoria): – Mr. Speaker, if I may take a moment to make a small 
presentation to each one in the Assembly here today. As you know, we are celebrating our Seventy-fifth 
Anniversary as a city, since 1903 and June 19 being the official date. I thought it would be appropriate 
that each member receive a Seventy-fifth Anniversary pin on behalf of the people of Regina. I would 
like to distribute these through the pages and through you, Mr. Speaker, and that you receive the first 
one on this occasion. Of course we invited all the MLAs to participate in many of our events. We have 
some good ones throughout the remainder of the year, to help us celebrate Regina’s birthday. Would the 
pages take them and distribute them around and give Mr. Speaker the first one. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatoon City Police 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, I would address my 
question to the Premier. The Premier is no doubt aware of the decision by the Saskatoon Police 
Association to refuse to patrol in singles rather than in pairs. What is your government doing about 
ensuring that the people of the province of Saskatchewan receive a totally adequate and complete police 
protection in the forthcoming weeks and months? 
 
HON. A.E. MR. BLAKENEY (Premier): – Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member will know, the 
Saskatoon police are a municipal police force employed by the city of Saskatoon and headed by a chief 
of very, very considerable competence, with a distinguished record of service in the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police, a person in whom I have great confidence, Mr. Gibbon. I am very confident that the 
civic officials of the city of Saskatoon, together with the chief will arrange to give Saskatoon police 
protection second to none in Canada. It has been first rate up to now and I have no reason to believe it 
will be other than that in the future. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Minister, supplementary question to the Premier. Would your government 
today consider granting to the municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan sufficient additional 
revenues to enable them to adequately protect their citizens through a twinning of the police patrols as 
requested by the Police Association of Saskatoon? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I have no reason to believe that the revenues the city of Saskatoon 
are not as they now stand, sufficient to province the measure of police protection that the mayor the 
Police commission and the Chief of Police decide is the 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2146 

 

appropriate level of police protection for the citizens of Saskatoon and I would certainly not want to 
intrude on that decision-making process. 
 

Replacement of Director of Cancer Commission, Saskatoon 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): – A question to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, 
about the Cancer Commission. I ask the Minister of Health if it has been brought to his attention yet by 
Alta Brown that the medical staff at the Cancer Commission operation in Saskatoon has voted a vote of 
non-confidence in the director there and asked that she look into the replacement of that director and I 
ask if that has been brought to your attention and whether you intend to take any action on that matter? 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): – The situation in Saskatoon has been brought to 
my attention and I am aware of it. I believe that it is in the hands of the commission and the executive 
director and will be adequately dealt with by them. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask the minister why you chose or the Cancer 
Commission chose to bring two doctors from Great Britain, one to Regina, who was accepted by the 
medical staff and accepted by the staff at the office here and then was fired and one to Saskatoon who 
has not been accepted, has only six years experience and is found by the medical staff to be wanting in 
his duties, why did you choose to overlook Saskatchewan doctors who are as well or better qualified and 
other Canadian doctors and go job hunting to Great Britain for the two doctors? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: – Mr. Minister, the Cancer Commission advertised the position to try to search 
out the most capable people it could find. It had interviews with many candidates. It has decided, in its 
wisdom, after reviewing – I wish the member would be more accurate in his questions and refrain from 
the allegation that there was a firing. There was not a firing, there was a probationary period. If the 
member does not know what a probationary period is all about I would suggest it wouldn’t be very 
difficult to find out. Because the Cancer Commission found these two candidates, in their view, at that 
time, to have certain qualities that they thought would be beneficial to the cancer program, they engaged 
them in their present positions. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, is it the Minister of Health’s intentions or the 
intention of the Cancer Commission and in your knowledge, that the Cancer Commission intends now to 
fire as well the head of the Saskatoon Cancer Commission office? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: – No, I don’t not think that the Cancer Commission has any such intentions. It 
will look at the situation carefully. Surely I would think that the staff of any establishment would not 
necessarily determine who is going to be the director but their views will be of interest to the 
commission in the process of its review of the situation. 
 

Inadequacy of Grain Transportation 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of 
transportation. 
 
Mr. Minister, for some time it has been rumoured that Canada has been losing grain sales because of the 
inadequacy of its transportation system and the inability to have the right kind of grain and a sufficient 
volume of grain at the proper location for export. 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2147 
 

Mr. Minister, now that this has been confirmed, indisputably confirmed, my question to the minister is, 
since your federal counterpart in Ottawa have obviously been having some audiological difference over 
the past couple of years, will the minister assure this Assembly and the farmers of Saskatchewan that 
these philosophical, nit picking points will quickly be resolved and that it will be full steam ahead 
toward getting a system in place that will alleviate this loss of market that our farmers are experiencing? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the differences 
between the government of Saskatchewan and the federal government with respect to transportation, I 
don’t think there is any kind of difference involved in the situation of getting grain to the west coast. I 
think that both governments agree that it is in fact, a high priority. 
 
With respect to the lack of movement to the west coast, our government brought this matter to the 
attention of the federal government as early as late January and we have had a continuing 
correspondence between ourselves and the government with respect to that situation. At all times we 
have received assurances from the federal Minister of Transport that he would do all in his power in 
order to get the grain to the west coast in sufficient volume to meet the sales that have been carried 
forward by the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
We put forward the argument, Mr. Speaker, that a transportation problem, which in this case it was, 
could in some respects undermine the efforts of our wheat board and the hon. minister agreed that that 
was so, and the heavy emphasis has been on westward movement to the coast to meet the demand there. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the problem which I have 
described has been in place long before last January. I’m sure the minister is aware that an American 
report which has indicated that Canada has missed out on sales to China which has since been confirmed 
by the head of the Canadian Grain Commissioners, one Esmond Jarvis, and the revelation that Canada 
has no sales to China past August, has precipitated the problem to the fact that we must have a 
transportation system in place in a minimum amount of time. 
 
In light of the situation, will the minister tell this Assembly what plans his department has to orchestrate 
such a development with the federal government? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the provincial government’s position on west 
coast movement, as early as the Hall Commission hearings in Vancouver, we put forward a proposition 
with respect to further shipments out of the port of Prince Rupert. There are indications that that could 
well be taking place. Everyone agrees that there are problems of shipment to the Port of Vancouver 
simply because of the situation there but every effort is being made to improve that. That is not to say 
that our position with respect to Rupert is so strong that we are going to forget about movement through 
Thunder Bay or movement through the Port of Churchill. I think Saskatchewan needs all of the options 
open. 
 
With respect to the problems of this past season I think that is what we have to concentrate ourselves on; 
the problems with the past seasons relate to the capacity of the railways to deliver the grain, in particular 
the capacity of the Canadian Pacific. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in light of the fact 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2148 

 

that the Americans recently sold the Chinese a million metric tons of wheat and appear to be on the 
verge of selling them a great deal more, is the minister telling this Assembly that our farmers can look 
forward to Canada being bogged down in a bureaucratic fight between bureaucrats of the Prairies and 
bureaucrats of Ottawa? Is that what you are telling the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — What I am telling the farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and what I tell 
the hon. member, that dealing with grain movement a policy proposal has been clearly outlined by the 
Hal Commission. If we can get those Hall Commission recommendations implemented, a great many of 
our grain movement problems will be solved. That is our position. It is shared by all of the western 
provinces and I don’t think it is a matter of bureaucrats at all, it is matter of decision being made at the 
policy level. 
 

Provincial Fish Marketing Commission 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN: – Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to know as a result of some of the press articles that have been very recently in the news, if 
it is the intention of your government to proceed with a provincial fish marketing agency commission or 
board, of one form or another, in the face of the promise of legal action from the federal Fresh Water 
Fish Marketing Corporation? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan ): – Mr. Speaker, we have tried to 
make our position clear with respect to this matter. It is our first objective to attempt to remain within 
the marketing agency as long as we are able to do so. We are not going to remain within the federal Fish 
Marketing Agency if that agency is going to downgrade or, in fact, militate against the fishery in 
Saskatchewan. We are going to attempt, once more, to arrange an agreement with the Fresh Water Fish 
Marketing Corporations, to handle the fish for Saskatchewan. If that is not possible, and if it is not 
possible to do so leaving the agencies and the fishermen in Saskatchewan the benefactors of that 
agreement then we will have to look at the alternatives. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister give this House the assurance that 
this government will not proceed with the fish marketing board or commission of any kind without a 
vote of the eligible producers in Saskatchewan, as is enabled under your National Products Marketing 
legislation? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: – Mr. Speaker, I believe it is evident and has been over a long number of years or 
at least since I have been in on the government side of the House, that the commercial fisherman of 
northern Saskatchewan and the fisherman of the southern portions of the province have been asking the 
province to withdraw from the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation and to establish a marketing 
agency independent of them. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: – One final question. Will the minister again give us the assurance that no 
freshwater board or commission will be established without a vote held of eligible fishermen in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: – Mr. Speaker, I attempted to indicate to the hon. member that I believe the 
fishermen of Saskatchewan have already indicated what their position is with respect to the Freshwater 
Fish Marketing Corporation and I believe their position precludes my commitment that we would 
necessarily go back to them for another 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2149 
 

position which I believe would be the same. 
 

Prison Guard Demotion – Walter Chester 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Ap): – Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. A review of 
Hansard on April 19, in reply to a question by myself with regard to Walter Chester, you stated 
unequivocally that Mr. Chester was not dismissed because of the assault charge. The assault charge, as 
such, had nothing to do with the demotion of Mr. Chester. I have before me a copy of a letter forwarded 
to Mr. Chester by the Deputy Minister of the Department of Social Services under date of February 16, 
1977, this letter being exhibit 11 at the Moore Inquiry, where in the letter specifically states – the deputy 
minister specifically states — that, “In view of the court’s February 11th finding of guilty on the assault 
charge I am taking the following action – suspension and demotion.” Would you now, firstly admit that 
in fact Walter Chester was demoted because of the assault charge and because of the now finding on 
appeal of not guilty that Walter Chester should be completely re-instated with all benefit lost being 
given back to him and full seniority also being restored? 
 
MR. ROLFES: – No, Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with the member. I have the letter before me also, it 
says: 
 

While my decision to suspend and demote you is based on the conviction of the assault charge 
on February 11, 1977 I have also reviewed your work history and find that it confirms my 
decision. In fact a review of the past performance indicates that management has had 
long-standing concern about your willingness to follow established policies and philosophies of 
the correctional centre. Specifically, my concerns include the following . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, this letter was tabled with the Moore Inquiry and I will say that although at that particular 
time the assault time the assault charge was taken into consideration, the reason for the demotion of Mr. 
Chester were based on his past working history. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): – Well, by the way of first supplementary. The letter is quite specific. “I submit 
to the minister that in view of the court finding him guilty on the assault charge I am taking the 
following action.” 
 
We have as well before me, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the Increment Probationary and Annual Rating Form 
on Mr. Chester for the Public Service Commission. This is in 1973, wherein Mr. Chester, in all 
categories, either met requirements or exceeded requirements as an employee as a corrections officer III. 
Would you not be now prepared to admit that in fact Mr. Chester was demoted and made a scapegoat for 
Prince Albert riot and that in fact your failure to reinstate Mr. Chester, now that he has been found not 
guilty, indicates a total lack of support for the correctional officers and their difficult job in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROLFES: – Mr. Minister, there is absolutely no connection between his first statement and the 
conclusion that he draws. Mr. Speaker, I also want to make it very clear to the House that even though 
said the assault charge had nothing to do with it, the member opposite did not continue to read what I 
said in the House here on April 19. 
 
I said, “It (the assault charge) was an addendum to the list of things that finally convinced the 
department that action had to be taken.” The member, as he has done in the past, is simply trying to 
mislead not only the House but the members of this 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2150 

 

province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: – I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, before that every employee of this government has a 
procedure before him if he feels that he is aggrieved and all Mr. Chester has do to is follow that 
procedure and I will make my decision at that time based on the outcome of the grievance procedures. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): – A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Can the minister 
explain why, if these other factors (Mr. Chester’s inability to accept your philosophy) have been long 
standing, you did not demote Mr. Chester sooner? In fact why, if that is the case, did you fly in the face 
of the Increment Probationary and Annual Rating Form which gave him such a high rating? Can you 
explain why you failed to take action sooner, before the assault, if these other reasons are now held out 
as being the real reason for the demotion? 
 
MR. ROLFES: – Mr. Speaker, I suppose one can always ask, why does an employer not take action 
when an employee commits his first offence? I suppose because, as I indicated before, Mr. Chester has 
many good qualities. I think that is evident. No one denies that. One of the problem that Mr. Chester did 
have was to obey the policy of the department and that was not just with this government but also with 
the former administration. There is evidence to show that. As I indicated before, and as we can 
document further incidents of when Mr. Chester found it necessary not to obey the policy of the then 
government and the then administration and I suppose you would have to sometime make a decision as 
to whether or not you are going to take disciplinary action against an employee. All I am saying is that 
the assault charge was the final incident which convinced us that we had to take some action and that 
action was taken. Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, if the employee feels that he has been aggrieved, let 
him take advantage of the grievance procedure; I will then make my decision when the results come in 
from that procedure. 
 

Sask Housing 
 
MISS CLIFFORD (Wilkie): – A question to the minister in charge of Sask Housing. The Battlefords 
low cost housing built about 25 to 30 houses in the 1976-77 season but since then has been shut down. 
What reasons will you give for this project to be discontinued? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — I will take notice. 
 

Saskatoon City Police (cont’d) 
 
MR. COLLVER: – I would direct my question to the Premier. In the light of your refusal to my earlier 
request that the government of Saskatchewan allocate sufficient resources to the municipalities of our 
province, so that police maintenance of twinning police cars for the safety of police officers can be 
introduced, and in the light of the Minister of Social Services, response to our question or request that 
the long-standing good officer, corrections officer, with the Department of Social Services in the 
correctional system be reinstated since he was terminated as a result of a charge from which he has been 
totally exonerated, what steps will your government take today to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan receive adequate police protection and further, what steps will you take to ensure that the 
police officers and correctional officers of our province 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2151 
 

know that the government of Saskatchewan is in support of them? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I will answer his questions one by one. 
 
With respect to the funds, so far as the government of Saskatchewan is concerned, the city of Saskatoon 
and any other city, has full and complete authority to use the very large, unconditional grants which 
were given to them by this government to provide for the police function in any way they like. I do not 
think it is inappropriate for me or for the member for Nipawin to say to the city of Saskatoon how they 
should organize their police force, whether in singles or doubles or triples. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – I believe, I believe that Mr. Chief Gibson, knows more about running a police 
force than does the member for Nipawin or the member for Elphinstone and I therefore suggest that they 
will make the right decisions. 
 
With respect to the personnel in the correctional institutions, I say to this House that we are in full 
support of the personnel of correctional institutions. We have given them full support; we intend to give 
them full support; we wish our correctional institutions to be run well; we believe they are run well and 
we will continue to support all the staff so that they will continue to be run well. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Speaker, in the light of your continued refusal to do anything about this matter, 
and in the light of your suggestion that the allocation of resources to the municipalities is not a means by 
which the municipalities could increase and improve their police services and make their correctional 
officers feel, or the law enforcement officers feel that the government are behind them, will your 
government today consider forwarding to the government of Canada, a request by the government of 
Saskatchewan that capital punishment be reintroduced in the government of Canada legislature and that 
the, a vote be held across the country by the people of Canada to insure that . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Next question, the member for Wascana. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – Question to the Minister of Labour. The Minister of Labour will have recently 
received a letter from the head of the union regarding the continuing problem at the Wascana Hospital 
over the failure to pay housekeeping aids the same amount of money as housemen. I ask the Minister of 
Labour whether it is your intention, now that the investigation has failed to resolve this very important 
matter of equal pay for work of equal value, that the investigation having failed to resolve the matter, 
will the Minister of Labour now take some personal part in the matter to try to resolve it, a matter 
important to various hospitals. I also ask the minister whether he stands by the comments he made in 
writing to me on July 18, 1977, when you said, just briefly, Mr. Speaker, “If the hospital study is not 
successfully implemented, I believe it would be a great setback to the concept of equal pay for work of 
equal value.” It has not been a success. What are you prepared to do now to avoid this great setback to 
what I suggest is a very important concept? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw South): – In answer to the member for Regina Wascana, I think a 
little history, perhaps a little history needs to be dealt into at this point in time. It will be remembered 
that there was a job evaluation study throughout 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2152 

 

the hospital system. That hospital system has since been resolved. The negotiations took place and the 
equal pay for similar work was put in place. At that time the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Association agreed that Wascana Hospital would also have the job evaluation applied to them. Since 
then, the Saskatchewan Government employees, for reasons of their own, withdrew from it. At that 
point in time the women’s division of the Department of Labour went in and made an assessment. They 
made their assessment and discovered what they believed to be some violations of equal pay for similar 
work. Since that time the Board of Governors of Regina Wascana Hospital have decided not to negotiate 
the matter out because, I suppose, of the withdrawal of a commitment which they believe had been 
given by SGEA and accordingly the matter now, as provided for by The Labour Standards Act is being 
forwarded to the Human Rights Commission, I plan to not to involve myself personally. I expect that the 
Human Rights Commission will be dealing with this matter forthwith. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – Mr. Speaker, the minister admits, however, that housekeepers at Wascana 
hospital and housekeepers holding similar position in other hospitals, though doing almost identical 
work with housemen, are paid in all of the hospitals around the province or virtually all of them, less 
money than the amount paint to men doing work of equal value. Does the minister admit that? 
 
MR. SNYDER: – We are not talking in terms of equal pay for work of equal value. Let’s set that 
straight. We are talking in terms of equal pay for similar work and kindly draw the distinction because 
as far as I am aware and I have been given assurances that in the hospital system there are no violations 
in contravention of The Labour Standards At, there are no violations of equal for similar work. 
 

POINTS OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise on a point or order, to suggest to you 
that, today, a matter of extreme urgency, the people of the province of Saskatchewan, was brought to the 
attention of this House . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I want to hear the member’s point of order. I don’t want to hear the 
argument. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, in order to present the point of order you have to develop the 
urgency of the argument. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — On the contrary, on the contrary. All I need to now is what the member’s point of 
order is. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Why would a question that I had on policing in Saskatchewan and on capital 
punishment be cut off in this question period? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well, the member for Nipawin had two question today and supplementaries related 
to them. The first question was with regard to the adequacy of the police force in Saskatoon, i.e. two 
policemen in a car. I gathered from the question and the answers that followed that it lacked some 
urgency since it appeared to be out of the jurisdiction of the province. 
 
The second question the member asked later on dealt with two police in cars and the incident with 
regard to the Correctional Institution. The member was allowed a supplementary. The second 
supplementary that he was asking seemed to me to be off 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2153 
 

the subject and not a supplementary and, therefore, I passed on to the next question. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Speaker, I would just make this comment on this point of order. On a new 
point of order then, if you will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is . . . Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I don’t believe that it is in the rule book 
that you would make a decision as to whether or not capital punishment and the reintroduction of that in 
Canada has anything to do with . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think I made myself quite clear and in case the member wishes to 
check what I said, he can go back and check the record. The latter question was about two police in cars 
and the correctional institution in the province. It was my decision that the second supplementary which 
he asked was not a supplementary in the sense that it sought more information with regard to the subject 
or the answer that was before us. It seemed to me to be off the subject. Now if the member wishes to ask 
further questions, I am sure there will be another opportunity for the member to pursue the subject. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Energy) moved second reading of Bill No. 47 An Act to amend 
The Senior Citizens Home Repair Assistance Act, 1973 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege today to move second reading of Bill 47, An Act to amend the 
Senior Citizens Home Repair Assistance Act, 1973. This important legislation has several major 
benefits: 
 
1. Home Repair Grants help senior citizens to remain independent, in their own homes, in greater 
comfort and security. 
 
2. The program provides jobs in the construction industry during the slow winter months. 
 
3. The general quality of the housing stock in the province is substantially improved. 
 
4. The grants helps stabilize rural communities by making it possible for senior citizens to live in their 
own home communities in adequate housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we launched the Senior Citizens Home Repair program in 1973, we said help should 
go first to the senior citizens with the lowest incomes. So, we limited the program to those receiving 
some or all of the federal Guaranteed Income Supplement. We have done what we set out to do at that 
time. Since September, 1973 over 24,000 senior citizen home owners have received grants totalling 
more than $8 million. The average income of those who received grants in les than $4,000 per year. 
Without the grants, most of these people would have found the money to repair their home impossible to 
find. 
 
This year, thanks primarily to the success of our resources policy, we have the funds to expand the 
Home Repair Program and provide more help to more senior citizens. Effective September 1 of this 
year, single senior citizens with income up to $7,000 per year and couples with incomes of up to 
$11,000 per year will be eligible to receive a home repair grant for the first time. This will open the 
benefits of this program to over 7,500 additional senior citizen home owners. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 
all of the 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2154 

 

24,000 who have already received a grant will be eligible to apply for the second grant to undertake 
further home repairs. 
 
In the future grants will be available to eligible senior citizens every five years. Mr. Speaker, just let me 
give you an idea of how big an expansion this is. We estimate that close to 9,000 senior citizens will 
receive over $4 million in grants before the end of the current fiscal year. By the end of the first full year 
of operation of the expanded program we expect that about 16,000 householders will have applied for 
assistance of $8 million. That is equal to all of the assistance that has been provided over the past five 
years. But not only have we widened the eligibility requirements, we have also increased the maximum 
grant from $500 to $650. Once these amendments are approved, all senior citizens who receive some or 
all of the federal Guaranteed Income Supplement will be eligible for a full $650 grant. Those whose 
incomes are too high to qualify for GIS will be eligible for a grant of between $300 and $650, depending 
on the income. 
 
Now, the government is fully aware that this level of assistance may not, in all cases, pay for the major 
repairs needed in some older homes. Therefore, we offer something more under the Residential 
Rehabilitation Program. Senior citizens requiring additional funds will be able to stack the forgivable 
loans available under that program with the senior citizens grants. Through this combination they can 
qualify for up to $1,625 in grants and forgivable loans. 
 
I think members on both sides will endorse these changes. Mr. Speaker, there are added benefits to 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
In any normal winter the construction industry in Saskatchewan slows down dramatically during the 
winter months. Unemployment goes up. So, we designate the Senior Citizens Home Repair Program as a 
winter works program that operates between September and May of each year. Over the last five years it 
has created more than 700,000 additional man-hours of employment. Mr. Speaker, we expect that the 
expanded Senior Citizens Program will generate almost that many man-hours during the next winter 
alone. This will help maintain our low unemployment. 
 
Most of these employment benefits will go to the small tradesmen, especially in rural areas of the 
province. We have made sure that the Senior Citizens Home Repair Program is fully accessible in the 
smaller communities and rural areas where many senior citizens live. 
 
In five years, over three-quarters of the grant money has gone to senior citizens living outside the cities, 
Mr. Speaker. Over $6 million to enable senior citizens to remain in their own town, rather than being 
forced to move to larger communities; over $6 million in construction work for the tradesmen in smaller 
centres through the province, Mr. Speaker. Yes, and $6 million in grants to help stabilize small 
communities and help improve the quality of life in small-town Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill to improve and expand the Senior Citizen Home Repair Program will, I believe, be 
universally welcome across the province and I invite all the members to give unanimous support to the 
amendments that we are introducing to this bill. Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading to amend The 
Senior Citizens Home Repair Program as set out in Bill 47. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2155 
 

MR. MERCHANT: – Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few brief remarks about the program. 
 
First let me say, a remark about the way these programs are advertised and communicated to the public, 
because I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this program, not dissimilarly from other programs, is 
somewhat dishonest in the way that it is advertised in the sense that everyone who applies will be 
accepted and the clear impression is left with people that all they need to do is apply and the $650 is in 
their hands. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — We haven’t even advertised Where do you see it? 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – This is just a carry on of your same programs and I’m communicating to the 
minister and if he doesn’t realize that I’m shocked, communicating to the minister the fact that what this 
is, is a carry on of your home repair program and the result of that program has been that people feel that 
all they had to do was apply and they would get the money and instead what happens is many of them 
apply and are then told, well we spent all the money that we can spend this year. A whole bevy of your 
programs work in just that way. You make big fellows of yourself about the program (and I’m not 
suggesting this isn’t a good program) you make big fellows of yourselves about the programs . . . 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Vote against it Tony! 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – Oh, I don’t think I’ll be voting against it. You make big fellows of yourselves 
about the program. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — You’re just trying to make cheap politics. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: – I’m not trying to make cheap politics. If you would keep from heckling you 
would find that I would have maintained the tone in an instructive way, instead of always being debated 
by you in your usual political way and arising my tone and (?) going after you in a political way because 
that is all you people seem to be able to understand – this sort of political talk. You take all of your 
leadership from the guy beside you and the only thing you listen to is when somebody is shouting at you 
If you want me to shout, I’ll shout. 
 
Now the second area, Mr. Speaker, the second point that I want to draw to the attention of an ever 
understanding government, Mr. Speaker, is that this program, as with some of the federal programs, 
always dealing with senior citizens of the lowest incomes, seems almost to discriminate against those 
who have saved and have put something aside towards the future. 
 
I had a lawyer’s wife, I was surprised that the attitude had flooded up that high in the economic stratum, 
say to me on Saturday words to the effect that, well, my view is that we should spend all of our money 
because the government will look after us when we are old. Always dealing with people of the lowest 
income and never saying, yes, we’ll have a limited program for people who have saved, always going 
and helping on those of the lowest income, virtually encourages our senior citizens either to have 
divested themselves of their money or to have spent their money by the time they reach old age. 
 
I think the minister is aware, and the government is aware of the growing feeling 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2156 

 

amongst young people that they will be looked after when they get older. But there is no need to say it. 
We are discouraging thrift; we are discouraging care. This government does this, Mr. Speaker, so too 
does the federal government – the federal government with the senior citizen high-rise program, housing 
program, 75 per cent paid for by the federal government, 20 per cent by the provincial and 5 per cent by 
the municipal. But that program again is bringing home to senior citizens that they would almost be 
better off if they hadn’t put $10,000 or $15,000 or $30,000 aside because they would be living in the 
better housing that is available for the very poor. 
 
Now I realize that there is a problem because your tendency is always to say, well, we’ll look after the 
very poor if we can, but I suggest to the government that this is an area that you have to examine. 
Always going to the bottom rung means that we are discouraging thrift. 
 
We face now, Mr. Speaker, a requirement in senior citizens’ housing of about $45 million. The 
minister’s officials will be telling him that the priority requirement for senior citizen housing is about 
$45 million and there is a $15 million carry-over of priority housing from last year. About 2,000 senior 
citizen housing units are urgently required. It is part of the reason that I think this program is a good 
program, a program which makes it possible for people who want to stay in their current housing, to stay 
there. I think that it should be supplemented with a greater emphasis by the government on building 
senior citizen housing with the federal-provincial cost shared agreements in the smaller towns and 
villages so that people aren’t compelled to come into the cities where we have the high-rise 
developments and senior citizens housing available. I realize the minister is now saying, we’re starting 
in that direction, and I realize that and I say that that is where the emphasis should be. 
 
The minister no doubt is aware that a program of about $400 million will be announced within the next 
couple of days by the federal government and that, as well, will be the direction of that material. 
 
The last area that I wanted to mention, Mr. Speaker, is that though I certainly, and I assume my 
colleagues approve of the program that the minister has been discussing, the real problem for people to 
stay in their own house is more a problem with taxes, a problem with expenses in staying in that house, 
expenses which in a large part come from government, expenses with their electrical bill, expenses with 
their power bill, expenses with their insurance, expenses with the municipal tax bill which flows in part 
because of rising municipal costs but also flows because of a failure or inability of the provincial 
government to ensure that the municipal governments have a sufficiently large tax base in order to make 
it possible for senior citizens and others to stay in their own house where they want to be because of the 
cost that’s involved. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to the minister that that’s the area he should be looking at 
next. Repairs are good. You have, as well, a program again only for the very poor on the supplement. 
You have a program that will go in and cut their lawns and clean their walks. That’s a good program and 
I have certainly seen it in operation and think that it is running well in Regina. The next step that you 
have to take if you are going to help people to stay in their own house is to ease the tax load that they 
face and the expenses that are related to taxes. Those expenses really flow from government agencies of 
one sort or another like Sask Power. Now that, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, may be amore economic move 
than it would appear at first blush, a more economic move because if you can keep people independent I 
think you keep them out of the nursing homes of the Minister of Social Service. I think you keep them 
out of the hospitals of the Minister of Health. If you keep them independent and keep them out of 
government run housing you save money in 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2157 
 

that way. The people will look after their own house and probably look after their own bodies better if 
they are staying where they had always been, staying where they are happier to be and staying where, I 
think, they are entitled to be if we in government make easier for them to stay in their own housing. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, all members of the House will accept that inflation affects senior citizens more 
harshly than it does anyone else, because for the young in their 20s and 30s, by and large, they have a 
large debt load and are paying off that debt load in depreciated dollars while their salaries rise to meet 
inflation. It is senior citizens who have been most cruelly ravaged by inflation and who deserve the 
principal consideration and must have that kind of consideration if they are going to stay in their own 
housing. 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): – Mr. Speaker, I just have a few words today to say about this 
program. I think that the Liberal caucus will be in general agreement and in full support of the program. 
However, the minister got a little touchy when the member for Wascana started to talk about advertising. 
Whether you feel there has been any advertising or not, Mr. Speaker, I think due to the Budget 
proclamation of this program starting there are many people who have contacted me about it and have 
been misinformed to some extent and I think that this has been to some extent due to information that 
has come from your department as well, because I know that I did phone your department and got some 
information saying that it would be tied to the Guaranteed Income Supplement. Now, I know it’s a new 
program and there may be some misunderstanding but I would ask the minister that when this program 
does come into implementation that information about it is given to organizations that would be able to 
benefit the senior citizens such as the town council, such as the New Horizons Program, so that their 
hopes are not built up that they will be able to get the full amount and it is found out later that perhaps 
they do not qualify as they thought they had. Mr. Minister, this misconception is, although you may not 
agree, it is being found because I, myself, have gotten two different kinds of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say about this and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill No. 48 – An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 1973 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to introduce today amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation Act which will permit the corporation to provide assistance to small builders in the 
province. The programs proposed will give small contractors greater economic protection and increase 
their flexibility in participating in the housing industry. 
 
With these amendment, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation plans to provide provincial guarantees 
of interim financing loans by private lenders. The province has chosen this approach rather than using 
government capital funding so that it will not be necessary to interrupt the normal relationship of a small 
builder with his bank or credit union. Rather, we will simply be reinforcing this relationship by 
providing the lending institution with additional security for its loans. This, in turn, should lower rates of 
interest for small builders. 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2158 

 

We are also considering the possibility of introducing a form of purchase guarantee to assist small 
builders in areas where housing demand is soft. Further details of this program will be announced when 
final decisions have been made. But let me expand a little on the reasons the government decided to 
support these small contractors. 
 
As I mentioned in the Budget speech, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been proud of the way in which 
our construction industry has responded to the high level of demand. Over the last three years we have 
had more than 10,000 housing starts each year. Back two years ago we reached a record of 13,150 and 
last year, which we didn’t think would be as good a year, we reached 12,850 housing starts 1978, or 
1977 rather. Mr. Speaker, this is an enviable record throughout the country. I think the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation is to be commended in the work that they have undertaken in trying to provided 
housing for the senior citizens or the citizens of this province. However, this high level of activity is 
beginning to catch up. The surge in demand created by the baby boom generated generations moving 
into the housing market. This surge in demand was re-enforced by rapid growth in our economy. Now 
that we have entered a period of somewhat slower growth and the peak of the baby boom cycle has 
passed, we can expect that housing demand will ease off a bit. If housing starts do decline, Mr. Speaker, 
we want to be sure that our small contractors can compete effectively with the big ones. We believe their 
ability to do so is good for the construction industry and good for the home buyer. One of the areas in 
which small builders sometimes operate at a disadvantage, is the availability of interim financing during 
construction. Interim financing is difficult to obtain and if interest rates are higher for small builders, this 
places them at a distinct disadvantage. Therefore we felt that some action be taken to improve the 
availability of funds at reasonable interest rates, would be of significant help to may small contractors. 
The general public will benefit too from the increased competition in the industry. 
 
It may also be desirable to take some action to help small builders sell the homes they build. Because 
small builders build only a few homes at a time, they face high risks when they build on speculation 
without an assured buyer. So we are often reluctant to build homes that are not pre-sold except in the 
sellers’ market. We feel that in market areas where the demand is somewhat less, the government might 
assume some of the builder’s risk in order to assist him in building enough units to meet projected 
demands. This approach may be especially effective in rural areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1978, we plan to double the number of units under the rural housing program from 400 in 1977 to 800 
this year. By guaranteeing small builders that the corporation will purchase housing meeting the criteria 
of the rural housing program in areas where they are needed, we’ll have more assurance of meeting that 
target. At the same time the smaller builders will be kept busy. These, Mr. Speaker, are the reasons for 
this amendment. In the very near future we will discuss with the construction industry and with lending 
agencies the proposed details of these program and with their co-operation, we fully expect to put in 
place an effective program of government assistance to small builders. 
 
I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 48 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation Act, 1973 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: – I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2159 
 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 53 – An Act 
respecting the Creation of Corporations for Certain Purposes 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the bill before the House that I’m going to speak to and move second reading at 
the end of my discussion, is a bill entitled The Crown Corporations Act, 1978. This bill, I believe and I 
hope, will be supported by all parties in this Assembly. The legislation essentially improves and 
streamlines an act which has existed for 30 years with relatively few amendments. As all members will 
appreciate, many significant changes have occurred in the past 30 years, not only in the Crown 
corporation sector but also in the province itself. The time has come, we believe, to update the existing 
legislation and the changes contained in this bill will, I think, accomplish this objective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, careful, prudent management of the financial affairs of this province over many decades 
has earned for Saskatchewan a measure of confidence with the financial community, unsurpassed in 
Canada. Indeed this province’s relationships with the financial community are viewed by many 
informed observers as exemplary. We want to be certain, however, that these excellent relationships 
continue. In order to do this, the province must maintain and enhance its ability to exercise appropriate 
and effective fiscal controls while, at the same time, permitting our senior management and corporation 
officers to carry out their management functions. This concern has been recognized, not only by this 
government but by other governments as well. One need only think of recent experiences in the federal 
government to find examples of the problems which may arise in the absence of good fiscal control The 
federal government, in fact, considers the question of fiscal controls over Crown corporations and 
departments to be of such major concern that it has created a Royal Commission on Financial 
Management and Accountability. In addition, it recently prepared a paper on the subject entitled, Crown 
Corporations, Direction Control Accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the present government and previous governments in this province have recognized, as a 
fundamental priority, the need for a system to provide broad policy direction to the Crown corporations, 
to give priority to their capital spending and to monitor their general operations. All of these are 
necessary to ensure that the corporations are achieving the economic and social goals for which they 
were established. This has been accomplished in part through the creation of a central holding company, 
the Government Finance Office. This company has functioned for almost 30 years and the essential 
intent of the proposed amendments is to re-emphasize and in some measure enhance its role as an 
instrument through which sound financial policy making and management will continue in our family of 
Crown corporations. One final general comment, Mr. Speaker. You will note that this bill changes the 
name of the Government Finance Office to the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan. The 
name, Government Finance Office, is somewhat misleading and often confusing. It may, for example, 
imply that the corporation is responsible for financing government activities. This obviously is not the 
case. The possibility of this kind of confusion increased when the Treasury Department was renamed the 
Department of Finance a few years ago. The new name is a more accurate description of its role since 
the corporation’s essential responsibility is to monitor the overall financial investment of the province in 
the Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now wish to review some of the changes which this bill will bring about. I will deal first 
with the amendments proposed for Part II of the Act which describes the 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2160 

 

organization and responsibilities of the Crown Investments Corporation, since most of the substantive 
changes, as opposed to housekeeping amendments are contained in that part. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned 
earlier that the primary reason for introducing this bill is to demonstrate the government’s commitment 
to regular improvements in its overall financial management system. Amendments dealing with the 
borrowing powers will be understood and, I believe, appreciated by the financial community. The 
changes also utilize language, which is consistent with that used in other Crown corporation legislation. 
 
The provisions dealing with borrowing are contained in sections 27 and 28 of the bill. In section 27 (1) 
the corporation is granted the power to borrow money with consent of the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council. Current legislation empowers GFO to borrow only to meet expenditures required for the 
efficient exercise of its powers and stipulates that it must borrow only from certain kinds of lending 
institutions. 
 
The bill before us broadens the borrowing power to include any of the following purposes: 
 
(a)To repay or refund loans made by the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
(b) To provide moneys required for the acquisition of real and personal property. 
 
(c) To reimburse advances made by the Minister of Finance to the corporation from the Consolidated 
Fund. 
 
(d) To pay any loan, liability or indebtedness whose payment is guaranteed by the corporation. 
 
(e) To repay any temporary borrowing of the corporation, and, 
 
(f) To provide funds required by the corporation to carry out its powers. 
 
Further the corporation will no longer be limited to negotiating loans from certain kinds of lending 
institutions, Canadian banks, trust companies, etc., but now has greater scope and may, for example, 
borrow through the issue and sale of securities and recognized capital markets. The Minister of Finance, 
under present legislation, is also authorized to borrow on behalf of GFO. The purposes for which he may 
borrow, however, are restricted to providing funds required by corporations incorporated under Part 1 
for the acquisition of real and personal property. These powers have similarly been broadened and the 
purposes for which he may now borrow on behalf of GFO are identical to those found in section 27(1). 
These changes do not represent the granting of any extraordinary power to the Minister of Finance or to 
the Crown Investments Corporation. Similar sections are found in The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas 
Corporations Act 1973. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Act 1976, The Saskatchewan Mining 
and Development Corporation Act 1977 and in other Crown corporation legislation. 
 
The amendments are proposed because it was found over the years that the restrictive nature of GFO’s 
powers under The Crown Corporations Act has, at certain times, made the borrowing strategy and 
program of the government unnecessarily complex. 
 
It is also worth noting that the amendment to the borrowing power does not alter or dilute the overview 
of the borrowing program which is a traditional and a central 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2161 
 

responsibility of the Minister of Finance. The amendment simply enlarges the flexibility available to the 
province and to the Minister of Finance in developing and carrying out its borrowing program. 
 
Section 24 of the Bill describes the general powers granted to the Crown Investments Corporation. The 
section is similar to the existing section respecting the powers of the Government Finance Office but 
some significant changes have been made. 
 
At present, GFO is responsible for loans and advances from the Crown to corporations designated as 
coming under Part 2 of the act. Under the new section 24, subsection (1)(b), the Lieutenant-Governor 
may designate specific loans and advances which will be assumed by the Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Subsection 24(1)(g) specifically delegates to the Crown Investments Corporation responsibility for 
reviewing Crown corporation capital budgets and for assisting the government to assess and priorize 
capital requirements. This provision is designed with two objective sin mind: 
 

(1) to provide better co-ordination of the overall capital programs in the Crown corporations 
sector and 

 
(2) to improve the government’s capacity to allocate capital resources among the respective 

Crown corporations. 
 
In this aspect of its operations the Crown Investments Corporation will function in the Crown 
corporations sector in a manner roughly similar to that of the Treasury Board in its financial overview of 
the government departments and agencies. 
 
At present, the Government Finance Office does not relate to all Crown corporations. The repeal of 
certain sections of other acts as set out in sections 35 to 38 of the bill will enable (and this is only a 
labelling, Mr. Speaker) the Lieutenant-Government in Council to designate the Crown corporations to 
which the Crown Investments Corporation will relate and it may designate all or some of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now turn to a series of less significant changes with which I will deal very briefly. First, 
those in Part 1, the part under which the Crown corporations may be create by order in council. 
 
Section 6 specifically states that the board of a Crown corporation will be responsible for directing the 
affairs and business of the corporation. This statement is designed to clarify the position of Crown 
corporations boards. 
 
Section 6(2) clarifies the means by which the chairman and vice-chairman of boards are appointed. 
 
Section 7 allows boards to create executives in other committees. Existing legislation requires the 
purchase, sale or mortgage of real property in excess of $5,000 must be approved by the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council. This obviously is unrealistically low for most corporations. A new 
subsection (3) of section 10 therefore allows the Lieutenant-Governor in Council to establish an 
appropriate limit in relation to these transactions for each corporation based on its particular needs and 
circumstances. 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2162 

 

Section 13 updates references to superannuation legislation. 
 
Sections 18 and 33 adopt language consistent with The Tabling of Documents Act for the corporations 
incorporated under Part 1 of the act and for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Now those in Part 2, the part which establishes the Crown Investments Corporation – a new section 
23(6) allows the Lieutenant-Governor in Council to designate the location of the head office of the 
Crown Investments Corporations of Saskatchewan, and this is consistent, Mr. Speaker, with other acts. 
 
Section 23(7) specifically declares that all property and assets of the Crown Investments Corporations 
are the property and assets of the Crown. 
 
Section 24(1)(i) allows the Crown Investments Corporation to provide financial, legal, industrial 
relations and other advice and assistance to Crown corporations. 
 
Section 25 specifically allows the Crown Investments Corporation to acquire property. New section 26 
clearly indicates that the corporation has the authority to employ staff independent of The Public Service 
Act. 
 
Section 28(3) clarifies the method of transferring to the Crown Investments Corporation funds raised by 
the Minister of Finance on its behalf. Section 29 adopts the current legislative style of drafting with 
respect to guarantees of loans made by the province to the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Section 31 outlines the authority of the corporation to invest is excess funds. 
 
Finally, of course, the final section repeals the existing Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned at the outset that the bill does not represent any major changes to existing 
legislation and will not bring about major changes in current policies and procedures. Rather it may be 
characterized as a responsible move by the government to maintain the position and reputation it now 
enjoys for sound effective workable management of an important segment of the province’s financial 
affairs. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this bill warrants the attention and support of all member so this Assembly. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 53. 
 
MR. MALONE: – Would the minister tell me whether or not the new Crown corporation, whatever the 
name of it is, when this bill passes, will be the subject of scrutiny by Crown Corporations Committee, or 
will it be similar to GFO, which is not, as I understand it, subject to the scrutiny of Crown Corporations 
Committee? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — No, the Government Finance Office has, at least in my experience since being 
minister since 1972, always appeared before the Crown Corporations Committee and I expect it will this 
year. We are usually the last one because we encompass a bunch of others, but we always appear. The 
Crown Investments Corporation will replace GFO and I would certainly expect it to appear before 
Crown Corporations Committee. 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2163 
 

MR. MALONE: – Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words before adjourning debate. 
 
We look at this bill with some suspicion, quite frankly, and what we are concerned about is that by the 
creation of this new Crown corporation, or whatever the members calls it, we could conceivably face the 
situation – and I hope when the minister closes eventually, will talk to this point – what we are worrying 
about, is the situation where this Crown corporation would gather unto itself all of the profits that are 
accruing to other Crown corporations such as Sask Tel, SPC, and so on, which as the members opposite 
are aware, we are very critical of. We believe that those corporations should not be earning the dramatic 
profits that have been earned by this government in a form of hidden taxation on the consumers and 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are concerned that this new corporations, as being suggested by the minister, will simply be a device 
whereby corporations can hide details, hide profits or losses as the case may be, behind the corporate 
veil of a new Crown corporation. 
 
We want to study at some length, the remarks of the minister and also the provisions of the bill and, 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to beg leave to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways) moved second reading of Bill 55 – An Act to amend 
The Highways Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, these are some very short amendment to The Highways Act brought about by a 
new department that we brought into being last winter, trying to take advantage of the cold weather, 
which does provide a protection for some of our lighter surface roads, from trucks carrying heavy loads. 
 
These amendments will allow us to do legally what we already did last winter from late January until 
mid-March, simply allowing extra weight during the winter months when the frost is on. There was 
some doubt in the Attorney General’s department as to whether or not we could legally (the Department 
of Highways and Transportation) could legally issue these permits. These amendments will, without any 
doubt, legalize what we are doing. Hopefully we will be able to allow increased weights as soon as the 
frost has penetrated enough, late December, which will allow a longer season. There were more than 
1,000 farmers and other truckers, people who delivered fuel and so on and fertilizer took advantage of 
the short period which did not seem to raise any real havoc with roads. I want to congratulate the 
truckers and the farmers at this point in time because to some extent this is – they are on their honor – 
because they are asked to remain off the roads when the temperature becomes warmer than minus 6 
Celsius. By and large we have good results with that. After all, it’s their roads too and they realize this. 
There have been some good results and I think some savings by those people who are trucking because 
of this new departure. 
a 
So with that, I would at this time, like to move second reading to amend The Highways Act. 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): – Mr. Speaker, let me say initially that I don’t think members in 
our caucus will have too much problem supporting any amendment which would allow the Department 
of Highways to allow the issue of cold weather permits for an increase in trucking weights. There is a 
provision, of course, that the 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2164 

 

application of the extension of permits for truckers is done in a non-discriminatory basis. 
 
Now I am under the impression that much of the pressure to increase load limits on frozen roads is 
coming from Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation as a result of the shortage of timber that they 
have for their sawmills and that now they are in a position where they’ve got to haul this timber great 
distances in order to maintain a big enough supply of white spruce to make their mills – to put them in 
the category where they don’t lose more than $5 million each year. 
 
I’d say that’s a good deal. We have been doing that with truckers hauling to the pulp industry for many 
years now, I believe since the pulp industry was established. They were allowed overload permits 
provided that the temperature was below a certain level. I say if we can do that for truckers hauling 
through the pulp industry certainly we should be in a position to provide that same service for those 
truckers that are hauling logs to the sawmill at Carrot River or Big River. 
 
By the same token, however, we had better be prepared to offer that same permit to anyone who wants 
to truck grain on frozen roads, provided he falls within the same weight restrictions that you intend to 
apply to log haulers and other people who are involved in government work. 
 
I say if your department has no doubt done some study with respect to the kind of deterioration that 
occurs on a frozen road when you increase your weight limit, if you feel that you are in a position where 
you can expand your weight limits be permit for those people hauling in the logging industry, then I am 
only warning you that there had better be provision made in a non-discriminatory way to provide it for 
everyone in the trucking business across Saskatchewan. If that’s the case you will have no problem 
getting support from our caucus. 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): – Mr. Speaker, if the members are finished, we in this caucus will 
also be supporting these amendments. 
 
One must question the attitude of the government though that reference as made to the fact that they 
were breaking a law last year. I think probably this is not the kind of thing we like to hear of any 
government doing. It is unfortunate that changes of this nature and these studies couldn’t have been a 
carried out some years ago so that we could have taken advantage of our winter weather long before this 
time. But we will be supporting this amendment. 
 
MR. KRAMER: – I did not say we were bigger. I said there was some question that we might be. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) moved second reading of Bill No. 
8 – An Act to amend The Water Supply Board Act, 1972. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this amendment to The Water Supply Board Act, 1972 was originally referred to 
the Non-controversial Bills Committee. I was surprised to see that that had been referred back to the 
Legislature today. However, I understand it was a matter of the Committee only dealing with one bill 
and the significance of the bill was not any more or less considered but rather a matter of technique. 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2165 
 

All that this bill does, Mr. Speaker, is change the location of the head office of the Water Supply Board 
from its previous location in Regina to the town of Watrous. Most hon. member in this House will know 
that the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board not only moved its head office to Watrous on the basis of the 
decentralization of government services and government agencies but that the Water Supply Board did 
construct itself a building in Watrous to not only accommodate itself but accommodate other 
government offices in that community. We believe that the move was not only in line with government 
policy but we believe the move has been well supported by the community of Watrous As well, Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the Water Supply Board, all members 
of the staff of the Water Supply Board moved their homes along with the head office to that community 
and are making their contribution to that community. I would, therefore, move second reading of this 
bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the propose motion by the Hon. Mr. Matsalla that Bill 
No. 60 – An Act to amend The Provincial Parks, Protected Areas, Recreation Sites and Antiquities 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

BILL NO. 27 – An Act to amend The Condominium Property Act, 1968 
 
Section 1 (Cont’d) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister like to introduce his assistant? 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Yes. Mr. Leo Beaudry, the Deputy Provincial 
Secretary. 
 
MR. MALONE: – Mr. Chairman, I just have one question to ask . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Maybe I could just open it first and then . . . Section 1, 1968, Chapter 14. 
Proceed. 
 
MR. MALONE: – I wonder if the minister would mind without consulting his official, without looking 
at the notes in front of us, tell this House what he thinks a condominium is. I just want to make sure he 
knows what he is talking about. (Laughter) 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well, it isn’t what some people think I’m talking about. (Laughter Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the condominium is basically a type of arrangement for building and selling property. I don’t 
know how to best explain it. It is almost a co-operative where Mr. Malone and I might get together and 
construction 50 units; they could be joined together or they could be separate under this act, in which 
each individual does not have title to the property but rather has title to, I can put it, a group which owns, 
once it 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2166 

 

is set up and running and all the units have been sold, the common property, the land, the swimming 
pool and whatever, between them. They pay an annual or monthly fee, as the case may be, to run those 
common services which they enjoy. They could, for example, have someone who is cleaning all the 
sidewalks and that is looked after by the condominium authority. They have a body which they have a 
vote in and they can sever or sell their share, their house if you like, in the condominium property. Now, 
I know that may not satisfy the member for Lakeview’s legal desire for a description of a condominium 
but that is mine and I suspect maybe the folks out there will understand me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: – Mr. Chairman, I just want to say for the first time in this House since I have been in 
this House, I think the minister really knows what he is talking about! 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Section 2 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 3 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 4 deleted. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 45 – An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Section 1 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): – Mr. Chairman, I might make one brief comment. 
Really this is only instituting the budgetary provisions with respect to increases in the tobacco taxes. It 
relates to the application of ninety-sixth one hundredth or a cent per cigarette rather than four-fifths of 
one cent for a cigarette, plus changes in the prices of the taxes levied in relation to cigars, related to the 
prices in which they are sold. 
 
I should tell the members of the Legislature that our taxes on a package of cigarettes come to 24 cents on 
25, in Manitoba it’s 25 on 25, in B.C. it’s 24 on 25, in Alberta it’s 8 on 25, in Ontario it’s 27 1/2 on 25, 
in the Maritimes and in Quebec they are all higher than ours. The only that is lower of course is Alberta 
and that does create some problem for us as it does create some problem for B.C., simply because 
people will cross the border to buy tobacco. There is no way you can police that and there is no way we 
should even try I suppose. But the assumption is that this will bring us about $4 million additional 
revenue in the current year. There hasn’t been any decrease in the consumption of cigarettes although 
there is some indication that there is a decrease amongst older persons. There are always a lot of new 
ones starting up but there has been a large proportion of smokers who have ceased smoking in recent 
years, particularly in their middle years from 30 on, say, but there is some pretty clear indication that a 
lot of young people begin to smoke and the total consumption of tobacco has not declined. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Speaker does the minister have any statistics of any kind whatsoever on 
whether or not in fact, the consumption of cigarettes has gone up in 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2167 
 

Saskatchewan in the last three years, and does the minister have any indication that it has gone up 
especially in the area of young people smoking? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – My information is that the use of cigarettes has gone up right across Canada and also 
has gone up particularly amongst young people, but a fair number of people in the middle brackets are 
ceasing to smoke and it is good advice and perhaps it should be passed on to the member for Nipawin. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, I accept the minister’s good advice and when I woke up this 
morning and spent an hour coughing I wish I had listened to him yesterday rather than today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the fact is though, that the minister has suggested that the increase in taxation on tobacco 
is going to have some kind of an effect on the consumption of cigarettes in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The facts, quite simply, don’t bear him out. During the course of the dramatic rise in the 
price of cigarettes, primarily due to taxation, but other increases have been included as well, the fact is 
that cigarette smoking has gone up. Would the minister therefore not agree that the tobacco tax increase 
that he is referring to in this act is an attempt by the government of Saskatchewan to increase its 
revenue? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – First of all, no one can determine accurately whether or not the consumption of 
tobacco wouldn’t have gone up a great deal more if the taxes hadn’t been increased and there is no way 
that the member for Nipawin nor I can determine that. He knows that. 
 
Secondly, we don’t deny that it’s a means of raising revenue and we are quite willing to publicly state 
that that’s one of the reasons and rationale behind the increase in the tobacco taxes. 
 
The other side of the coin is if in fact people do reduce their consumption over time (and we don’t know 
that that is true, we hope that it will be true,) and if the revenues do drop as a result of that decline in 
consumption, the other side of the coin is we would spend a lot less money in terms of emphysema cases 
and other cases in our hospitals and there would be some offsetting factors in that regard as well. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Well I think, Mr. Chairman, the minister has certainly explained that cigarette 
smoking is deleterious to the health, dangerous to one’s health and we certainly agree with him and with 
the Surgeon General of Canada and with the Surgeon General of the Untied States and every other 
expert in the field who has said it is dangerous to the health. We agree with that. There is no question 
about it. the question I am asking the minister is quite simply this . . . during the last three years the 
government of Saskatchewan has increased the tax on cigarettes dramatically. Furthermore, they have 
spent substantial money in the province of Saskatchewan to encourage smokers to stop smoking. Yet we 
have seen during this same period of time an increase in the consumption of cigarettes in our 
communities. An increase. Now the minister, therefore, would he not agree that raising the price and the 
substantial sums of money that are being spent on the attack on smoking, if you want, are not doing the 
job. Don’t the facts speak for themselves, Mr. Minister? There has been an increase in consumption. 
Therefore, what we are doing is not doing the job. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously these are very difficult statistics to come by to prove 
one thing or the other. You could use the argument quite logically that 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2168 

 

increased prices on tobacco has reduced the rate of increase that has occurred in the use of tobacco. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Why would it be going up? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – Well, every province across this country is raising the tobacco taxes and the theory 
is that they want to raise revenue, obviously and the other theory is that eventually it will have some 
impact on terms of the consumption of tobacco and if it doesn’t, if it doesn’t, at least you will have some 
revenues to pay some of the costs of those people who end up in hospital with emphysema and lung 
cancer and things of that nature. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, the purpose of my question, of course, is to ask the minister a final 
question and he obviously hasn’t answer the real question, the heart of the question. I don’t know 
whether his department or whether the Department of Health is doing any meaningful research on this 
problems, but apparently the approaches are not working, that we are using. To suggest that I might have 
gone up faster anyway is to suggest that we don’t know why it is going up. We don’t know why the 
consumption of cigarettes is going up. But it certainly isn’t having any affect on it, that we increase the 
price and it isn’t having any affect on it, or doesn’t seem to behaving any affect on it, that we are tacking 
the expenditure of large sums of money to attempt to get people to quit smoking. 
 
So my question to the minister is this, if it is a means or raising moneys then why is the minister, or why 
is the government of Saskatchewan being discriminatory in its approach to the raising of money? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – Mr. Chairman, I suppose it is totally dependent upon the interpretation of what is 
being discriminatory. Obviously tobacco is not a necessity; people can do without. It is a commodity 
which is heavily taxed everywhere no matter where you go. Ontario just increased its rate to 27 1/2 cents 
per package; ours went up from 20 to 24. Theirs went up even more and it is consistently followed 
around the world. You can check anywhere you like and governments are generally raising the taxes on 
tobacco; the theory being, that it will eventually cause some reduction in the consumption of tobacco. 
Secondly, if it does not do so it will at least provide some revenue to offset the costs, which obviously 
governments are involved, in relation to the illnesses that are caused by the utilization of tobacco. There 
is no way that you can describe it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister, why, not only he but other ministers 
of the present government, when asked a question on the one side why Saskatchewan isn’t trying to take 
bold new steps, they use other provinces in Canada as an excuse? But when asked why the government 
is taking bold, new, crazy steps, they use other provinces in Canada to explain that that is why we are 
going it. Look, Ontario has all these hospital premiums and all these extra charges and Alberta has all 
these charges and extra charges. Why do they persist, Mr. Chairman, in holding Ontario out as being the 
epitome of governmental action in terms of the cigarette tax, like the minister has just done, to say, my 
goodness, Ontario has raised the tax, all this tax, so we may as well follow suit. 
 
My question to the minister, for what it is worth, and certainly this minister is answering question a heck 
of a lot better than the Minister of Social Services has ever dreamed of 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2169 
 

answering questions, but mind you this minister hardly ever has a chance, hardly ever has to cover up 
what he has done in the past. 
 
Mr. Chairman, my question to the minister is this. Would you not agree that a portion of the revenue of 
the government of the province of Saskatchewan should be allocated to meaningful research into why 
the consumption of cigarettes in the province of Saskatchewan is increasing while at the same time the 
taxes are increasing and the advertising program to get people to stop smoking has been increased? Do 
you not think that a real and meaningful research study should be done by the government of the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – I am not opposed to any research being carried out with respect to the problems 
related to tobacco. 
 
The member for Nipawin is a smoker and he knows perfectly well that he would be better off without it, 
but why does he persist in continuing? No matter how much research is carried, perhaps, he will 
continue to smoke. I don’t know. Perhaps the consumption of tobacco is going up in Saskatchewan, 
however, remote the prospect is because people are worried about the fact that you might become the 
Premier of this province. I don’t know what their motivations are. The fact of the matter is that it is a 
revenue raiser and I readily admit that. We anticipate raising $21,600,00 this year in terms of revenue. 
Other provinces use the same approach and if it doesn’t reduce consumption at least it does provide 
some revenue to offset the costs involved with respect to tobacco consumption. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Would the minister, since he is certainly prepared to support the principle, or the 
concept of a study, a psychological study conducted in the province of Saskatchewan as to why the 
increase in smoking continues and persists even though these measures have been taken, including the 
discriminatory tax, the increase in tobacco tax, I agree with the minister that’s happening all over the 
world. It’s an easy place to raise money. But then the other side of the coin, we are not really 
approaching or finding out what the real problem is. 
 
Would the minister be prepared to support a motion which I intend to introduce calling for the 
expenditure of 2 per cent of the amount raised by the tobacco tax, which is a half a million dollars, 
would he be prepared to support the motion to allocate a half a million dollars of this year’s budget to a 
psychological study of why there is increased consumption of tobacco? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: – Mr. Chairman, the member knows he can’t move such a motion because it involves 
an expenditure of money. But secondly, the government is already spending in our program called 
Feeling Good (and it will also be going into the field of tobacco and doing a good bit of educative work 
on this particular phase). Incidentally, I am going to be in Rosetown shortly attending a meeting in 
relation to the smoking problem. I am doing that on behalf of the Minister of Health who is not able to 
be there that particular day. 
 
I have answered as plainly and as bluntly and clearly as I can there are two reasons for increasing the 
taxes on tobacco. One, it raises more revenue and it might in time be a factor in reducing consumption. 
If it does not reduce the consumption, then obviously it provides some funds to treat the people who 
suffer from emphysema and other related diseases which are directly traceable to the use of tobacco. 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2170 

 

MR. COLLVER: – Would the minister, since he is now trying to back peddle on what he said earlier, 
would the minister be prepared to introduce a motion into this Assembly, or introduce an amendment to 
the Budget in this Assembly, that the government of Saskatchewan would allocate a half a million 
dollars to a meaningful psychological study in the province of Saskatchewan as to why tobacco smoking 
is going up? Now the minister mentioned the Feeling Good Program. How in the world can you say that 
the Feeling Good Program is going to be successful if you don’t know the reasons why the darn thing is 
doing up in the first place? If you don’t have the research, the basic research done to find out why these 
apparently diametrically opposite occasions or occurrences are happening in the province (and they are 
apparently diametrically opposite) and I am sure the minister will agree, the tax is going up on the 
theory that it is going to reduce consumption, it doesn’t . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It does. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Well somebody says it does. Consumption has not gone down. Consumption has 
gone up. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what I am asking for is a very reasonable statement from the Minister of Revenue – will 
the Minister of Revenue as a responsible minister of the crown and a member of the Treasury Board, 
would he be prepared to introduce an amendment to the Budget to the expenditure of a half a million 
dollars for meaningful psychological study on why the consumption of cigarettes is going up even in the 
face of these apparently opposing views? 
 
HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Education): – Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is once again revealing 
his ignorance of a subject. There have been psychological studies, sociological studies, economic studies 
gone on for 10 or 15 years in this field. There is very clear evidence that if the relative price of tobacco 
is raised that consumption can be decreased. The problem is that the member talks about the dramatic 
increases in tobacco prices. There have not been dramatic increases in tobacco prices. Relative to 
personal disposable income in our society, the price of tobacco has not stayed up, it has not even 
maintained itself. The relative price of tobacco has declined and that’s one of the reason why there 
hasn’t been an overall decline in consumption. 
 
Further to that, there is a fundamental problem here and that is, there are enormous health costs involved 
in the use of tobacco, not only to those who smoke but unfortunately also to those who do not smoke but 
have to stay in the same room or confined space with those who smoke. It is pretty hard to define just 
exactly what these cost are because, for instance, when studies on lung cancer are done, they are 
generally done on those who smoke It is very hard to determine exactly the impact of the ambient smoke 
in the atmosphere and its effect on those who don’t smoke. So even in costing it out it’s a very difficult 
matter. I can say that recent studies would indicate that health costs in Canada in 1975 would come to 
something like $800 million. I suggest that if a study was done on a provincial basis, on the economics, 
not just the psychology of this problem but the economics of the problem, you would find that the health 
costs cost the province of Saskatchewan far more than the income, far more than the revenue. This is a 
very frightening problem. 
 
Another aspect of the problem that the member does not take into consideration is, the province is taking 
social action in terms of the Feeling Good Program in terms of dealing with the question of smoking and 
the health curriculum at the Grade Three level. This sort of action which is to be commended. We are 
still fighting the problem of 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2171 
 

the commercial advertising of tobacco There is something like $40 million a year spent on the 
commercial advertising and promotion of tobacco. I simply ask you to look at any of the kinds of 
publications that come into this province across Canada; you’ll find that tobacco and alcohol advertising 
is the glossiest and most sophisticated and is aimed very much at young people. I would say, from a 
psychological point of view, unquestionably at young women. This is a point that the minister has 
pointed out that in fact there are studies of where the increase in tobacco consumption have taken place. 
They show that in the age group 70 to 75 in the adult population non-smokers have increased from 50 
per cent to 55 per cent. There is one group amongst whom this is not true and that is girls aged 15 to 19, 
amongst whom smokers have increased from 18 per cent to 28 per cent in the last 10 years. This is 
undoubtedly, unquestionably due partly to the psychological manipulation of the $40 million which is 
used in tobacco advertising. I suggest that if the member would speak to his friends in the corporations 
across Canada, who are promoting this kind of use of tobacco, we would get a lot further than with the 
kind of silly points he is raising today. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, I can certainly appreciate the necessity for the Minister of Revenue 
to be helped out by the Minister of Education as it relates to tobacco and tobacco tax., The fact is that 
the Minister of Education is certainly not capable of understanding what real research is all about. He 
talked about ignorance, he talks . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, he talks about research, then he says, “undoubtedly, unquestionably 
this is the reason for it!” Now that’s exactly what research is all about, is to determine whether that, in 
fact, is happening. Is it, in fact, the $40 million that is spent on the advertising primarily in eastern 
Canada but certainly to a certain extent in Saskatchewan, the cause in that one group of people that the 
minister mentions, and I think he was quoting from figure in the Yorkton study, I think, if I recall 
correctly I think that the Yorkton study that brought about that . . . I beg your pardon. 
 
MR. FARIS: – The hon. member is suggesting I said it’s the only cause. I said it is simply one of the 
causes. I pointed that the decrease in relative price is another factor. When you are dealing with research 
you have to be very clear. You are dealing with a good many causes and to isolate it to simply one is 
very naïve. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – I agree, so therefore the minister shouldn’t just isolate it to simply one and when he 
talks about the corporate friends of our party he should talk to his own corporate friends, like Seagrams 
and Rothman who are making all kinds of contributions to the NDP. He should talk to them about 
whether or not they should cut back on their advertising programs. The fact is, Mr. Chairman, that what 
I’ve asked the minister to consider and the government of Saskatchewan to consider is that a meaningful 
study be conducted in Saskatchewan, not a study by the Minister of Education, not a research study 
that’s done from his so-called many factors that he can list now, but a meaningful study. Why are these 
people increasing their smoking consumption in the province in the face of increased cost? Now the 
minister talks about the difference in relative cost. That of course is absolute and utter nonsense and the 
minister knows it. The minister knows that in the last three years the cost of a package of 25 cigarettes in 
our society is doubled, in three years – doubled. Now is the minister suggesting that inflation in three 
years has caused the prices of other articles to double? The answer is no. They are certainly 50 per cent. 
Well, the minister says, no, but I recall paying 55 cents for a package of 25 three years ago and today it’s 
$1.10. To me 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2172 

 

that’s double. Now the tax hasn’t doubled but the cost has doubled. The relative cost as the minister will 
well know, the Minister of Education will know, in the last three years has not changed that much and 
what I am talking about is statistics in the last three years. The apparent increase in consumption in the 
last three years has been dramatic The apparent increase in consumption, the minister will know that the 
Yorkton study showed this and so have other studies done in Saskatchewan in the last little while, that 
there has been apparently an increased consumption. The Minister of Revenue stated that this has 
happened across Canada and that’s true. It is not just Saskatchewan. But I don’t see why we should 
spend, as the minister says, $40 million or $50 million – he didn’t say that, he said, more than $25 
million, $25 million we get in on the tobacco tax. He said it cost more than that for the health care, 
additional health care as the result of smoking. I think the minister said that. At least he is not reacting to 
my statement. 
 
Why should we spend more than $25 million to correct a problem that we don’t know why there is an 
apparent increase in consumption, apparent increase in the health hazard even though the taxes have 
continued to go up dramatically, the price has gone up dramatically and even though programs to 
prevent them, to attempt to curtail the smoking habits of individuals in our community has in fact 
increased dramatically in the last three years as well. What we are asking for is a study to determine the 
knowledge. What we are asking for is quite simply this. Government persist in the discriminatory 
taxation measures on tobacco while mumbling out of their mouths the statement that they are a health 
hazard as we all know they are. They are busy collecting $25 million from tobacco smokers in our 
community. They don’t really want to correct the problem What we are suggesting to the government is 
this. Let’s find out what’s going on. Let’s find out what’s happening, and then let’s approach the real 
problem of improving our health care with some standard of knowledge. We don’t know, but you 
continue to rake in $25 million from tobacco smokers in a discriminatory fashion, on some kind of a 
theory that maybe it’s reducing the consumption when in fact, every member of this Legislature knows, 
and the Minister of Revenue agreed today, that consumption is increasing. What we are trying to suggest 
to the government in a reasonable fashion is, look we can do an appropriate study in Saskatchewan, one 
–half million dollars would go a long way to do a psychological study of why this increase, this apparent 
increase in consumption, has occurred. We have the personnel in Saskatchewan to do this kind of a 
study and instead of continuing to rake it, in a discriminatory fashion, $25 million while at the same time 
mouthing out the other side of our mouths that we are opposed to this increased consumption, let us talk 
about doing something about it. So what I’ve asked the Minister of Revenue is a very imply question. I 
will now take my place. 
 
Obviously and apparently the minister is not prepared to accept any sort of intelligent approach to the 
problem. Only the government of Saskatchewan knows, in terms of the allocation of Aware moneys and 
Feeling Good moneys and all of these allocation moneys – without any justification, without any 
meaningful research, they are apparently going to say, we are right, there is no other suggestion that is 
worthwhile. So I ask the minister one more time, will he, as one of the more responsible ministers of the 
government opposite, allocate or attempt to allocation through the Treasury Board, an allocation this 
year of one-half million dollars towards meaningful psychological research on the increased 
consumption of cigarettes in the province of Saskatchewan, in the face of increased price and increased 
advertising against it? 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Section 2:3 amended agreed. 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2173 
 

Section 3:23 amended agreed. 
 
Section 4 agreed. 
 
BILL NO. 51 – An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 

 
Section 1 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Minister, can you tell me what this does, 
please? 
 
HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Education): – Mr. Chairman, it simply comes out of the negotiations 
this year. It provides that the Minister of Finance will pay the premiums for the first $7,000 of insurance 
for each teacher insured. Previously, the provincial government paid the premiums on the first $5,000. It 
is simply part of the total collective bargaining package. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

BILL NO. 52 – An Act to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act, 1970. 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Is this just an increase? 
 
MR. FARIS: – Mr. Chairman, yes, just simply, again, part of the collective bargaining package and the 
teachers agreed to increase their contributions. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: – Mr. Chairman, I can’t let this act go by without bringing a couple of questions to 
the minister and I would like him to comment. 
 
As he knows, The Teachers’ Superannuation Act will be some $70 million overexpended this year; that 
the contribution from the Consolidated Fund will be something like if I remember correctly, $70 million 
and last year it was $20 million. All of a sudden we are finding ourselves now – am I correct in that, first 
of all, to start with? Am I correct in that? 
 
MR. FARIS: – Well, Mr. Wally Sawchuck the Executive Secretary of the Superannuation Board is with 
me here and he says the figure last year was something like $15 million and the figure this year is $21 
million. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: – . . . budgeted for ’70, is that correct? 
 
MR. FARIS: – The figure for ’78-79 is $21 million. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: – O.K. I wanted to check my figures. The amount of contribution 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2174 

 

coming out of the consolidated revenue each year has been increasing rather dramatically. Is the minister 
intending to introduce anything into the negotiation table to try to find some way of changing the 
concept, the philosophy of The Teachers’ Superannuation Act, the government matching contributions 
to get it to be actuarially sound; to bring the contributions up to a level whereby the fund is going to look 
after itself. It is not going to continually be a drain on the consolidated revenue. I think the Minister of 
Revenue has introduced some rather dramatic changes in the normal pension programs of the civil 
service. Something has to be done with all pension programs in the government and I am wondering if 
the minister has any intentions – I know this isn’t the subject matter of the amendment, but certainly it 
does open up the act. It is going to be a continuing problem This particular pension program in itself is 
not the problem, it is the entire philosophy of pensions in Canada. In Saskatchewan inflation is running 
away with the value of the dollar and so forth. Is the minister planning on doing anything to try to rectify 
the situation or bringing this particular pension program into line? 
 
MR. FARIS: – Yes, this pension plan along with other pension plans in Saskatchewan is under study 
and the Superannuation Commission will be undertaking various actuarial studies to have a look at it. As 
the member can see, what we are doing here is getting agreement from the teachers that they are going 
to contribute more to it. 
 
The member will be aware, of course, that the problem goes way back in the history of this plan, as with 
other plans that it is not a funded plan and what the situation would be if it had been a funded plan and 
what the possible levels of funding would have been, would have been made possibly quite a different 
picture. But we, of course, do have to examine the future. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: – That is the only comment I make. I am glad to hear the minister saying that, 
because certainly we can’t blame the present government, or we can’t blame the present Minister of 
Finance. We might blame them for a lot of things, but not this particular one because of the fact that it 
goes way, way back in history, the lack of funding of the program, of the pension program in itself is the 
basic cause, I would suggest, of the trouble it’s in but what is important is that pension programs in 
Canada in general be examined to make certain that they are funded, that they have some actuarially 
soundness about them or the people who are preparing and contributing over the years are going to be in 
serious trouble. 
 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Bill 52, motion agreed to and bill read for the third time. 
 

BILL NO. 32 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister might outline for us exactly the same sort of 
thing that he usually does on these bills and that is to give some kind of an outline on the respective 
changes that are being made. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I guess the hon. member was not here when I gave second reading 
to the bill. That’s when the principle of the bill is debated and where we outlines the details. The whole 
purpose of the bill is to reduce the person income tax from 58 points to 53.5, a 9. 5 per cent reduction, 
also to provide for the 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2175 
 

tax cuts, raising it from $120 to $160 and to for a cut in the case of the dependent children to $30 up to 
$160. Then there are also some technical amendments related to the federal legislation which are 
contained in the last section of the bill. Those are the basic points of the bill, the changes that we did 
announce during the Budget Speech. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, in reference to The Income Tax Act, was the minister aware of the 
dramatic increase in Sask Power rates that were going to occur in the very same month that the minister 
announced the so-called $85 reduction for the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, this is The Income Tax Act not the Power Corporation Act. I don’t 
know what the hon. member is talking about. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – At the time the minister announced his budget and the changes in the income tax, in 
accordance with the Budget Speech, he stated that there would be an $85 reduction in income taxes as a 
result of these changes that are in this bill. That very same month, Sask Power bills coming out to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan were, in effect, in some places double and some places triple 
what they had been in previous months and had also been far substantially higher than they had been in 
the previous year. Was the minister aware of that policy of Sask Power’s increased bills at the time that 
he announced this increase? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the hon. member can be brought into order because I 
really think that psychological study that he was talking about during the tobacco tax might be very 
appropriate to undertake because I don’t know what kind of cigarettes he is smoking. We are talking 
about The Income Tax Act. During the Budget Speech I announced that there is an $85 per capita 
reduction, in case of the cost of living package, to every taxpayer in the province. Perhaps he missed the 
point or slipped a cog. I am not sure which it is. He is obviously trying to confuse power rates with an 
income tax reduction. Maybe he can tell me what he is trying to fish for which he obviously does so 
often. He obviously has some problems in this area. In case of power rates, they have gone up 
admittedly. He knows the reason behind it. We had, during our Budget Speech, made it very clear that 
during the coming year power rates will be held to the current level — no increases in case of gas rates – 
to be kept at an 8 per cent level. Wherever he gets the doubling of the rates, let him produce to me the 
figures where we have doubled the rates. It is true that on a particular bill, because of the amount of 
consumption, the rates from any week to week or month to month may vary based on consumption. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Perhaps the Minister of Finance, in mentioning the kind of cigarettes that I smoke, 
had in mind the kind that are recommended by members to my right, but the kind I smoke are even more 
mild that the kind the Minister of Finance smokes, Oh he quit, that is right I am sorry about that. He is 
one of those pure types. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the fact is that the minister announced the reduction in income tax rates as means of 
stimulating the economy of Saskatchewan. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? During the course of the 
Budget Address to stimulate economic activity in Saskatchewan we are reducing the income taxes of the 
people of the province. 
 
We agree with the minister on that. Tax reduction was in order at that time. As a matter of act, tax 
reduction could have been even larger. Since that time the federal government has announced a program 
about which we intend to have a great deal to say when that particular act is introduced further into this 
Legislature, on the sales tax 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2176 

 

 the reduction in Saskatchewan. 
 
The federal government has brought in a reduction in sales tax or moneys provided for the present 
government for a reduction in sales tax from 5 per cent to 3 per cent to stimulate economic activity, to 
create jobs and to create opportunity. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, one of the ways that economic activity is stimulated, and I notice that the minister 
is paying a great deal of attention to this – I am sure he does not much care about economics in these 
sorts of things. One of the key areas in the stimulation of economic activity is the psychological area, as 
the minister will know, totally one of the keys to the development of a stimulus in a private sector 
economy is the creation of a positive attitude with reference to government taxation, not only by 
consumers, but also by local and small business firms and by the private business sector. If this creates 
an atmosphere of confidence in the economy and an atmosphere of confidence in the community, 
business activity will increase. As a result of increased business activity jobs will increase. More jobs 
will be available. The minister is aware of all those things. 
 
Now the psychology of an income tax cut is one of the key factors in having an income tax cut. The 
psychology in creating an atmosphere in its people develop confidence in a community. When the 
Minister of Finance announced in his Budget that there was going to be a tax cut in Saskatchewan of 
some $85 per capita or at least per taxpayer, when the mister announced that there were going to be tax 
cuts in the private business sector, on that day and for the following two or three days, the comments 
made in the private sector about the present government’s activity, as a matter of fact the feelings 
amongst many of the people of Saskatchewan at that time, were rather positive. They felt that perhaps at 
long last the NDP government was recognizing that jobs and opportunities were created in the private 
sector, that it was necessary to cut back on the taxation burden on the middle income sector of the 
province of Saskatchewan to give them confidence in the future so that they, in turn, would invest their 
savings here instead of outside the province. The minister knows that that particular psychology for a 
few days was quite positive and the, Mr. Chairman, out came the Sask Power bills and the Sask Tel 
bills. First of all, the Sask Tel bills having been promised in the Budget that the people would get an 8 
per cent rise were in fact an 8 ½ per cent rise or 8 point something, 8.4 – it was more than 8 per cent, 
Mr. Chairman. That’s first of all. 
 
Secondly, Sask Power not only had a much colder level of climate to contend with in the months of 
January, February and March, in which the consumption of gas and power dramatically increased, not 
only that, but they had gone to a new system, Mr. Chairman. A nice new system for Sask Power by 
which they would estimate bills and come out at the end of March, or in that range, with a catch-up bill 
to catch up with underestimates that they had done in the previous month. Not only would they do that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the minister knows full well that is true in the North as well. Not 
only would they do that in that month but they would also at the same time, as they did, bring in that 
increase that had been allocated last fall. Now you combine the increased consumption, the increased 
rate and the catch-up provision and Sask Power bills in the month of March and April to the people of 
Saskatchewan were in many instances staggering. Staggering! That’s just not local instances of one 
house here and one there, an increased consumption in one building, these are instances where people 
had records of building and houses that they have had for the last five or six or eight years and they had 
examined their records and suddenly found that in these two months, March and April, the power bills 
that they had to pay to Sask Power were triple and more than what the rates had been before. So here we 
have a government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, attempting to change the psychology of the 
economics of our province by introducing some income tax cuts which is what we are talking about 
today 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2177 
 

in this bill, by bringing in income tax cuts and change the psychology and at the same time coming out 
with far more than the income tax cuts in dramatic increases in power and telephone bills. Both at the 
same time. So that the two or three days euphoria created in the minds of the business community and 
the consumers by the Budget brought down by the Minister of Finance suddenly turned sour and turned 
sour all over the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, my question to the minister was a very simple one. Was he aware that this was going to happen at 
precisely the time that he was introducing these tax cuts? Was he aware that Sask Power was going to 
conduct itself in this way and Sask Tel was going to conduct itself in this way? If so, why would he have 
not explained to the Treasury Board and to the members of the Treasury Benches, why would he not 
have explained to them, that we are going to change the psychology in this province? We are trying to 
change the psychology so we can create jobs? Or conversely, if he was not aware, would the minister 
not agree that he should have been made aware that his timing was going to be off? Now, Mr. Chairman, 
we are debating today a bill that cuts income tax and we are in favor of cutting income tax and we are in 
favor of this bill – but Mr. Chairman, the bill was designed, the move was designed to create a 
psychological change and it did not work. 
 
Last week in this Legislature, the Premier was questioned about unemployment in this province. He was 
questioned about the dramatic increase in unemployment, to over 7 per cent, and that Mr. Chairman, we 
know in Saskatchewan is far, far higher than it appears on the surface. You cannot relate 7 per cent 
unemployment in Saskatchewan to 9 per cent or 10 per cent in Quebec, or 14 per cent, or 15 per cent, or 
18 per cent in Newfoundland, because the statistics are not kept in the same way, because farmers are 
not included, etcetera and this is primarily an agricultural province. But the point is . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I think have been quite lenient with the hon. member for Nipawin. 
I think he has stated his point. I think we are dealing with an Act to amend the Income Tax Act and he 
has stated his thinking regarding it. I would like to proceed as in the normal way and proceed with Item 
1. I ask the member for Nipawin, I think he has strayed at some length, in perhaps stating or a preamble 
building to it. But if he has some specific question to ask, I would like him to ask it, and ask it now. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – I would like to suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that in dealing with Item 1 of a bill 
reducing income taxes in the province of Saskatchewan, that we are as members responsible to ensure 
that this bill in its introduction achieve its purpose. We are dealing, Mr. Chairman, with something that 
is very important to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and that is, the taxation rates. We are 
dealing here in this bill on Item 1, with general remarks on the bill and Mr. Chairman, I intend to make 
general remarks on the bill and that is exactly and precisely what I am doing. I don’t think that it is 
incumbent, Mr. Chairman, on you to suggest that general remarks on the income taxes in Saskatchewan 
are not relating to the Income Tax Act or amendments to an income tax act, nor do I think that it is more 
normal or more abnormal, to handle things in any particular fashion or any way in terms of this 
Legislature. It is tradition in the Legislature that we address our remarks in general on Item 1 of the 
Estimates of bill and that is precisely what I am doing. General remarks with reference to the income 
taxes of the province of Saskatchewan and the reduction and the way that this reduction was brought 
about and the way that the reduction in income taxes did not achieve its prime and stated purpose. 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2178 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the purpose of this bill, has been stated by the minister, the purpose was to reduce 
income taxes and therefore create economic activity and create economic stimulus in the private sector. 
That, quite simply, has not happened and is not happening for a number of reasons. Number one, this 
particular income tax cut was insufficient to meet the needs, insufficient to meet the needs. Number two, 
coupled with this so-called decrease in income taxes was a dramatic increase in other taxes, through 
Sask Power and Sask Tel. A dramatic increase and they negated any positive effect of this bill. Now, 
Mr. Chairman, I intend to make further general remarks about he income taxes in Saskatchewan and the 
reduction therein proposed by this bill. I don’t think that it is right. I don’t think that it is fitting that you 
should say that it is improper for me to do so. If I happen to be talking about something else., that’s fine, 
but I am talking now about the way this income tax act was introduced in the province of Saskatchewan 
and its purpose. Surely isn’t that the reason for the comment that you make in terms of item 1. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, at the same time that the minister is talking about reducing income taxes with this 
bill, the minister is also saying to his federal counterpart, we are going to improve economic activity in 
the province of Saskatchewan by going along with your suggestion, Mr. Federal Finance Minister, that 
the sales tax in Saskatchewan be reduced by 2 per cent over six months. 
 
Now at the same time that that’s been happening, Mr. Chairman, in order to create this economic 
stimulus that this bill is designed to do, at the same time that that’s happening, we see now a pulling 
apart of that agreement, that so-called agreement, on sales taxes. Keep in mind the economy, it is a very 
subtle thing and requires psychological charging, keep in mind that in order to charge the economy you 
have to look at all of the facets of the economy, of the economic strength or weakness of our province, 
and you have to attempt to pinpoint those areas that require change. One of the major ones, again, was 
the psychological one, to give consumers confidence in the future so that they would increase their 
consumer spending. To give business people confidence in the future. 
 
Now the minister has suggested in some of his catcalls across the floor, what about the Chambers of 
Commerce that give us such wide acceptance across the province of Saskatchewan with reference to 
these income tax cuts and the Budget? I would say to the minister that during the euphoria of the Budget 
speech there were some Chambers of Commerce across the province that made very positive comments. 
But I ask the minister this question, where have the positive comments been since two or three days after 
the Budget speech? The answer is, all gone! No more positive . . . the member for Quill Lakes again, as 
the member for Rosetown suggested, is like the terrier dog that runs around and can’t even get into the 
contest at all. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. I’ll ask both members to please cease from any innuendoes back 
and forward. I’m trying to hold the hon. member to this bill, specifically this bill. This rolling around 
and so forth, I am not going to allow and I think we are here to do a business for our people and I 
certainly want to see it done in a proper fashion giving the members ample opportunity to give positive 
question and expect positive answers. I want to adhere to that. Otherwise we are making a farce out of 
parliament today and I ask . . . 
 
MR. COLLVER: – I couldn’t agree with you more, Mr. Chairman, and we would certainly like to see 
some positive responses as well to the questions that we are asking the minister. We think it’s a 
legitimate request to ask him whether or not he knew about (he 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2179 
 

still hasn’t answered that question) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. This is what I have been asking you, to make your specific 
question and not be rambling about what is happening throughout Canada and so forth. Make your 
specific question and I would ask the member. . . 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry. The first thing I asked the minister to comment on was 
that very specific question. Was he aware of the increase in Sask Power rates that were going to be 
introduced within two or three days of the introduction of his tax cuts? He went on to give me the most 
roundabout answer that you ever heard, including my smoking habits, as you will well be aware, Mr. 
Chairman. Furthermore . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order please! I’m going to ask the minister to reply and then I’m going to 
call on the member for Indian Head-Wolseley to continue and you can have your. . . but I think to be fair 
to both sides of the House I have to do that. 
 
Order, order please. I ask the minister to reply to your question. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – On a point of order I ask this House, I had the floor you did not tell me to sit down 
on any particular point, merely that I was speaking or making comments on item 1 for too long. I do not 
accept your judgement and your call and I ask the House to vote on this. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d have to state that there is no vote on this. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – I am suggesting to you that on one other occasion in this House, I questioned the 
remarks of a chairman in committee, the chairman asked me if I was questioning his remarks. I said, yes, 
I am .He said, “do you want to take it to the Assembly?” I said, “yes I do” and he did. I am asking for 
the same privilege today. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order, Mr. Chairman, on a point of order . . . this 
goes a little beyond the bounds of propriety. When one member shouts across to another one and he is 
smoking hash or nicotine, that is a little much and we have heard innuendos like that come across here 
for a long time but honestly there is a limit to everything. Mr. Chairman, you heard that and I would ask 
you to ask that the member to withdraw it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I think we can get this back into perspective here without too much trouble if we 
try to adhere to of the rules within the book here and I would like to read this one, it is page 19 and it is 
section 2: 
 

Mr. Speaker or the Chairman after having called the attention of the Assembly or the committee 
to the conduct of a member who persists in irrelevance or tedious repetition, either of his own 
arguments or of the arguments used by other members in debate, may direct him to discontinue 
his speech and if the member continues to speak, Mr. Speaker shall name him or if in committee, 
the Chairman shall report him to the Assembly. 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2180 

 

I am trying to, I just asked him, I think, in as honourable way as I could to not be repetitious and not to, 
that I thought he had stated his point, I was trying to be fair with him. I asked him if he has a specific 
question, make that specific question now, then I would like the minister to reply. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Chairman, I will do that. I will state a specific question. I hope you will be as 
insistent that the minister will give a specific answer. Were you aware, at the time that you introduced 
the tax cuts, of the proposal to increase dramatically the bills for Sask Power and Sask Tel within the 
same week? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware that at the time of announcing the Budget that there has 
been no increase in the power rates and there has been no increase in the telephone rates. The hon. 
member is aware of that as well and so is the public of Saskatchewan aware. We have not misled the 
public. The only person who is making allegations of some misinformation to the public is the hon. 
member for Nipawin. Mr. Speaker, the member has made a number of allegations about the purposes of 
the Budget, which I think are appropriate to deal with. He made references as to the positive attitude and 
positive nature of the Budget in which I agree with him. The Budget did instil confidence or additional 
confidence in the economy in Saskatchewan. Certainly the sizeable reduction in taxes including the 
income tax has had a very desirable effect. Only those people who are prejudiced or uniformed or 
irresponsible would be misinterpreting what the Budget has done. The Budget has achieved what we had 
hoped and the Budge has been praised, Mr. Chairman, all across this country and certainly has been 
welcomed by the people of Saskatchewan as a move in the right direction. The reduction in income tax, 
the more money in revenue sharing, the numerous measure we have taken which I do not propose to 
restate now. Let me point, Mr. Chairman, to notable commentators and writers and economists, like 
Diane Cohen who writes extensively and whose columns are reproduced in the Star Phoenix, in the 
Leader Post said very clearly that that this is what our economy needed and that other provinces that 
have not introduced budgets should follow the Saskatchewan lead. Newspapers like Montreal Gazette, 
Toronto Star – organizations like the Canadian Bankers’ Association, Saskatchewan section praised the 
Budget; this is what our economy needed – Investment Dealers of Canada just being here. It is not only 
that the Budget had the effect on the day it was introduced, its continuing endorsement is a positive 
feature. 
 
Just the other day I received a publication from McLeod, Young and Weir, investment dealers who do a 
lot of business in the province of Saskatchewan, who praised our moves as to what our economy needed 
and what the economy of Canada needs at the time. The local organizations like the Downtown 
Merchants Association in Regina, the Construction Association, Saskatoon, newspapers like the Leader 
Post, Star Phoenix, Prince Albert Herald, Moose Jaw Herald, Hospital Association, Weyburn paper, 
Yorkton paper and I can carry on and on, in the editorials. 
 
I think the Budget has been very well received and it was pretty evident that the opposition was not able 
to, in any way, criticize the Budget in any meaningful way because it was a Budget that was a positive 
Budget. 
 
The hon. member for Nipawin is trying to create a smoke screen. I think he is playing to the media. I 
think the media have responded, both the electronic media and the written media, how they felt about 
this Budget. I can say this, that in talking to the business 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2181 
 

community, there isn’t a day that passes by that I don’t run into someone who expresses his feeling. 
Individual merchants feel very positively about the Budget and it has had a dramatic effect on business 
— small business, big business, all business in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is a great place to live. It is 
through this Budget we have introduced, through the income tax reduction, we propose to carry on. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: – Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to take too much of the minister’s time, but I want 
to talk a little philosophy here if I might 
 
First of all the minister made some rather sweeping statements at the end of his speech. He talked about 
this Budget’s dramatic effect on business; it was a great stimulus to the economy; it was praised by the 
business community. Mr. Chairman, just a few days ago we got the unemployment statistics in 
Saskatchewan. It would that the exact opposite is true, the exact opposite is true. I’m not going to go into 
a debate on unemployment. I want to go into a little bit of philosophy of this business of income tax 
reductions on low income earners as a stimulus to create jobs into the business community. And second, 
a little bit about the philosophy of income tax reduction in general to stimulate the economy. 
 
First of all, it seems to me that now every time there is a slow down in the economy, politicians across 
the country, particularly opposition politicians in all Houses of government, assemblies, whether it be 
the House of Commons or any province, come out and immediately call for income tax cuts and 
particularly in the low-income people. First of all, I think, Mr. Chairman, that that is the last place that 
we are going to stimulate the economy – not that anybody doesn’t want the income tax reduced, I think 
all of us do. But to turn around and suggest that to lower the income tax on low income earners by $100 
or $50 a year, that those are the people who are gong to invest in new jobs is sheer folly. First of all if 
you take somebody on a $7,000, $8,000, $10,000, or $12,000 income with three or four kids and you 
turn around and reduce his income tax by $100, it’s a cinch that person is not going to invest in IPSCO 
or any national corporation that might come to Saskatchewan or Canada and province jobs. That person 
is going to take that $100 and use it for the necessities of life. Similarly those on a medium income very 
rarely would income tax on anybody in the low income or middle income bracket ever stimulate the 
economy, simply because of the fact that in the rising cost of living those kind of people need that 
money for the necessities of life. As the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) has pointed out, those 
necessities of life are very often returned right to the government whether they be increased utility rates 
or whatever they may be. 
 
The second thing, I am afraid that income tax takes a long period of time to have an impact. When I say 
it takes a long time to have an impact, I am referring to the fact that very often self-employed people 
don’t pay income tax on a quarterly basis or whenever it may be, other people, farmers and so forth at 
their year end, other people only pay a small portion on a monthly basis and very often income tax is the 
last thing to find an immediate stimulus. In other words, the stimulus that is required in Canada right 
now – you know the amazing part about Saskatchewan with the dramatic effect, that now we are in the 
time when we should be in the high employment seasons, when jobs should be created very, very 
rapidly. The same thing across Canada, and yet the stimulus in Saskatchewan doesn’t seem to have 
occurred in the province that has not felt the impact of recession for a long period of time, we find now 
that there is a slow down and a slow down in November or December might be understandable but right 
now it is in April and in May, that period of time when our economy should be going in summer 
employment and seasonable jobs should be going and being generated on a daily basis. 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2182 

 

It would appear that if anything, this particular Budget has not had any dramatic impact; in fact if it were 
in November or October or December, we might say it had a very negative impact. Of course we are 
talking about the stimulus of jobs. I’m not talking about tax relief because I’m like the member for 
Nipawin, I think the tax relief in this particular budget is very shallow; there are too many hidden taxes. 
You turn around and you increase power 21 per cent in September. Maybe the impact wasn’t felt until 
March as the member for Nipawin . . . I never noticed. Then you increase everything else and the reports 
of the Economic Council of Canada about the impact of utility increases in Saskatchewan are very 
unfair. 
 
What I want to do is talk to the minister, about efforts to stimulate the economy. Now, perhaps the 1 per 
cent reduction in corporation tax might have something more even though that just brings us to the level 
of most of the rest of the country so there is no great incentive to come to Saskatchewan. Surely the high 
income tax of the past and even the high income tax of today, and all of the other measure that come 
certainly are not an inducement for people to come, and in particular, business, to come to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask him if there isn’t some other way. Despite everything that was said about the sales tax 
reductions across the nation we are having $1 billion and the impact was being felt the next day and the 
impact was being felt in increased consumer spending in the business community and the retail outlets 
and those business people who have the responsibility or who might be encouraged to generate new jobs 
– that was being felt the next day. To me, I think that this idea of income tax reductions for low income 
people, low income tax in general is a stimulus to create jobs has but not succeeded in the past in my 
experience it will not succeed in all probability in the future and certainly it is an effort over a general 
overall period of time perhaps to encourage Saskatchewan citizens perhaps to stay in Saskatchewan a 
little longer before they lave because of the low taxation rate in Alberta, but I just don’t find them as a 
stimulus to the economy to create jobs. Right now I think that the Ministers of Finance who are 
controlling the fiscal policies of provinces and of the national government have got to be finding some 
way to create immediate stimulus, stimulus that can make its impact at an early time and an early 
occasion perhaps tomorrow or the next day. 
 
I want to discuss with the minister that philosophy and say I’m critical of every time he gets up and says 
that the low income person pays the least tax in Saskatchewan and Canada but I gave him some figures 
the other day to show that if you have a $20,000 taxable income in Alberta you pay about $1,000 more 
here. And those are the people who might create jobs. If you have $15,000 it was something like $500, 
$400 plus more income tax in Saskatchewan that you pay in Alberta and perhaps those are the people 
that might stimulate the economy. And when I say that low income people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, income tax reductions in that field are great for low income, for they have them keep 
pace with inflation but I think it’s a false assumption to suggest that they stimulate the economy and that 
your Budget has had a dramatic effect because of these great low income taxation savings even though 
you did cut generally the provincial rate which of course after being the highest in Canada, people were 
still shocked at the height, they are still making out their income tax for last year. Certainly it will be 
probably be a year away before they will recognize there is any benefit if there is a benefit in low 
income. 
 
And I ask the minister in all honesty, number one, I am asking him a question of 



 
May 1, 1978 

 
 

2183 
 

philosophy, stimulus, job creation, all of these things. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, in a number of question that the hon. member raised, first of all, there 
is certainly truth in what the hon. member for Nipawin is saying that confidence is a very important 
thing and I can tell the hon. member that at the time of the Budget and since then that there is a new and 
added confidence in the economy of the province as a result of that confidence people are today 
spending more of their savings than they had prior to that. Certainly, the income tax reduction, personal 
income tax reduction, has not taken effect yet as the hon. ember is aware. It does not take effect until 
July 1 in which we are gong to double that amount. Now, I am not . . . this is precisely what I said in 
second reading. I am not trying to misinform but trying to be very fair and honest with the members 
opposite. 
 
We also know that in this province personal savings have never been higher. Now, I invite you to check 
with the banks, the credit unions, the trust companies, the people who sell registered retirement plans. 
Now the personal income savings have never been higher in this province and it is also true really of the 
country as a whole but in Saskatchewan somewhat more so because of our buoyant economic 
conditions. And that is a good thing. Now as a result of the Budget, people are saying that things have 
been good. We have been able to put money away. The government is stimulating the economy and 
people have that added confidence and are taking savings and spending some of them on a variety of 
goods. Certainly the Education and Health Tax reduction has added to that stimulus but we are not going 
to be completely the full beneficiaries of that. The benefits are going to flow to the manufacturing 
industries in eastern Canada and some to even outside of Canada, the imports that we make. These are 
the facts of life. Certainly, we have been advocates to reduce the personal income tax for low and middle 
income Canadians because the low and middle income Canadians when they have the personal income 
tax reduction, they are not going to run to the bank or the credit union to deposit that money into 
savings. Their savings are limited. Everybody concedes that. The federal government provided for a $50 
a month cut for January and February. In talking to the federal Minister of Finance he says that they 
share the experience in that area. While it is true that the low and middle income people spend that $100 
of the tax cut, the high income people, they found that most of that money went into further savings. 
This is why we do advocate, as a stimulus, the reduction in the personal income tax for low and middle 
income people and in Saskatchewan there is – I invite the members to do their bit of homework. We are 
not trying to mislead anybody. 
 
Up to an income level of $13,000, an average family will pay this year the lowest income tax in Canada. 
Now that is in Saskatchewan. Up to a level of $9,090 the average family will pay no income tax at all. 
Remember that those are not the only taxes. As the hon. members are aware, we do not have the health 
tax. We also provide the lowest automobile insurance and these are direct and meaningful things that 
help the consumer. 
 
In the case of the increases in unemployment during the winter months, weather is a problem in this 
province, but we have had the added thing in the last while and certainly this year, of people from 
outside coming to Saskatchewan which has had the effect of increasing our rate of unemployment. 
Certainly we are finding this, that from a province to the east of us, the province of Alberta, many 
workers are coming to Saskatchewan to look for jobs, including the construction industry. I’m afraid 
that this may even become a larger problem. I hope not. But I invite the hon. members opposite, 
particularly the member for Indian Head-Wolseley to check with the business 



 
May 1, 1978 
 

 
2184 

 

community. I don’t know whether he has had a chance to talk to the business community but there is a 
great deal of confidence in Saskatchewan in our economy because things are relatively good. Retail 
sales are indeed holding up and going up. In the last two weeks I talked to two automobile dealers and 
they tell me that since the Budget and since the sales tax reduction, automobile sales have never been 
higher. That is a good sign. Remember, as I said, in that area the main beneficiaries are going to be the 
manufacturers in eastern Canada. This is why, while the sales tax has the effect of stimulating the 
economy, we are not the total beneficiaries because we do not have the large manufacturing industries. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I think that I have dealt in general with the question that the hon. member has 
raised and if there is a specific question that he might have I will be glad to deal with it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister to very briefly tell us, in the field 
of individual income tax and I hope this has not been covered while I was out of the House, you have 
estimated almost $324 million to come in to the treasury in this coming fiscal year You are making that 
estimate on the basis, I assume, of a 53 per cent income tax rate. Now, last year for the year 1977-1978, 
you estimated $310 million or about $310 million dollars to flow into the treasury but that was on an 
income tax rate of 58.5. Furthermore, if we take your Budget speech to be factual, and I suppose that is 
what this budgetary debate is all about, 22,000 taxpayers came off the tax rolls. So what you are saying, 
Mr. Minister, is that 22,000 less taxpayers paying about 9 or 10 per cent less tax are going to bring you 
in an additional $14 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, I assume your answer is going to have something to do with salaries rising but I think the 
wage settlements that we are talking about in this province right now to the tune of 5-6 per cent, I think 
we are reaching. Would you explain how you arrived at that number? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it would be better for us to deal with that during the 
Estimates, however, I’ll try to deal with it. Certainly he has partly answered his own question, in that 
personal incomes are rising and very substantially. The estimate of personal income tax receipts are 
prepared using an estimate of the total 1978 basic federal tax which is estimated at $19.5 billion in 
Canada. The total basic tax is then allocated to Saskatchewan according to the estimate of our 1977 
share which is 3.34 per cent of the basic federal tax. Both the total 1978 basic tax and our share are 
subject to change throughout the course of the fiscal year as new information becomes available. 
 
But those are the basic criteria; we work with the federal government. Now in order to determine our 
gross collections for 1978 tax year we then apply the personal income tax rate of 53 per cent to the 
allocated basic tax. Once we know the gross calculations and we do of $345.5 million, we then make 
two adjustments. First we have to convert the calculation to the tax year, to a fiscal year; second we 
must reduce the calculations by the net amount of the tax cut and the surtax and 1978 Budget estimate of 
receipts is therefore calculated by making the gross collection of $345.5 million plus $2.5 million to be 
placed on the fiscal year basis less the tax changes of $24.2 million which will yield $323.5 million as 
the figure as shown. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I suppose we are talking about is whether we should be reducing 
the income tax rate right now and in view of those budgetary figures it would appear to be some degree 
of question. Mr. Minister, I may possibly have more comments on this and with your permission I would 
like to call it 5:00 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 
 


	ANNOUNCEMENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Replacement of Director of Cancer Commission, Saskatoon
	Inadequacy of Grain Transportation
	Provincial Fish Marketing Commission
	Prison Guard Demotion – Walter Chester
	Sask Housing
	POINTS OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD
	SECOND READINGS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
	Bill No. 45 – An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act
	Section 1

