



















































Hansard: April 27, 1978


 

2065 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 27, 1978 

 

EVENING SESSION 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE – DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE VOTE 1 
 

ITEM 1 (con’t) 
 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): – Mr. Chairman, don’t we have a vote to handle still? Didn’t we just handle 

the amendment only? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — We took the motion as amended. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Mr. Minister, this afternoon during question period, there was a question asked 

concerning Land Bank land and Crown leased land. I don’t know whether it was that urgent this 

afternoon but it’s urgent tonight, I understand that up until November, 1977 approximately 13,500 acres 

of Crown land has been turned over to the Land Bank Commission, which basically, I have no objection 

to. 

 

However, the comments that were made in question period this afternoon raises a few question in my 

mind at this point in time, in regard to grassland that’s being turned over from the Land Bank to the 

Lands Branch. I understand you mentioned or made the point this afternoon that some grassland that has 

been purchased by Land Bank was in exchange, if that’s the appropriate term that you want to use, was 

turned over from Land Bank to Land Branch. Now it’s my understanding that there really is not a very 

serious sales policy in effect in regard to land under the jurisdiction of Lands Branch. And, it’s my 

understanding that a home quarter can be sold or parts of lease land that might form a rancher’s home 

unit could be purchased from Lands Branch but other than that there’s no policy by your department to 

sell land under the control of the Lands Branch. I’m just wondering if you could explain the sales policy 

of lands presently under control of the Lands Branch? I’m thinking in terms of grassland not cultivated 

acreage. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): – The answer that I gave this afternoon would still 

apply; in a case where it’s transferred to Lands Branch for grazing it would then not be subject to 

purchase. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – This is the answer, in effect, that disturbed me a bit because I’m sure everyone is aware 

of the position that our caucus has taken in regard to the sale of Crown land in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I don’t think there’s any point for us to go back into that again. All it would do is take up 

a bit more time of this Assembly. 

 

In effect what is happening by transferring Land Bank land over to the Lands Branch is that grassland 

that was previously owned by a private individual, sold to the Land Bank an then transferred over to the 

Lands Branch, does not come up for sale. Under the Land Bank program, if that land stayed in the Land 

Bank, after five years the person leasing would have the option to purchase, if it stayed with the Land 

Bank. But the fact that it is transferred from the Land Bank over to the Lands Branch rules out any 

possibility of any sale. You know, in my own mind, I think this is unfortunate because what is 

happening is you are transferring now privately owned land, that is being sold to Lands Branch and is 

then taken over the main stream of sales in the province of Saskatchewan by being transferred over to 

the Lands Branch. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2066 

 

MR. KAEDING: – This would be a very limited number of quarters and I think it would have to be 

land which is not suitable for cultivation purposes. It would have to be grazing land and I think the same 

rationale would apply as to why it shouldn’t be for sale then at that time. It seems to me if we conceded 

that Lands Branch land is the kind of land which should not normally be sold, then this would fit into 

that category. It would be according to policy. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Well, in regard to governments owning land you know, I can’t understand why in the 

world any government in its right mind would want to continue on with lease land basically because you 

make one person happy and about 30 other people madder than blazes at you, when the land does come 

up for acquisition. Beg your pardon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . (Laughter) But really, I, it is difficult 

for me . . . you know, we must accept the policy that the government has set down now that Crown land, 

grassland, cannot be sold unless under the few stipulations which I mentioned earlier. I don’t like to see 

that figure being enlarged. I am just wondering if the minister could tell me, for the last year for 

example, how many acres of grassland were transferred from Land Bank into Lands Branch – of 

grassland only. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We transferred from Land Bank to Lands Branch 4,166 acres. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – 4,160? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – 4,166 acres. That would not necessarily be land that we purchased from Land Bank. 

It may be a whole block, it may be quarter sections and so on, part of cultivated block. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – What happens in that regard? Is it just a transfer or are there dollar figures exchanged? 

Does the Lands Branch purchase from the Land Bank or is it just transferred over? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is a dollar value attached for the purposes that would make the transfer 

between the two departments. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Would that be a dollar for example? Or . . . 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, I think it is a dollar value, yes between the two departments you transfer so 

many dollars’ worth each way. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Well the point that I mean, do you transfer at a cost of a dollar or do you take a realistic 

land value at the time of transfer? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, we take it on the basis of actual, what is assumed to be the actual land value. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Yeah, you know, according to that possibility some of our arguments may not be as 

severe because there was 4,100 acres taken out of sale but the eventuality of maybe 13,000 acres being 

put up for sale because there was 13,000 of Crown land under Lands Branch, I understand transferred 

over to Land Bank during the year 1977, is this correct? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There was as well as transfers from Lands Branch to Land Bank, 14,165 acres 

transferred from Lands Branch into Land Bank, so we have an off-setting 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2067 

 

figure there which is larger than the other. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Is it too early at this point in time to ask how many acres of grassland that the Land 

Bank now holds that might be transferred over to the Lands Branch in the current year that we are 

dealing with 1978-1979? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Three and a half acres. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Sounds great, I’ll go along with that. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I don’t think we could give you a breakdown of that, but we are buying very little 

land which is grazing land; we are trying to concentrate exclusively on cultivation land. Again, you 

would have the problem of maybe having an attached quarter, but the amount is veryall. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Mr. Chairman, I have a few more questions under Land Bank, but I think it might be 

best if we wait until we get to that subvote and as far as Item No. 1 is concerned, we are agreed to Item 

No. 1. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — The other day, the minister gave us a list of organizations 

receiving grants, could he send me over a copy of that list that received them in the past year and could 

he inform the House on any of those groups that have applied for grants under the present budget and 

which ones were approved and the amounts, if he has a list. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We have just submitted orders in council to pay the standard kinds of grants like the 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association, the Poultry Council, so on. Those which we have identified and 

we know an actual figure. There are others which may . . . like the Agricultural Society, for instance, we 

don’t know how many grants there will be because we don’t know how many will apply. But those that 

are regular grants are taken care of now. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, that’s exactly my question. The other day you indicated there was only 

$30,000 in this whole vote. Then what about the annual grants which are more than $30,000 because, I 

assume, 4-H gets a pretty sizeable grant each year and so forth. Some of these will continue to get the 

grant. Yet, you indicated $30,000 is the total allowed for it. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The total amount for it is $1,686,000, but the amount of $30,000 is simply there as a 

miscellaneous grant area. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So, what you are saying is the standard grants are covered in a million X then you 

have $30,000 for grants that you didn’t know anything about at this time. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Agreed. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — O.K. 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, was it $25,000 that you granted 

to the National Farmers Union in the year 1976-77. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, I think you are right, $25,000. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2068 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — $25,000, O.K., Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the member for Nipawin suggested 

that possibly you were bailing the NFU out in terms of your funding of that particular organization and 

possibly favoring that organization and I, quite personally, I am not just so sure that that is the case, I’m 

not too concerned right now whom you are supporting as to whom you are not supporting and I think 

that that is more of importance to me at this point in time because if we can take the other approach that 

you have been supporting the National Farmers Union and turn that into good. If other organizations can 

qualify under that criterion for funding then I think that that is good and they should be made aware that 

such assistance is available to them through some of these newsletters that you are so frequently putting 

out, or get that information out to the ag reps. I have to refer to a statement of yours that says “Kaeding 

Says CAM Protest Not Productive.” Well, that doesn’t sound too bad but when you say that “I simply 

feel that because this group doesn’t have a policy, no one will know what they represent in a year.” He 

said this in Yorkton prior to the start of the picketing at livestock yards by CAM members last week. 

 

Now, obviously you have taken a position against that particular organization . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well, I just read what you said. Now I am sure that I would never ever hear you saying that about 

The National Farmers Union if it only had ten for a membership That is the parallel I am drawing, that 

you have condemned this organization before even attempting to do anything. I think that that is the 

most important thing right now in terms of your approach to the various organizations. I would like to 

think that your approach to organizations in the in the province of Saskatchewan that were acting in the 

interests of farm producers would be one of support and encouragement for whatever job they might be 

able to do on behalf of producers. I would like to see you take that approach. 

 

Now, in the same article it goes on to say, “That although Mr. Kaeding supports the concept of the 

protest, he compared it to a wildcat strike and said he is worried it will not help the movement reach any 

point of conclusion.” How could you be so presumptuous about a thing like that is beyond me. It is 

absolutely beyond me because I was asked the questions about the strike before it took place as well and 

I said, “Well I don’t know what good it is going to do, how can I predict that? Let’s wait and see.” And I 

wished them all the luck because if anybody can help the agricultural industry in this province to 

achieve its goals and the goals that they were trying to achieve weren’t that far out of line, they just 

wanted the cost of production plus the profit Surely an organization, I don’t care what label they come 

under, shouldn’t be condemned in that manner. 

 

You also suggest “that the Egg Marketing Agency didn’t get where it is by protesting, the minister 

pointed out,” referring to you. Now then, you turned right around and supported the Egg Marketing 

Commission. O.K., this is the Egg Marketing Commission. As I have already pointed out, 2.25 cent 

profit formula per dozen. Well I say that is great profit and great progress by the CEMA. 

 

Now, I would like you, Mr. Minister, if you wouldn’t mind, just replying to some of the comments I 

have made, tell me more specifically what justifies you reactions in condemnation of one organization 

and support of another as you see fit. Wouldn’t you as minister of Agriculture be better off to support 

these organizations, all of them, National Farmers Union included, as we do? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, Mr. Chairman, the member again fails to understand. I 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2069 

 

indicated yesterday that we did not propose to the NFU that they should have a grant from the 

department. They proposed to us a program which looked reasonable and which we said we would 

provide some funding for. We didn’t provide them all the funds they wanted by a long way and we 

required them to make a logical and reasonable request. They had to substantiate that by the kind of 

activity they were going to undertake. It was not the kind of activity which you are referring to. 

 

As far as CAM is concerned, I don’t think that at any point you can identify that I condemned the CAM 

movement. I expressed some concern over the fact that they were not able to, at least didn’t appear to be 

able to set down any policy which they could identify as their policy. They were talking strictly about 

international investment or a profit return on their investment and I indicated to them on a number of 

occasions when I had a chance to discuss it with them, that this was a great concept but they had to have 

some organized backing in order to be able to get what they wanted. Simply going around on a protest 

vote was not going to achieve it for them. I suggested to them that there were organizations within the 

province, The Stockgrowers Association, the National Farmers Union and others which they could join 

in order to achieve what they wanted to achieve through an organized mechanism and I suggested to 

them that I thought that was a better way for them to go. They chose not to do that and, of course, I am 

not going to quarrel with that but I might say that at no time have they approached our department or 

myself, for that matter, for any kind of assistance and certainly we are not going to go out and hand them 

cheques. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, you then felt it was your responsibility to make comment on that 

organization’s work and what its future might be at that particular time. Then I wonder, Mr. Minister, 

would you make comment now, please to this Assembly what your views are of the present Western 

Canadian Cow-Calf Association and what you think its future holds for its particular membership? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well Mr. Chairman, again the Cow-Calf Association is an association of livestock 

producers which has got together to attempt to get for their membership a better deal in agricultural in 

terms of the livestock industry. Certainly, I haven’t any objection to the group; in fact, I have discussed 

many times their desires and their policies. They were in to see me only about a week ago and we 

discussed a brief which they presented to us recommending what they thought we should be doing in the 

livestock industry and I think that they are a very legitimate organization and one which I would hope 

would continue. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I am glad to hear you say that because I would sure 

hate to see you condemning any more organizations in the province of Saskatchewan. This recent article 

which I quote you from would be the last one that I hear you condemn in any way and that I would see 

your support for any further organizations. Mr. Chairman, if I might just move into a different subject 

which I would like to raise at this particular point in time. Going over some of the discussions we have 

had in the Agricultural Estimates I see the member for Morse has place himself in a position where he 

believes that possibly one section of land would be a reasonable size for farm size in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That is on page 1965. With the modification or with the support of an effective 

diversification program that one section of land should be enough, that that is possibly a maximum that 

should be placed. That is not our position. I am not sure what your position is because on the preceding 

page you suggest maybe 500 acres, which is substantially less than a section of land. But I wonder if you 

have any feelings on that matter; if you feel that farm size should be restricted and if, in fact, that is the 

direction that you are working towards 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2070 

 

in your policies? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Chairman, we have no policy which is working towards the restriction of farm 

size. I have raised the issue on a number of occasions with responsible farm organizations such as the 

Federation of Agriculture and the SARM and it might be of interest for you to know, if you don’t, that 

the SARM have looked at this on a number of occasions and have discussed it and they have talked 

about it. You may have heard Boyd Anderson at some time or another bring this smatter to the attention 

of his board of directors and his regional people. We have some concerns over escalating farm size as I 

think most people in Saskatchewan have. However, I have not at any time indicated that we have a level 

in mind which we thought was an adequate level. The member for Morse may have quoted on a section 

of land and I am sure that most of us would agree that with a good diversification program, there is no 

reason why a section of land could not be adequate. That does not mean that we are recommending that, 

but I do think that there is a problem in trying to have any kind of restriction in farm size until you can, 

in some way, guarantee an adequate income on a land base. And until there is some further activity in 

terms of a guaranteed level of income for beef producers and hog producers and poultry producers and 

so on, unless there is some mechanism set up whereby they can get an adequate income out of a 

restricted base, then it would be highly unlikely that they could even suggest that kind of a proposal. 

You will know that in the discussion that was in the recent hearing by the Department of Environment 

on land use there has been a lot of discussion about land size and whether there should be a limit on land 

size. That is not something which we are proposing, we are simply . . . the item is out there for 

discussion so they can get some idea of what people in the country are thinking. I think that’s the proper 

procedure to take. If there should be a very urgent demand on the part of the public that we should have 

some restrictions, we would have to look at it. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, do you feel that the present land use hearings that are being held 

throughout the province will result in recommendations that will restrict farm size in the province? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I would be just guessing if I said that because I don’t know what they will 

recommend. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, when you speak of guaranteeing farm income, are 

you referring to a minimum or a maximum? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Would you repeat that please? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, what I was asking the minister is when he was replying to me just 

moments ago, he spoke of a guaranteed farm income. Now, were you referring to guaranteed farm 

income in terms of a minimum or a maximum standard? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – What I was saying is that unless there is some mechanism to province an adequate 

income for farmers on a diversified base, which is the only way you could look at a farm operation 

which was the size we are talking about here, then there would have to be some mechanism whereby – 

for instance, the Dairy Commission is now guaranteeing an income, at least a reasonable income, to 

their producers as are the egg producers and so on. They know that with a certain volume of production, 

they are probably going to be able to support an operation on a fairly limited size of an operation. And, 

unless you have some kind of mechanism like that in place for most 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2071 

 

products, then I would suggest that it would be pretty difficult to limit size. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, earlier I was asking about those lists. Would you be able to send me 

over photostatic copies of those two lists that I requested? And, on another topic if I may, the other day 

under, I believe it was Bill 6, The Farm Ownership Act, I asked you a question re a specific problem that 

your department is investigating now. Because of seeding time fast coming upon us, could you give us 

any indication when a recommendation will be available so that those involved will know who puts the 

crop in? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Chairman, I know that this is under review by the Farm Ownership Board and I 

discussed it with the director. He said that there may be some grounds on which they can deal with this 

problem but the indication seems to be that it was real estate operation, it wasn’t a direct sale to the 

person in Alberta. The sale was never really made to the person in Alberta, and so it may not be in 

contravention but the Farm Ownership Board is trying to get the documents together so they can either 

prove or disprove that. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I’m being careful not to open this up too far in case there are some legal 

involvements coming up on it. But say you are considering the first buyer (let’s call him that) who may 

by Bill No. 6 not be legally allowed to buy land in Saskatchewan; you may be considering him as a real 

estate firm, as an agent I guess, rather than a buyer who bought and resold immediately as a corporation 

buyer? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it is hard to identify that and this is what the Farm 

Ownership Board is trying to do. They are trying to identify; they are trying to get the documents to 

either substantiate that it was a legitimate purchase or wasn’t. If it was an illegitimate purchase, then the 

Farm Ownership Board will likely be taking some action. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you give me some ground or some idea, without jeopardizing your case, 

what might indicate that they were agents and therefore it was not, as has been indicated by some 

people, an illegal sale and, therefore, should go back to point A, in other words, the original land 

holders, rather than be able to go for resale again? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – It’s already done, so I think that although he may have contravened the act and he 

may incur a penalty for doing that there is nothing that we can do in terms of reversing the actual sale 

because he can pay a penalty for having made the improper sale. We couldn’t, I don’t think, reverse the 

actual document. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — That’s the kind of answer that I’m trying to get into the case itself. So basically 

what you are saying is, a person who is now a Saskatchewan citizen or a group of people and have 

purchased the land even though the middle man may have been or may not have been proper would end 

up with the land as your department sees it presently. It would not have to be reverted back to point one 

The reason I’m asking is that seeding time is just days away and people are asking the question. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, again, I don’t want to put myself if judgment of the case because the Farm 

Ownership Board is examining it and they will have to determine what the situation is and it may take 

days or weeks, I don’t know. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you give the individuals either through the House right now or 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2072 

 

in confidence to them, an idea when one decision will be made one way or the other so they will know 

how to judge what to do? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, I’m sorry, I’m sure that I couldn’t give them that assurance. It would depend 

entirely on how long it would take the Farm Ownership Board to get the information they need. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I wonder if I might on item 1 ask a question 

regarding the orderly marketing of grain which we seem to have some disruption in with regard to the 

off board deliveries of feed grain. Members from your side of the House have alluded to many illusions, 

as it were, and I think now would be a good time to get a better understanding of just what your position 

is regarding feed grains, deliveries of them. Some from your side of the House have suggested that there 

should be a quota placed on them, others suggest that it should all be under the Canadian Wheat Board. 

And in the process, while they are making their argument some for and some against and none of you 

very consistent, you take some unusual cracks at the Progressive Conservatives which seems unusual 

since they, themselves, introduced the Canadian Wheat Board, not once but twice. They do that at the 

initial stages of their speech on the off board grains. Further on down, then they come back and they say, 

well, the Tories are trying to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board. Now I hear it coming from the Liberal 

critic and that makes it all the more interesting. . . (interjection) . . . Well, you’re not running federal, 

Jack, so don’t get into it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder would you mind just telling me what your position is? Would you like to see the 

feed grains under the Canadian Wheat Board, are you content with it the way it is on off board deliveries 

and, if so, do you feel there should be quotas on those deliveries? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Chairman, I have no difficulty at all in answering that question. My first 

preference would be to have all the feed grains under the Canadian Wheat Board. I think there are very 

many good reasons for us taking that position. I think that if you have looked at any of the speeches that 

were made from this side of the House it would have shown you the loss which farmers have taken 

because they have marketed outside of the Wheat Board. So that would be our first choice. The second 

choice if there was obviously no way that we were going to get Mr. Lang to change his policy, then we 

would certainly wish that all of the off board grain would come under quota. I think, as I indicated in my 

remarks in the feed grain debate, that a bushel of grain takes as much room whether it’s off board grain 

or whether it’s Canadian Wheat Board grain and it should not be possible, in my opinion, it should not 

be proper for someone who wanted to shove a bunch of grain on the off board market to take up that 

much room in the elevator system and then penalize someone else who is prepared to operate under an 

orderly system. An orderly marketing system will never work with that kind of a leakage on the side. It 

disadvantages people who are not able to deliver or who do not wish to deliver on the off board market 

and certainly we are very much of a mind that we should have quota, if we have to live with the open 

market there should be a quota on those deliveries. 

 

I know of a case in a constituency right next to mine where last fall there was an American combine 

operator who was complaining bitterly because he could not get his grain, in the middle of the night, into 

an elevator. He said he had 8,000 bushels that he was going to combine that night and he wanted to get 

that all into the elevator before morning because that was all the room that there was in the elevator. The 

agent would 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2073 

 

not undertake to take his grain and so he was very bitter about that. But if he had taken that grain one 

farmer would have gotten 8,000 bushels into that elevator and the rest of the farmers, his neighbours, 

would have sat around wondering where they quota was coming from. And certainly, we do not think 

that this is the way to run an orderly market. 

 

It was interesting that you should again bring up the position of the Tory Party because I can recall very 

well when Joe Clark was in Manitoba when he made the statement that if he became the Prime Minister 

of this country he would be prepared to allow the multinational grain companies to work side by side 

with the Canadian Wheat Board and in competition with the Canadian Wheat Board in getting 

deliveries. I know that his counterparts in western Canada said that’s a no-no, don’t ever say that again 

and he has been careful not to say it again. But he said it and he meant it when he said it because he 

repeated it two or three times in that same series of meeting. I know that it was an embarrassment to the 

Conservative Party because they do not want to be nailed with that accusation. Nevertheless, their leader 

said it and I am sure that he meant it and he must have gotten advice from his own people. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — The three prairie wheat pools are united, is that not so and licensed as an agent of 

the Wheat Board? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — And what is the name of that company which those three prairie wheat pools 

form? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – You are talking about the export group that is set up by the three pools. That is 

EXCAN. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Now then, we have the three 

prairie wheat pools and what used to be the Untied Grain Growers as part of EXCAN and they are no 

longer? EXCAN is licensed by the Canadian Wheat Board to sell grain and you might be made well 

aware and I am sure you are aware that there are four major companies and they are you multinationals 

and they are your big companies, none of which are Canadian, that market Canadian grain. They are 

Cargill, Dreyfus, Bunge and Continental. Now then, if you want to know what the Conservative position 

federally is, I am going to tell you what it is. Very simply they have suggested, just suggested to the 

three prairie wheat pools, farmer owned, that farm company EXCAN be allowed to compete with these 

four multinational for the export of Canadian grain. Now, Mr. Minister, do you see anything wrong with 

that? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, certainly, I do not see anything wrong with them competing with the 

multinationals nor did I suggest that should not. I simply said that the purchase and selling of the grain 

should be through the Canadian Wheat Board and the elevator companies are free to act as agents and 

that is what they have been doing. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that is correct. These four major companies 

operate through the Canadian Wheat Board. They sell on behalf of the Canadian Wheat Board. I think I 

would take it as read that you agree with me that there would be nothing wrong with EXCAN working 

on a competitive basis with these four multinationals in the sale of grain on behalf of Canada. They 

represent the bulk of the grain and I think that that’s the way you have expressed yourself to me Now, I 

would have to accept that as being the case, that you are suggesting that EXCAN should move into 

competition with these people land sell as much grain as they can on behalf of 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2074 

 

western Canadian farmers. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, I would agree with that if they were selling it as agents of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. What Mr. Clark was proposing was that they would be able to operate outside of the Canadian 

Wheat Board and sell outside of the Wheat Board without having to necessarily be licensed by the 

board. But what he was proposing was that they could sell outside of the Wheat Board jurisdiction and 

that is what we object to.\ 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t blame you for objecting, not one bit. 

Not one bit do I blame you for objecting. I unfortunately did not hear the remarks made by Mr. Clark 

and so I’m not prepared to accept what you say he said or what the member for Morse said he said. All I 

know is what the Federal Progressive Conservative party position is in that one particular area, at least 

That they have never at any time suggested that there should be a break-down of the Canadian Wheat 

Board or selling outside the Canadian Wheat Board. Surely to goodness not. This is the very point I’m 

trying to make. That your members from that side of the House get up in this Assembly and condemn 

the Conservatives for attempting to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board. They do that in the same speech 

and I can show you if you like, you can look for yourself in the Hansard the same time they have praised 

the Conservatives for introducing the Wheat Board. 

 

Now, what sense does that make? None. That’s understandable because it comes from that side of the 

House. Now, I’m seeing that the member for Morse, in his usual way, is slipping over to that side of the 

House and supporting your arguments. That’s good. That’s fine. The Leader of the Liberal Opposition 

this afternoon was suggesting that he wouldn’t let any of you people steam roll over any of his members. 

Well, I’m sure he wouldn’t. We’re not in the position that the Liberal Party is in this province. We’re 

steam rolling over you people. We’ve long since steam rolled over them. Now, we’re getting to position 

where we’re trying to zero in on some very important issues and that is the marketing of grain. We’d 

like to see that you as Minister of Agriculture, in terms of representing our grain producers (we’re the 

biggest grain producing province) would take a very effective stand with Ottawa. As I’ve said before, go 

to battle with them, whether they’re a Liberal government or a Conservative government after the next 

election, and see to it that our own company EXCAN which is licensed by the Canadian Wheat Board 

can sell and will sell more gain that it has in the past on behalf of western Canadian grain producers. 

 

That’s what I’m suggesting and that’s what I’m suggesting is the position you should take. Now, Mr. 

Minister, you don’t disagree wit that position, do you? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I will repeat that as far as EXCAN is concerned or any of the companies, if they’re 

operating as agents to the Wheat Board, I have no complaint. Again, I want to go back to the statement 

that the position of the federal Progressive Conservative Party is totally in support of the Canadian 

Wheat Board. I’m suggesting that either he doesn’t know what his leader is saying because I could send 

him the quote. I don’t have it here but I could send it to him right away, first thing in the morning. I 

could send him the quote when he made that statement. He was quoting to the press on two or three 

occasions of having made that statement. Now, either the Leader of the Conservative Party doesn’t 

know what he’s saying or the member for Moosomin doesn’t know. 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): – Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I wanted to ask 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2075 

 

some questions on the farm testing lab that you have. Is that in item 26? Do I wait for that one or can I 

ask it now? I’ve only got a few, Mr. Chairman, on this. Can you tell me what Saskatchewan ‘s share was 

in 1977 of the testing of machinery in this province? I may be wrong on this but there are three testing 

stations, I believe, in the three prairie provinces. You test machinery from other provinces. What is the 

percentage of machinery, what was our share of the machines that were tested in the three prairie 

provinces? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I don’t know if I can give you a complete breakdown on the percentage of machines 

that were tested. I would expect that a large per cent would have been at Humboldt because the satellite 

stations at Portage La Prairie and Lethbridge are just coming on stream now. So I don’t expect that they 

would have done a great deal of testing there. And Portage La Prairie came on last year so I would think 

that at this point in time we’re still doing the major part of the testing. 

 

MR. WIPF: – What will your predictions be for the coming year? Will you be able to pick up one-third 

of the testing or more than one –third. What are your predictions? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Our agreement with the provinces is that we provide 45 per cent of the cost of 

running this station and I would suspect because we have the largest station we would be doing most of 

the testing. 

 

MR. WIPF: – O.K. Mr. Minister, are we on schedule with our testing and experimental work? Or are 

we running behind? Where do we stand with this now? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes. We’re on schedule and we expect that there’ll be about 60 reports published 

this year. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I wonder if we could stay as closely as we can to the subvotes which will pertain 

to some of these questions that are being asked, and in general terms are you agreed to Item No. 1? 

 

MR. WIPF: – With the permission of the minister, I was going to finish asking this group of questions, 

is it O.K. with you? I can wait for subvote 27 or 26 or 25, which one is it? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — 27, I think, and 28 and some of these would be the ones that I think your 

questions would be in order. 

 

MR. WIPF: – The Chairman would like to move along and I would like to ask you, which particular 

subvote does this come under, or does it come under several and then would then continue on Item No. 

1? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The test station is under O.K. 28. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — 28 did you say? Item 1 agreed. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, the stated objectives, question here, really not going to be very 

long, Mr. Chairman. It is a very broad question and it refers to the purposes of FarmStart. Number one, 

the primary purpose of this program is to alleviate cash flow problems of cow-calf producers and the 

secondary purpose of this program is to encourage the retention of breeding stock by Saskatchewan 

producers. Now, that’s two things. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2076 

 

Mr. Minister, do you feel that the FarmStart organization has achieved those two objectives? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I think as nearly as it was possible to achieve an objective in face of the very 

difficult situation that there was out in the country, I think we have accomplished a fair deal. We still 

have a lot of the people who went into the FarmStart program and even in the beef industry which was 

very difficult. A good percentage of those are still with us and are still, I hope be able to cash in on some 

of the benefits now coming from higher prices. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, I’m going to draw to the attention of the hon. member again on item 9, 

you can ask as broad a question as you like regarding FarmStart there and I would like to proceed with 

the Item 1. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, then, all right, that’s in another item, I’ll leave that and come back 

to it later, O.K.? 

 

Then, Mr. Minister, if I might ask you this question. I didn’t know if this is any of the subvotes, I 

haven’t found it yet but would you know, could you tell me, what the increases have been in elevator 

handling changes from 1974 to 1977? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We don’t have the exact figures here but I believe the figure about four years ago 

was something like four cents a bushel and it’s now about eleven cents. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I just want to know if your figures and mine were 

somewhere close and they are not too far out. The per cent change since 1974 to 1977 is 360 per cent 

increase. O.K. in elevator handling charges. Now, I think that’s a substantial increase and again, Mr. 

Minister of Agriculture, I want you to make some strong representation to Ottawa in terms of the 

Canadian Grain Commission. 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment): – I wonder if it’s in the purview of this committee to 

be probing for rates that are not set by this government or by this Legislature. Mr. Chairman, I would 

like a ruling on that please. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I think that your point of order is well taken, I also think that in subvote 1, 

I’m trying to be as lenient as I can, but I think sometimes that the privilege is being abused to some 

extent and I would like to draw to the attention of all members that we try to adhere to the rules of the 

House. I think that is not new to any of you that you’ll agree with me that we are trying to cover in 

general terms under subvote 1 the things that pertain to the provincial organization and the provincial 

government and I would ask the hon. member for Moosomin to try and adhere to that. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to say one word on this point of order, I’m not 

going to say that either but if that’s a reasonable point of order, then there will be no more reasonable 

motions before this Assembly by this government to do this or that or the other thing. As the member of 

Melville suggested, they should accept the cost that the birds are causing the farmers and all the damage 

of eating up the crops. That’s the federal jurisdiction and you raised it in this Assembly. I am raising the 

very same issue in Estimates on a general topic, on Item No. 1 and if that is a reasonable point of order, 

well then we will be standing on points of order and could stand reasonably on points of order on all 

motions before the Assembly that don’t pertain to the provincial politics and in fact, pertain to federal 

politics. Now, Mr. Chairman, that’s my comments on the point of order and since the 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2077 

 

government is very much in a hurry to get off of Agriculture, sure I got a number of questions I would 

like to ask, but I guess there is no need of asking them on Item 1 and I was almost finished. It is 

unfortunate that the members had to get so upset. I had about two or three little items left on Item 1 and 

then I was finished. But nonetheless, that’s fine. We can leave it, we can go down item by item. The 

Liberal agriculture critic suggested that he got some question on item by item and that is fine. We will 

just see how many he has on item by item and that is agreed. Item 1 agreed on my part. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Just one question. Is horse racing Item 2 or do you want it handled under Item 1? 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

ITEM 2 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — I would like to thank the minister for sending me over the list. But on Appendix 

A of the list, you sent over, the first one takes in effect of the amount of money used because of 

pari-mutuels and so forth. Could you inform me which races it grants . . . I should maybe say it’s 

Saskatoon, Regina and could you explain why no other new race track can be approved in 

Saskatchewan? I think it is a 1949 law or something, but I have never been able to get the answer. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, Saskatoon, Regina and Moose Jaw and these are the only three pari-mutuels 

fairs that run. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — But is there some provincial legislation that indicates only tracks that were, had 

days, prior to a certain time will be allowed to have racing? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The federal government determines how many pari-mutuels will be run in the 

country, and the regulations under which they operate are outlined by the Canadian Trotters’ 

Association and by the Canadian Thoroughbred Horse Racers’ Association. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — If I can, let’s forget about the thoroughbreds and standardbreds re racing. Under 

Saskatchewan, we have a (I am not sure what they call it) an association that says who gets race days, 

but I understand that there is a Saskatchewan law that says no race track is approved so that they can go 

to the federal, unless they had racing prior to a certain date. Am I incorrect on that? Or, I understand, it 

is a 1940 something law. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I really couldn’t tell you what federal law it is that determines who or how many 

pari-mutuels there are. But I know it is a federal issue. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I thought you were getting some more information. My question is then, let me 

get down a little close to the point, then, I will use Alberta. Racing there is handled by the Racing 

Commission and any breed of animal or anything that wants to have races, has to go before that 

Commission to be approved. Then they go to the federal government for pari-mutuels in X amount of 

days. In Saskatchewan there is no such body, to my knowledge. Am I correct on that? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes you are correct. There is no racing commission here. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2078 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So the only people in Saskatchewan that can have racing are the thoroughbreds 

and the standardbreds without the, for example, to change that the race tracks in Saskatoon and Regina 

who own the racing association and run the tracks in this province, would have to agree to it. There is no 

government body involved; it is strictly those race tracks that now control all racing in this province. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, I think you are right on that. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So what you have done is give the monopoly to two race tracks to control it and 

the government is not involved in it at all? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, I wouldn’t say that there was a monopoly there. We haven’t had any requests 

from anybody outside of that to interfere with that particular mechanism. It appears to be operating 

satisfactorily. If there have been protest then they haven’t come to me. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — My concern is that several years ago, before I was elected to this House. I was 

very involved with racing on the tracks and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — No, I’m afraid I was never that small. 

 

What my concern is, I was informed in those days by the Department of Agriculture (and I believe the 

gentleman isn’t with your department any more) that if anybody wanted racing, you had to convince the 

two race tracks to allow you to run. The government had nothing to do with it because they had an old 

law on the books that said that any track that wasn’t acing couldn’t have them, so those two race tracks 

and only those two, for example, Lloydminster is a town that wanted racing and was all set to go and 

something went sour because the exhibitions wouldn’t give us permission (inaudible) because they 

didn’t want to give up days. We understand that the control was with them and there was nothing we 

could do about it. 

 

Now, do you not have any information about these types of problems that have come up in the past? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I don’t have any background on it myself because no requests or complaints have 

come to me but I understand that at the present time the Trotters’ Association and the Thoroughbred 

Association are the people who are more or less controlling where racing takes place. If there were to be 

a protest or anything else like that – if someone else was to argue that these people should not have a 

monopoly, then I suppose that we would be prepared to listen to that but we haven’t had that kind of a 

complaint come to us. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Are you suggesting, Mr. Minister, that if those of the other groups that are 

interested in racing (referring only to horse racing at this moment, I won’t get into the dog racing that 

the member for Shaunavon wants me to ask about, yet) that they would make a presentation to you 

people suggesting they are interested in tracks like North Battleford, Lloydminster, who are interested in 

racing (Beechy has a one day race) would make a request to you, then you would go to the exhibitions 

and try to arrange something or how are you suggesting that they handle it? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, at the present time it is handled as I have indicated, and we have 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2079 

 

no reason to believe that that hasn’t been working satisfactorily. If it hasn’t I suppose someone should be 

advising. I am advised here that the Criminal Code of Canada governs pari mutuel betting and it limits 

the number of races per day (it says 10 races per day without the consent of the federal Minister of 

Agriculture,) providing that the pari mutuel of betting operation is carried on under the supervision of, 

and the officer appointed by the federal Minister of Agriculture, an assessment of up to 1 per cent of the 

total amount of bets may be levied for costs, and it goes on with a bunch of other regulations. So they 

would have to meet all of those federal regulations before they could operate a pari mutuel. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I agree with you but what I am indicating here is that these groups in the past have 

come to the Department of Agriculture and I will put it on record if you want me to, as past president, 

involved with many of these association, they have come to the government requesting permission, and I 

refer to Lloydminster as one that that I was very much involved with, and North Battleford, who wanted 

racing and were told that they had to go to the Saskatchewan Jockey Club because they . . . well, they 

went to them and said, we’re not interested in having more dates of horse racing in this province. They 

were going to keep them at the two tracks and froze out. 

 

What I am saying to you now, is there a way that the Department of Agriculture will accept requests 

from other organizations wishing to get racing and race tracks that are wishing to get racing and then 

they will have to go to the pari mutuel step, the federal government. Would you consider some 

mechanism to assist them, for example, a racing commission where all associations that are involved in 

racing would be eligible to partake and have involvement rather than just the two major exhibitions? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It is not government. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Byers, I’ve got a file about that big on this and it’s bigger than you even . . . 

(interjection) . . . No, they don’t, Neil. You are thinking of Texas betting. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The whole issue of racing commissions has been looked at in the province over a 

number of years and apparently the decision has been that the extra cost of carrying a racing commission 

was just an extra cost which would not get any benefit and I presume that if you had a racing 

commission, a good number of people who are now on the existing groups would be part of that 

commission, so I don’t know whether that would get you very much. I’m advised by the staff that there 

was a lot of effort put in to try to retain the racing date for Lloydminster but because of economics that 

they weren’t just able to continue to operate and they finally fell by the wayside. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I thank you for that answer. The exact reason is, as you said, they couldn’t get 

horses to go to Lloydminster of the two major breed of thoroughbreds and the standard breds and that’s 

Moose Jaw’s problem too. The people that were going there said there wasn’t enough purse money and 

so forth and that it was more lucrative to go to the two major tracks. But they went to the other breeds of 

horses in the province that were interested in racing and when they tried to expand the first they were 

frozen out. The newer breeds that are involved in racing, the Arab horses, the appaloosas are running in 

Alberta. What I am suggesting is maybe a racing commission involving all those that are involved in the 

horse industry and appaloosa involvement should maybe considered, or the government could assist in 

getting them altogether and that’s the government’s input as far as I’m concerned. Let me work it out to 

see if there is some amicable way to settle this whole thing. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2080 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, we do have a staff member who is dealing almost exclusively – well, not 

exclusively but deals with all of the requests from the racing people, people who are requesting 

assistance in the racing area and we provide as much input as we can in terms of assistance in getting the 

grants forward and all of that. Now if there is a feeling that there is a group of disadvantaged people 

around who are not getting heard, I would suggest that they make an attempt to make an appointment 

with my office and we’ll talk to them. I have no objection to talking to anyone in any sphere and if there 

is a group who thinks they are being disadvantaged by the present policy I would be glad to sit down and 

talk to them. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I thank the minister for that answer. 

 

Item 2 agreed. 

 

Item 3 agreed. 

 

ITEM 4 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — This is the old Sask Trade transfer, am I correct, this vote? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – This is the new Agriculture Development Corporation. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you tell me if they have a board of directors? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, they do. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you give me the names of the individuals on the board of directors? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The board of directors is myself, as chairman; Ernie Spencer a member, as vice 

chairman, Bob Lockwood, a director of Outlook branch, Dr. George Lee of the University of 

Saskatchewan, Wayne Larch from the Industry and Commerce Branch, John Saddler, Government 

Finance Office, John Sinclair from the Department of Finance; Harry J. Elder of Fillmore is a farm 

member and Bruce Chestor of Regina is a farm member. 

 

Item 4 agreed. 

 

ITEM 5 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Under this item, is this where the book is produced for all the different cattle in 

the province – or used to be produced, I should say, or is it a different vote? The cattle that were 

available, it was a marketing sort of book about that thick with all types of Herefords, Holsteins and all 

the different cattle listed in it. It may be in Industry and Commerce, I may be incorrect here. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We don’t have a published of cattle or breeders or anything like that. 

 

Item 5 agreed. 

 

Items 6 and 7 agreed. 

 

ITEM 8 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2081 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — The Swine Research Unit, could you tell me the reason for the increase? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, because we have committed ourselves to a Swine Research Unit at the 

university. Last year it was simply a $50 figure for research in the hog area. This year we are proposing 

to build a Swine Research Centre and that is the money which is voted for that. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — What percentage of that is provincial money and what percentage of that would 

be from outside sources, other provinces or federal? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The money required for building the unit is about $1.7 million. Out of that there 

have been department grants of $1 million. The Saskatchewan Hog Commission has got a $90,000 unit. 

The Saskatchewan Hog Commission Market Development Fund has $200,000. The University of 

Saskatchewan has $200,000 and the hog industry has committed itself to raise $210,000 for a total of 

$1.7 million. 

 

Item 8 agree. 

 

ITEM 9 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Was that the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you know if the minister keeps 

yelling “let it go”, I think we might find a lot more to it. Tell him to patiently sit . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . there is nothing over on that side worth intimidating to bother intimidating . . . The 1973 

Act, is the original Cow Loan Program, the $6,000? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The which? 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — The $6,000 that you were able to pay back for buying of female stock? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, that comes, I suppose, under this subvote, that’s the Loan and Grant Program. 

That is included in this subvote. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Deferring of loss, would you indicate is this for people not paying back or is it 

because of the loss of the subsidy to the livestock area one? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Sorry, I misinformed you, that is under subvote 12. 

 

Item 9 agreed. 

 

ITEM 10 
 

MR. WIPF: – What does this cover, Mr. Minister, what is this subvote? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – That subvote provinces for the administration costs of the FarmStart program. 

 

MR. WIPF: – How may FarmStart loans do you have out, Mr. Minister, under this? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes we have approximately 2,534 is what our last statement shows. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2082 

 

MR. WIPF: – Mr. Minister, are we having any trouble with these FarmStart loans. Are any due at this 

time and are you writing off any of these FarmStart loans? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well there are the regular problems that you have with collections. Certainly there 

are some which are in arrears and we presume there will be some write-offs, there are provisions for 

some write-offs, but at the present time I don’t know that we have written any off at all. 

 

MR. WIPF: – While you are on your feet, maybe you could tell me how many dollars are we in arrears? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – That would be very difficult to calculate, in terms of how many we have got in 

arrears. We’ve got the numbers who are in arrears. There are right now 115 out of that group are on 

demand. That means that they are being foreclosed or have been given their final notice. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Mr. Minister, under the FarmStart loans, do you have to have had experience in farming 

before you can get one of these FarmStart loans if you want to start up a dairy herd, do you need any 

experience in this at all? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is now under the existing structure, a kind of grading system whereby they 

attempt to determine whether the person has the capabilities to undertake a certain kind of an operation. 

We have on occasion, where people have come and wanted to get into dairy farming for instance, a dairy 

loan, we have required that they must go and work on a dairy farm for a period of time before we could 

accept them. And, we suggest to them that at the end of that training period, come back to us and we will 

talk to you again. That kind of proposition. 

 

MR. WIPF: – But you do have some FarmStart loans out in the dairy farming area where the people 

didn’t have any experience in dairy farming. Is that right? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I think that may be fair enough to say. Originally, in the beginning of the program, 

there were some people taken on who didn’t have adequate training and some of these have got into 

difficulty. 

 

MR. WIPF: – How many of those have you given in the last year? Loans to people to start dairy 

farming without any experience. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I don’t know. Without experience, you are asking without experience? I’m not sure 

that we can identify those here, if any. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you tell me how many dairy farmer you have that part of their milk cheque 

goes directly to you, rather than normally writing the cheque? How many have you got that are presently 

operating where an automatic debit on the bank comes to you when they get their milk cheques? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I didn’t get that question. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — How many dairy farmers, when a farmer sends in his milk the dairy pool sends a 

portion of the cheque directly to you people rather than to him and he just makes his payments? 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2083 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We don’t have a policy of taking cheques from individuals on a regular basis from 

their, you know, as their income comes in. I understand we have one account where he has agreed that 

he will pay a certain percentage of his cheque to us, but that is a voluntary agreement. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that your policy is not to have an automatic debt on 

any FarmStart loans that you may have out in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We have, what you might call, a garnishee on his production and he is required, 

according to his agreement, to pay us certain payments at certain periods of time. We don’t have any 

arrangement whereby he would have to give so much of every cheque. We don’t have that kind of 

arrangement. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. In the Dairy Producers Loan or whatever you call it, to help 

the dairy farmer, is there an opportunity if a young fellow who is born and raised on a dairy farm, and 

his father owns a dairy farm and wants to start up. Can the young fellow start up, a new man start up 

with a loan or does his father have to back the loan for him? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, in any case where a FarmStart loan is given, there has to be some security, 

and if he does not have the security then of course his father can co-sign it for him. 

 

MR. WIPF: – You don’t take the equipment and the land and barns and cattle you are going to buy and 

use that as security. He has got to have other security also? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, we would take security on this land and equipment. We wouldn’t take security, 

I don’t think on any other chattels except those which we are involved in If we, for instance, provide 

him with a baler a or a silage cutter or something like that, then we would have a claim on that item. But 

we wouldn’t go and claim against his tractor. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Is the policy of the department then to reduce FarmStart loans to young farmers starting 

up? Even if their father has a dairy farm, is it a policy of your department to refuse loans to these people 

and tell him, you know, to go to their father and get him to back him at a bank or something? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, I think not. The person asking for the loan would have to identify that he is 

going to establish himself. He couldn’t get a loan and then put it into his father’s operation. But if he 

was legitimately asking for a loan for himself, he would qualify providing he meets the criteria which is 

in the program. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Well, would his criteria be different being a farm boy born and raised on a dairy farm and 

say working there for 10 years? Would his criteria be different to get a loan than the guy coming out of 

the city to get a loan to start a dairy farm? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, I think the criteria would not be different but because he would be able to show 

a better chance to success, his odds of getting a loan would be much better. But someone coming off the 

street would have a hard time convincing the FarmStart administration that he should get a loan, because 

he would want to know that he has a reasonable chance of success. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2084 

 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, items 10 and 11 if I might just speak on them both 

simultaneously. In item 10 we see a grant to FarmStart for providing grants under the Agricultural 

Incentives Act, and No. 11 says a grant to FarmStart for operating a cash advance to the Cattle 

Producers Program under the Agricultural Incentives Act . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, why would it not be paid under Agricultural Incentives? You seem to have 

a double provision there in those two items. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – They are two different . . . 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes they are two different subvotes because one is the regular cash grant loan 

and grant program which many people have undertaken, the other one is the program under which we 

provided cash advances for cow-calf producers, and that is a separate program, under a separate 

authority . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Then I take it, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that the funds were 

not available under the Agricultural Incentives Act, to provide the funding for the cattle producers 

program? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, they are both under the Agricultural Incentives Act but they are under 

different subvotes. That is the only difference. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Just one question. Mr. Minister, last year’s budget is the same as this year’s in your 

money appropriation year. Did they not use the amount of money that was budgeted last year, or why 

are the two figures the same, for the last year and this year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, that is the anticipated amount we would have to pay under the grant program, 

that is, that subvote is strictly for grants under the grant loan program and we anticipate the same level 

of activity. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Last year then on your grant program, did you spend that $2,223,750 or did you not 

spend it? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, I think we did not spend that amount of money. We just budget for the 

maximum of what we think we should or will be spending. We hardly ever spend as many dollars as we 

have in that grant program. Last year we didn’t have nearly as many approvals as we would have 

expected because of the downturn in the beef industry. There was a very low demand from the beef 

industry or the beef area. And, so, we approved something like 300 to 400 loans last year as opposed to 

an expected 759 to 800. Our grant level would be less. 

 

MR. WIPF: – At what dollar value, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – For last year? It was $1,200,000. 

 

MR. WIPF: – On item 10, Mr. Minister. Does that mean you carried over $1,000,000 and that this 

$2,223,000 that you have showing for this year is actually $3,000,000 or did you only budget 

$1,000,000 in to it this year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No. Any surplus funds are returned to the Consolidated Fund at the end of the year 

and we have to budget for a new amount. 

 

Item 10 agreed. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2085 

 

ITEM 11 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, what percentage of the funds allotted for ’77-78 have been retained 

at this point? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – On the grant program? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I just replied to that, $1.2 million. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — We are Item 11 and my question was, what percentage has been repaid? It is an 

advance so you know it has to be repaid. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – On the cash advance program there is, out of the maximum amount of $49,658,000, 

the amount outstanding at the present time is $41,000,000 and you will recall that the requirement there 

was to pay back $10 out of the $75. On the basis of that $10 payout, 74 per cent of the people who were 

asked to pay back $10 paid it back. 22 per cent deferred and 5.4 per cent paid the entire $75. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is this amount in 679 – what is the purpose of that? Is it administration costs or is 

it partly to cover the interest you do not receive? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – That item is for administration, loan losses and interest subsidies. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Do you know what the interest subsidy is presently? If I remember correctly it 

was 6 . . . what is it costing you? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – The interest subsidy is approximately $3.3 million budgeted. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, one question here. You have cut back a half a million 

dollars in the agriculture item. What is the reason for the cutback here? Is it that you do not expect to 

make as many cash advances this year or what is the reason? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, it is the interest subsidy that would be reduced because there are less funds out 

as I indicated. There were only $41 million as compared to $49 million. 

 

Item 11 agreed. 

 

ITEM 12 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — I think this is the $6,000 advance area. Am I correct? O.K., how many of these 

are presently outstanding? If I remember, the program was cancelled in about 1973 or 1974 and they 

were in 1973, is this the last year or was it 1974 and there is one more year after? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, they were seven-year loans and the last loans were made in 1974 so they 

would not run out until 1981. This budgetary item calls for a certain amount — $175,000 for interest 

rebates and $75,000 for losses. And there are quite a few losses on those loans. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — The interest, you said, is $175,000 under this. How much money is 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2086 

 

outstanding now at its peak in 1974? What was the amount out? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – To 5,679 farmers, the amount outstanding is $9,356,628. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — You indicated that the loss is starting to get little heavier now than it was earlier. I 

assume what is happening here is that you are unable to collect under some of these grants because of 

the tough conditions some livestock producers got into and they have not paid you. You say that 

$75,000 is for write-offs this year? Is that correct? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, that is correct. You understand that this is not money out owing to us. This is 

money owing to the banks. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Yes, I realize that. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We simply pay losses after the bank has made every effort to collect. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — What is the interest difference that you are paying presently? For example, the 

farmer pays a certain interest, do you pay everything above it? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Right at the present time there is no longer any interest subsidy. The interest 

subsidy only was there for three years and after that they went on to the regular rate. So there is no 

interest subsidy in terms of today’s cost but some of this $175,000, you see, they do not apply for it until 

after they have earned it. So we still have some who will be applying for the old interest subsidy. Some 

of them will just be over the three year period. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So this vote, the only thing we will see next year will be losses you expect to 

incur. Is that correct? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, there could be some people who are late in applying for rebates, as long as 

they entitled to the rebates, they may have forgotten or may be a year late in applying. As long as they 

are entitled to rebate maybe when they pay off their final loan they may suddenly realize that they had a 

rebate coming which they did not apply for and they would then be able to apply for the rebate. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So you have rebates coming in until 1981, from what you are saying. Is that 

correct? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – It is possible that we could have. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So you will, therefore, have to budget until then? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, we would have to budget on an anticipated amount. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what were you reasons for introducing a 

government guaranteed livestock loan? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We did not introduce that one. That was done by the previous government. The 

purpose at that time was to try to encourage more livestock production and I think it accomplished that. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the point I want to make under this 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2087 

 

subvote is part of what I have been trying to describe to you, Mr. Minister, and I really don’t think that 

we are that far apart. I really feel that you do agree. The only thing is, you are not doing anything about 

it. We see a government take a position where it is going to encourage livestock production so it is going 

to get guaranteed livestock loans and get people buying brood stock. Then what happens is they take 

advantage of that program, some possibly that really didn’t need to but, well, the money was there and 

the interest was at a good rate and well, we will go into it. Now they have done this in every area in 

agriculture. This happened in hogs as well as it happened in cattle. Further down the road, all of a 

sudden now there is surplus of calves, a depressed market resulting. So you’ve go the taxpayers risking 

their money to get the agricultural industry going into livestock and then their money was risked again 

when it created a surplus and you had to assist the farmers in tiding themselves over by coming up with 

these cash advances for calves. The farmers took the cash advances of course, (they would take anything 

they could get at the time) then a year down the road you know, they were supposed to pay back the loan 

but by that time the calves still weren’t worth any more than when the grant was made for them and you 

know that, so that was the reason your government having to say, well, you only have to pay back $10 

or $15 and we will waive the rest. Those of you who can financially afford to pay back the whole 

amount, well, fine, we’ll take that. As you have already said, that was a very small percentage. 

 

Now, you know that is all taxpayers’ dollars and that it is all short-term policies, policies which don’t 

really solve any problems on a long-range basis. They only . . . they are band-aid programs, there is no 

question about it. You introduce a program and for every good that it may seem to do at the time, it 

creates further problems down the road. 

 

Do you not agree that this has been the course of action on your programs? Not just your government, 

but previous government and I’m not naming any one political party. They are all guilty of it. They’ve 

got short-term policies and I think we are seeing right here tonight that they are not effective on a 

long-range basis and that is what we are going to have to have. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I don’t think that I would agree with that because I think there is a need on the part 

of government to give some assistance to young farmers wanting to go into an industry. I don’t really 

agree that we have had over-production in the beef industry in Saskatchewan. I don’t think it matters a 

tinker’s dam whether we had a million cows or whether we had 900,000 in terms of the world market 

and that is really what created our problem So I don’t think that we can really be critical of the fact that 

people were encouraged to go into livestock; in fact, one of my concerns now is that too many people 

are going out and I would like to see some way that we could change that. 

 

I don’t think that the numbers of dollars that we are looking at here in terms of losses considering the 

size of the program that it was and considering the size of the program that FarmStart is, I think that the 

numbers of losses that we have here are very reasonable, in fact are the losses that most financial 

institutions would be very happy with, if they could stay within that range. So I don’t really believe that 

we should accept any criticism for the fact that there are some losses. There always will be losses when 

you loan money. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, you know it is so very difficult, Mr. Minister, to discuss these. I 

don’t care whether we discuss them under item 1 or subvote or whatever. There doesn’t seem to be any 

way to get some way of agreeing with you on anything. I don’t know whether that is just because you 

are stubborn or what it is, but, Mr. Minister, you 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2088 

 

know right well that in particular in the hog industry if you like we’ll take three days and we’ll travel 

together and I’ll show you empty hog barns in the province of Saskatchewan that were funded by the 

province of Saskatchewan grants or loans or assistance or whatever under one of your multiprograms. 

Now that’s a fact. That’s what I’m suggesting is wrong. You get them going into livestock, you say, it’s 

looking good, fellows, let’s go, you get them in and then bang, she goes the other way You are part and 

parcel of causing some of those problems down the line. By not being able to know what the future is 

you’re only guessing, you’re only going to say, well here we are, there’s money available and you 

should thank us for making it available to you. Sure they are going to take it but because of that it is 

creating problems for themselves indirectly, down the line. I don’t know why you can’t agree with that. 

I’m not disagreeing that we should assist them when they need assistance, definitely we should. We are 

asking you now as we have on this side of the House for assistance in fuel and high fuel costs. 

 

Now there is no argument there but if we could just come to some kind of an agreement, that in some 

areas, yes, that maybe our advice has been wrong in what the long-term projections are going to be, 

rather in the markets that are going to be available to the various commodities, whether it is livestock or 

grain or whatever it is. I think that before we go into any of these programs that we have to look that far 

down to know what it is going to do the industry and that is all I’m really suggesting. I’m just asking if 

you can’t agree to that, if you can’t see that yes, that is happening in some areas, and we should take a 

closer look at what the long-range market is going to be. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Again you point out a fundamental problem because really the reason this is 

happening is because of the very erratic markets that we have had, it hasn’t been because we have been 

producing too many hogs or too many cattle, I’m sure right now we could handle another half million 

hogs and it wouldn’t hurt out market a bit; and yet it we were to encourage somebody to go into hogs at 

today’s high prices, somebody would certainly criticize us for putting incentive when already there is a 

price incentive there. So, I don’t know what he is suggesting. I think he is suggesting that we should be 

helping people now when there is a need to get into the industry. Well, if we help them now, then three 

or four years from now you would argue that we have too much production, we should have known we 

were going to get too much production. Well, I don’t think you can do that, what we need to do is get a 

more stabilized market. We need to get a little more stability into the marketing of our products and we 

have tried to do that with some stabilization programs. There are other industries of course that have 

gone the orderly marketing route and the management route and have provided themselves some 

guarantee of level of production and those are the only two mechanism that I know of that give you a 

stabilized market and it seems to be we are trying both of those at the present time. Some people, of 

course, are objecting to supply management, so we don’t have that in the cattle industry. I am not 

suggesting that might be a total answer; it might certainly go a long way to help us even out some of our 

production cycles. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I would just like to make one comment under No. 12. It seems like I might be 

taking a shot at the former government, not the present government. Under this particular plan, as one 

who has sat in the auction marts and watched the buying, I think it had some excellent points and some 

bad points. One of the bad points was it seems to be that a lot of cull female stock was kept around the 

province. Therefore, we had calves from maybe two, three years giving us problems. Did the department 

find that was a problem when they went collecting, that those were some of the reasons for the defaults, 

some of the poor quality stock that ended up being kept for breeding 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2089 

 

because of the payment system? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I just haven’t been able to hear what you are saying, you are not talking into the 

mike. 

MR. KATZMAN: — What I am asking to put in a nutshell as one who was at the stockyards and 

livestock mart buying cattle during this period of time when this was around, I think there were some 

good benefits of the program. One of the bad benefits that continued for the first couple of years 

following the program was the amount of culls that should have gone to slaughter or put back to 

reproduce. Is that why some of your losses are occurring? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – It would be pretty difficult for us to identify but I am sure that you are right. I have 

seen that happen myself that a lot of cattle went back onto farms that should have never gone back. 

 

Items 12 agreed. 

 

ITEM 13 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Are these the Ag Reps? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, they are included in the subvote. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is there any consideration, for example, I will give you the problem in a nutshell. 

Where I live the Saskatoon Ag Rep office is on a direct phone exchange with me but I want to phone my 

Ag Rap I have to phone long distance. This is the complaint that we have in the area that I live in. Is 

there any consideration given to allow the Ag Reps to accept collect calls when people are phoning? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I don’t think so. It would be pretty difficult to control that. You could run up some 

awful bills, you allowed them to accept collect calls. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — My question is then, why is it when there is a phone exchange set up, for 

example, in Saskatoon there is an Ag Rep office at the university, yet everybody north of Saskatoon 

must go to Rosthern for any assistance they want, yet they are on a direct line to the university. They 

have to go the long distance route. The university says, sorry, you are not in our area. You have to go to 

Rosthern, I’m wondering if there is any way we can correct that internally somehow. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – It is pretty difficult to be able to set up ag rep districts so everybody is on the line 

they want to be on, but I do want to point out that there is nothing to save you from phoning an ag rep 

even if he – if he’s in Saskatoon and he wants to have some information, he phones the ag rep in 

Saskatoon, even if that doesn’t happen to be his ag rep. He can do that, there is certainly no restriction 

on that. If he is looking for program, some program delivered, then he may have to go to his own ag rep, 

but even there, I think if it were close in that he would be handled by the local ag rep. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — That’s the exact point. They are being refused by the local ag rep at times rather 

than being accepted because it is five miles to the university and it is 40 miles out to Rosthern. They are 

being told, “sorry, you have to go to Rosthern, I can’t help you.” Could you give some direction to your 

staff because of this problem occasionally, that they should bend to assist? 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2090 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, I think that in a lot of cases that could happen but there are some cases where 

under certain program deliveries, it has to be done within an ag rep region in order to have some control 

of financing and some control of program and so on. It is difficult – suppose he was making an 

application for FarmStart he would want to go to his ag rep. He should be dealing within his own region 

because the control is done in that fashion. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, we had a 4-H Club, for example, in Saskatoon, south of Saskatoon and we 

were told that the ag rep that we worked through for 4-H was in Rosthern. Yet, there was an ag rep right 

in the city that we could go pick thing up from. Fortunately, Paul Saum was excellent for 4-H and would 

always assist, but what I am saying is that for applications and things, we were needing assistance for 

farm grazing land or cultivated land that is coming up, the bulletins are in Rosthern they are not in the 

university area. That is my concern. If there is some way to duplicate it in this one case where the 

boundaries are so close. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, again I want to stress that. If it is an information type of program, those kinds 

of things it is quite easy for them to overlap. But when you have the heavier kinds of programs and there 

is a workload, each office has an estimated workload and if people are going to start flooding into that 

office from another ag rep district then of course the workload would become too heavy and you would 

have to change your structure. We try to have it as close to what is satisfactory for the local public as we 

can but you can’t always accomplish that. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what is the average cost of the long distance 

telephone calls from the agricultural offices that you have in the province? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – From the ag reps’ offices? Gosh, I don’t think we would have that information here. 

No, we wouldn’t have that broken down here. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K. then Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would you mind putting that information 

together, please, and sending it across at a later time in some other estimates, or whatever, at your 

convenience? 

 

Another question, Mr. Minister, with regard to our agricultural offices. Do they make representation to 

you, as Minister of Agriculture, what they feel about the programs that they are being required to 

implement? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Every year, or in fact, whenever it is possible for me, I attempt to meet with the ag 

reps in the regional offices and in the part of the minister’s tours which I conduct, I will spend a 

morning, probably an hour or two, with the staff to try to discuss with them any difficulties that they 

may be encountering and so on. There are, of course, always meetings between the ag rep staff and the 

director in which they can identify any problems they have in the field. These are ongoing kinds of 

meetings so there is plenty of opportunity for ag reps to express their problems and difficulties to the 

director. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — I don’t personally feel that there is a great enough opportunity for the ag reps in 

the province to make representation to you as Minister of Agriculture. 

 

What happens if an ag rep in a particular area does not agree at all with a program which he is having to 

implement on behalf of the farmers in his area? What happens if 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2091 

 

he writes you a letter, as a Minister of Agriculture and says that on the basis of the implementation as his 

local office that he is finding the program to be totally ineffective and he disagrees with it 

wholeheartedly? Now what is doing to happen in a case like that? Does he lose his job or what? Does he 

get transferred to some other department that he can agree with, or what happens? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, there are lines of communication in the ag rep services as there are in every 

other function of government. His normal line of communication would be through his director. If he 

felt that here was a program which we had in place which was causing a lot of difficulty in his area, he 

would contact his director and try to resolve the problem. If it was a matter of policy and we had an 

administrative policy and he simply could not live with that policy, I suppose he has got an alternative to 

move on to another job. That is always open to anyone and certainly it would not be possible nor 

reasonable for us to have an ag rep out in the country who would be opposing government programs. 

His job as a civil servant is to carry out government programs. If he doesn’t feel he can do that, then of 

course he will have to find himself a different position because certainly we are not going to fire him 

because he does not like a program but if he goes out there and works against it, then we could not 

accept that. Certainly, you would not allow that in any kind of controlled structure. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am not suggesting that the local ag rep would 

work against you. Surely he would be like a mechanic that was putting on Michelin tires, for example. 

Maybe he personally did not like the Michelin tires but he is being paid to put them on. He is not going 

to quit his job because he does not like putting them on, necessarily. He may, if that is his own personal 

decision. What I am saying to you is that I would like to see that whole process work in reverse and I 

say this with good basis. My conversations with ag reps throughout the province, in the various regions 

that I have happened to drop into, have been such that they are not very easy to criticize in any way 

government policy. They always say, well I guess I should not comment on that because they are 

employed by the government these are the policies of the government and the programs that they are 

having to implement. 

 

I would like to see a reversal of that and I would like you to initiate that again. This is provincial; this 

has not got anything to do with federal politics. I would like to see where you could possibly arrange to 

have all of your ag reps meet once a year. I don’t care where, maybe you could move your meetings 

around; you could have one in Yorkton, Regina, Saskatoon, some of the major centres. Now I don’t 

know whether this would be an expensive proposition but I think that whatever the cost may be, it would 

be offset by the reward that could be achieved in terms of representation of the local farmers through 

their ag rep to you. Now if they felt free to criticize you, as Minister of Agriculture, on your 

department’s program at any point and to work with you on that basis through constructive criticism, to 

make the programs more effective as they were able to see them from the local level, from the 

grassroots, rather than as you and the civil servants see it – from the top down. Now that is the way it is 

working right now and I have been critical in part of that centralized administration. That is what I am 

suggesting to you. Do you not agree that it might be a working solution for getting a good feedback from 

the farmers right throughout the province on any topic and subject in agriculture? Furthermore, that 

could work in part with your tours around the province and I think it would be very effective. Do you 

not think that would be a good idea, Mr. Minister? 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2092 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Chairman, the member for Moosomin, as usual, is way behind the times. We 

have already been undertaking that kind of activity for a long time. Our ag reps meet on a very regular 

basis. They have regular communication with the Director of Extension, and they meet on various 

occasions with him .They also meet in the regional offices; there are six regional offices as you know, 

and there are regular meetings of the ag reps in that area to discuss government programs. They do have 

an opportunity there and do dissect government programs and try to feed back to us what problems 

might be in the field. That is then brought back through the director and it comes from the director 

through to me. We also have a structure in the country and you should know this; we have agriculture 

district boards in the county which are set up by the ag reps, and then we have regional boards which are 

set up. The agricultural district boards meet in regions and they identify problems in regions and I get 

many, many letters from regional boards recommending this and that. They have different resolutions 

which are sent in to us and at those regional meetings, the ag reps are always available there. In fact, in 

my regular ministerial tours across the province, I make an attempt each year to meet with those regional 

boards. We spend a whole afternoon discussing topics which they may find of interest or something 

which they want to put forward to us. So they have all kinds of mechanisms to put forward the kinds of 

complaints or proposals that they want to do, and I would suggest that there isn’t any better way than we 

have now set up. The only problem is that I don’t have enough time to get around to visit them all. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, you could have said all that without suggesting that I was far 

behind the time. I was only trying to be constructive and suggest to you how your ag reps might better 

communicate with you on a more effective basis. You seem to feel that the basis by which you are 

communicating with your ag reps is quite satisfactory. If that is what you feel, well then, that is what I 

will accept. I just want to know what your views were on that. If I am behind the times, well that is fine 

and dandy but at least I’ve got your views on it and I thank you for them, Mr. Minister. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — While I have the opportunity, I realize I was making some criticism of the ag 

reps. Let me, here at this time, say that our local ag rep that is in our area is an excellent gentleman and 

is very considerate and does a lot of work for people that I know his job doesn’t require him and I think 

he deserves a compliment and this is my place I thought to do it 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): – Over the past number of years, 4-H regional councils throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan have been having quite a difficult time. I think the value of 4-H in educating 

and providing leadership for future farmers in the province is an excellent one. I just want to say that 

over the past number of year, I believe representations made by regional 4-H councils, 4-H members 

individually, to members within out caucus and to yourself, to understand the needs that they do have 

and the potential which they do have, and I would just like to say tonight that on behalf of our caucus 

and the 4-H movement in the province, I think your government should be congratulated for the 50 per 

cent increase in grants which are going to be made available to 4-H regional councils in the coming 

year. While I still think that 50 per cent increase is not enough, it is a good step in the right direction, 

and I am sure the 4-H regional councils throughout the province are going to appreciate your interest in 

the work which they are doing. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, one short question. I see an increase of 50 per cent to the 

4-H councils in Saskatchewan. Is that an indication of the growth in the 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2093 

 

4-H movement in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, that is simply an increase in the regional grants. 

 

Item 13 agreed. 

 

ITEM 14 
 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): – Mr. Chairman, I understand the Family Farm 

Improvement Branch provides in reduced costs thing such as water systems, sewer systems, this sort of 

thing to rural Saskatchewan. How many such outlets are there? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – You mean in terms of warehouses? Just one. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – How many people staff it? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Twenty-eight people. That includes all the staff people in the advance account. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – What sort of dollar volume of material goes through the warehouse a year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Last year, 77-78, $462,000. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – O.K., it’s not enough. A couple of years ago and maybe even last year, Family 

Farm Improvement Branch administered the livestock relocation program. Is that policy still in 

existence? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, there are two policies in effect. One is for the Qu’Appelle Valley and one for 

the rest of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – How much was budgeted for the program last year, not the Qu’Appelle Valley but 

the rest of Saskatchewan? How much is budgeted this year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – That comes in item 16. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — The Family Farm Improvement, does this at all cover – if I understand correctly, 

a qualified farmer can borrow . . . it used to be $15,000 and now I believe the maximum is $50,000 

under Family Farm Improvement? Is it a different vote? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – That’s a federal program you are talking about. This is simply a sewer and water 

program. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — They are not related in other words? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is this the group that does the planning for the feedlot and all the in stuff we see 

Mexibition. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, that’s the proper department. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2094 

 

Item 14 agreed. 

 

ITEM 15 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — How many years has an individual got to claim on this from the time you do the 

work until the time you can claim the rebate that comes back? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is no limit to the amount of time that can lag in between but the maximum 

grant he can get is $300. 

 

Item 15 agreed. 

 

ITEM 16 
 

MR. BERNTSON: – How many dollars were budgeted for, other than the Qu’Appelle Valley, last year 

and this year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I am advised it is not budgeted separately. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – Can you tell me how much was spent last year in other than the Qu’Appelle 

Valley? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is only a figure of 9.300 and some dollars paid out on that subvote last year. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – Did you say $9,000. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Right. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – Out of a total of $195,000 you only spent $9,000? That’s terrific. Have we no 

more polluters? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We don’t have any claims. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – If that be the case why are we budgeting $95,000 this year? Are you anticipating 

more polluters this year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, we had $195,000 in the year before and we didn’t use that so we went down to 

$95,000 and we think there should be some claims but nobody is putting them in. 

 

Item 16 agreed. 

 

ITEM 17 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — How many, and where? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Two which have indicated interest. One is at Foam Lake and the other one is at 

Ituna but neither one of these are certain at the present time. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Last year I understand you had two of them also. Is that correct? How many 

funds do you expect this $420,000 will cover, just two again or do you expect it 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2095 

 

will cover three? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, the maximum grant is $210,000 and we budgeted here for two. The policy 

states that anyone wishing to come under this program has to identify themselves the year before at the 

end of July so that we would be able to budget for them. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is there any consideration on assisting with a grant to privately owned seed 

cleaning plants that re servicing an area? When this program was first announced you said it was only 

for co-ops that served a certain sized area. I asked at that time, would you be considering at a later date 

maybe allowing for, where three or four individuals build a plant, a small grant and you said you would 

take that under consideration down the road. So I am asking the question again. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, we have looked at the prospect of having private people come under the 

program but the difficulty you have with that is that there is no guarantee of continuity to a private 

operator. He may take a grant this year and then next year he will pull out of the business, or he may sell 

his business. Under municipally operated, most of these are operated municipally, this kind of a 

program, there is a guarantee that they are going to be there for 10, 20, or 30 years and your grant will 

not be eaten up and simply lost. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Would there be any consideration because of that, which you just suggested for a 

small grant for each year as it goes on? In other words, if they are there 10 years they would get a small 

grant each year, which may after 20 years equal the same type of grant system, because they are serving 

the need of the community and where you have one put up commercially, there is no room for a 

co-operative one. Let me go one step further, because a private one came up because they couldn’t 

qualify for a co-operative one at the time, because all the money was allocated so some gentlemen got 

together and built their own, not as a co-operative, but as shareholders. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, we have some real difficulty there again, because as I say they can be 

shareholders and they can decide they want to go into an operation and then three or four years later they 

could decide to disband. It becomes rather difficult to put in large sums of money in terms of grants to 

that kind of a proposal. 

 

There is also some real problem with the smaller plants because you can’t really guarantee an kind of 

quality of job. Some guy may go along and get a grant to operate a small plant and may do a very 

inefficient job and yet we will have given him a grant. There is really no way that we can police that 

unless you are going to follow these plants around the country. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — On the same point then, how do you police a co-op grant? How do you police 

them if you couldn’t police an individual? You have the same problem. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I was really talking about mobile plants in this case. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I am talking about a built plant which has cost the same type of money as 

indicated for a co-operative, serving the same type of area, you are suggesting they will only last five 

years and pull out where the others will last 10 or 20. I am suggesting, fine, then give them a small bit 

for each year they last. If they are there for 10 or 15 years they will get the same kind of assistance. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2096 

 

What has happened is that people are refused because the co-operatives only have so much money the 

first year that you announced the program, I believe, the Budget of 1976, that this was first announced, 

and so if they needed one they built. My concern is, they should get some kind of recognition. I don’t 

know how you can do it and that is what I am asking. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, our staff has looked at this and we have determined that in terms of the kinds 

of dollars that we want to spend, and there are a lot of dollars here, there is close to $500,000 in terms of 

its program, in order to serve the maximum number of people this is the best way to go. Our staff has 

worked around small programs they have looked at smaller operations and they don’t seem to be viable 

in terms of the throughput you can get through them and the cost of the program. 

 

We have looked at numbers of different sizes of plants which could be used. This one keeps coming 

back as the most reasonable sized to build and get us the maximum amount of cleaning of the dollars 

that we put into the program. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Let me suggest, and I referring to one within my constituency, which I 

understand meets and surpasses some of the qualifications required for a co-op, the ones that you are 

assisting. 

 

What is annoying me, to no end here is, you are saying to these individuals who put their own money to 

give a service to their community and the people because there was none available, that they are to be 

penalized. I am saying that it is only fair and just that you should give some assistance and give it in 

retrospect, because you are saying a co-operative we know will be there, and so forth and so on. Fine, I 

will buy that argument. You are saying the private person won’t be there. Well, I disagree, I say, fine, 

then pay him in retrospect after he has been given some assistance, therefore, he knows he can lower his 

prices to the individuals in the community, which will also help everybody. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Chairman, there have been several studies made particularly in Alberta as it 

relates to seed cleaning plants and I think the general consensus is that there is a requirement in the grain 

belt for a plant in about every 50-mile radius The 200 bushel per hour plant costs about $600,000 to set 

up. If there is any processing in the plant at all such as a roller mill to get rid of the screenings to the 

local feed lots, etc., the federal government will forgive the federal sales tax on the capital costs of the 

plant. Would you take a request to your cabinet that it would be a considerable saving to the co-ops and 

other groups setting up feed cleaning plants to forgive the provincial sales tax on similar capital 

expenditures? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We are not aware of any program which the federal government has where they 

discount any sales tax on any of those kinds of equipment but we would be interested in looking into 

that proposition and if it is possible we certainly want to take advantage of it. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Mr. Chairman, just a couple of questions. It is my understanding that the authority to 

set up a seed cleaning plant qualified for the grant that it was strictly to be formed under The Co-ops 

Act. You mentioned a bit earlier that there should be some municipal involvement in it. Are you saying 

that, besides being set up as a co-op, local government must be involved as well in part ownership of it 

or is it just strictly a co-operative by farmers? 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2097 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Usually the way it works is that the municipalities start the ball rolling. The 

municipalities do not have any shares as such in the plan. It is private shareholders. In some cases we 

have, through the Department of Co-ops, in order to get them rolling, taken some shares in it just to get 

the financing underway. As they get more members they buy back those shares. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – O.K., that answers that portion of my question. 

 

I have been approached by some of my constituents for information in regard to such a plant. I am just 

wondering, does your department have designs, plans, cost estimates or feasibility studies on such a 

thing; how many bushels are required to make the thing economical, and this sort of thing? If so, I am 

just wondering if you could provide me with a feasibility study on that so that I could go back to them 

with something that was fairly concrete. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We can give you that information very quickly. We can give you a copy of the 

policy, if you do not have one. The policy outlines a lot of that and as far as costs are concerned our 

department in the Family Farm Improvement Branch could give you all the cost estimates and 

everything like that – how you set it up and all of that. In fact, if you could get a meeting, we would be 

quite happy to send someone out there to explain the whole thing to them. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Well what they are after is some kind of rough idea of what they are looking at. If you 

could provide me with some of that information I could take it to them and if they then feel from that 

information that they would like to pursue it further I think a meeting would be the best way to approach 

it. There is no rush for it but any time that you can make it available I would appreciate receiving it. 

 

Item 17 agreed. 

 

Items 18, 19, 20 agreed. 

 

ITEM 21 
 

MR. WIPF: – Just one simple question here, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. There is equal money for this 

again from last year What is the reason and what is The Saskatchewan Agriculture Return Stabilization 

Act? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, this money is there to provide for payments of the government payment into 

the SHARP Fund. When the price goes above the cost production level, then there is the levy made to 

the producer and the department also pays a share of that and that goes into a fund which is then 

available for losses at times when we get below the cost of production. 

 

Item 21 agreed. 

 

Item 22 agreed. 

 

ITEM 23 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is this the vote that covers the veterinarians that work in meat plants which are 

not federal standard but provincial standard? 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2098 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, the inspectors in those plants are federal inspectors but we pay them out of this 

subvote. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — How many plants? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I think it’s eight plants. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I realize you have increased the charges to these people in the last year again. Is 

there any movement in this area to try and convince them all to go on federal standards or on to the 

standard where they are just inspected by the health region and I mean once in awhile, not every day 

when they are killing? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – We have an arrangement with the Federal Health for Animals for a standard in the 

small plants which is not quite as rigid as those in the big federal inspected plants but quite adequate and 

we have that agreement with the federal government. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, my concern is that in some areas in the province we are seeing meat sold 

over the counter that is not inspected by a veterinarian at all but is inspected by a health officer who may 

come down once or twice a month, not always when they are killing the animal and the liver and 

everything isn’t inspected. That’s my concern. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, in the case of a small area and not in the city where they have local by-laws 

which deal with this, they are able to sell to the trade without having it inspected but of course then they 

can’t show it as inspected meat. It has to go out as uninspected meat. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is there any concern in your department that that type of meat should be 

identified when it is being sold retail, rather than when you go into a butcher market, you don’t know 

once it’s cut whether it’s red, blue or so forth. There was a motion passed in the House earlier re the 

packaging of beef and the indications. Is your department showing any concern where beef is being sold 

and it’s not inspected? Really, that what we are talking about, the retail sale of meat that has never been 

inspected. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Again, it becomes a question of cost and inconvenience to a small local operator 

and if you were to force him to go to a meat inspection program it could become fairly costly to him and 

it could also become very inconvenient to him because he may have meat to deliver and he can’t do it 

until an inspector comes around. You couldn’t expect an inspector to stand around waiting for him to 

kill three or four or five head. So it’s a little difficult to enforce a real inspect program in those cases but 

if a town identified that they wish to have inspection then they could say so in a by-law and they could 

require that. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, my question is, and I’ll put it simpler to you, does your department have no 

concern over meat being sold presently that is not inspected, or do you have a concern that maybe the 

store would indicate that they are not selling inspected meat? It’s a simple question. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, I suppose we have a concern all right but the question is, how do you correct 

that problem without a lot of inconvenience and expense to the people 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2099 

 

involved? If people at the other end are prepared to pay five cents a pound more because they have to 

get an inspector in to do the inspections and so on, then I suppose that could be done but we haven’t had 

any bad experiences up to this point in time and we feel that there are adequate safeguards being taken 

and it looks as though the program is going fairly well. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, let’s just backtrack in history and look at Montreal’s problem, and all I’m 

saying is that we should indicate it. A $5 sign on a meat cooler or something would indicate that this is 

not veterinary inspected. That is only my suggestion. 

 

MR. WIPF: – Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, your other expenses are up here about 80 per cent and I 

understand that just in the last month or month and one half, your meat inspectors now, when they go to 

the small places are . . . whoever is having them out to do the inspection, do they have to pay the hourly 

rate of the inspector rather than the inspection rate that was set before? I believe it was just so much for 

the visit and now they must pay the hourly rate, is this right? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, the federal government has decided that in their drive for more efficiency that 

they want to apply the full cost of the inspection service. We used to pay $2.37 an hour for the serve and 

now are paying $9.25. That cost has been passed on to us and we have to absorb that in some way. 

 

MR. WIPF: – You say that you have to absorb it. Are you saying that the government under this raise 

and other expense is going to absorb this or is the meat processing plant itself going to absorb it? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is cost sharing on that cost. 

 

MR. WIPF: – I didn’t get your answer, Mr. Minister. 

 

MR. KAEDING: – It is partly cost shared with the plant. 

 

Items 23, 24 agreed. 

 

ITEMS 25 
 

(inaudible interjection. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I understand they are looking for a funny man. You would fit the boat . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, you would fit it perfectly. 

 

On the 325 are there any projects that this is earmarked for? For example, I understand that you work on 

a three year promotion. Are there any program that are basically . . . 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is a whole series of programs which are now earmarked under the Market 

Development Fund. In 1977-78 our payments were $115,000 and there is probably an equal amount 

coming in this year. 

 

Items 25, 26, 27 and 28 agreed. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2100 

 

ITEM 29 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — How many investigations did you do last year? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There were 206 files opened last year under this program. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — How many did you have to rule on, that were problems or that ended up in a 

court? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There are none in the courts. There are 75 which are under investigation. Ten 

corporations were granted exemptions and a number of individuals were granted exemptions because 

they were coming in under the three year provision. All of these things are being checked out. 

 

Item 29 agreed. 

 

ITEM 30 
 

MR. WIEBE: – I don’t want to take up very much time in regard to this particular subvote, mainly 

because last year during estimates the minister and I were spending a considerable amount of time in 

regard to it. Basically the discussion was on policy. There is not much point in me going over again our 

policy and our position regarding the need for an adequate land drainage policy in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I was rather disappointed that we did not see legislation introduced during this session of the Legislature 

to deal with that very question. I understand that your department is still looking at it. I would urge them 

to speed up the studies or whatever they are doing or whatever it is that is holding up legislation that 

would, you know, adequately deal with the problem because there is no doubt millions of acres of land, 

that is good arable land, now under water because we do not have an adequate land drainage policy in 

the province of Saskatchewan. I would hope that legislation is introduced to deal with that problem prior 

to the government coming up with a land use policy. I think time should be taken in regard to that 

particular policy. But I don’t think we can afford the luxury of waiting that long for a policy from the 

government in regard to land drainage. 

 

I was a bit concerned with a statement that the minister made a short while ago in regard to the fact that 

we do not have a land drainage policy, and he urged farmers throughout the province not to undertake 

private drainage between now and the time we do eventually see a policy brought forth to deal with the 

problem. It has always been my understanding that before anyone can drain sloughs or drain water off of 

his private land he must receive authority first through the Water Rights Board and so on. He went on in 

that statement to state that if private land is drained and legislation is introduce, the proposed water shed 

commission, which is what I understand they are looking at, may have the right to issue back orders to 

close ditches or have other word undertaken on those ditches. I was under the impression that once 

authority was received under water rights that that individual farmer had permanent access to that 

drainage ditch as long as he abided within the guidelines under which those water rights were issued. 

Now is that the policy or is there a possible threat of farmers having to close those ditches who have 

gone through the normal channels and been granted the proper authority to go ahead and construct those 

ditches? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, anybody that has a permit under the Water Rights Act would not 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2101 

 

be in any danger. What we are referring to here is people who are doing illegal drainage, people who are 

draining without any permission. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – When is necessary legislation going to be brought down to deal with it? Can we expect 

it this session, which I think is unlikely? How about the fall session? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well, we were very close to have some legislation ready but we have gone back to 

some of the organizations and they have some concern about some of the requirements under the 

legislation. We were talking about water shed commissions and they are not sure, they don’t like the 

way we had proposed to set up the water shed commissions. There is some concern about appeal 

procedures. It is a very complicated process so we decided that rather than rush through the legislation 

we would give it another year to simmer with the groups and let them come up with a more concrete and 

more agreeable proposal and that’s where it sits. It is a slow process but I think it is important that we do 

it right. 

 

Items 30, 31, 32 and 33 agreed. 

 

ITEM 34 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is the demand for space in community pastures again going to have them all full 

this year, or are there space allotments left? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes, they are still full. There is still demand for more space than we have. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Are there any proposals of possible new community pastures being studied or 

built? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Yes we are trying to in places where they want to organize into a community 

pasture we are trying to encourage them to go into a crop pasture rather than do it on a provincial basis. 

 

Item 34 agreed. 

 

Item 35 agreed. 

 

VOTE 2 (Capital Expenditure) 
 

ITEM 1 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Are those the ones where private individuals who develop will get a grant from, 

or is that strictly for government ones? If a private individual develops an irrigation project, is this a 

grant towards them in this program or is this strictly for your irrigations projects? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Well these are small individual drainage projects which have been developed. 

Individual drainage projects, irrigation 

‘ 

MR. KATZMAN: — Does this include the type that has a pump in the river and then the big wheels 

running? Is there a cover under those? Is it a different area? 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2102 

 

MR. KAEDING: – No, this would be a small project, Spiral Creek project and Vidora, some of those 

small projects which are set up for hay productions. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Items 2 to 7 agreed. 

 

SUPPLEMENTARY 
 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

VOTE 46 (Loans, Advances and Investments) 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed. 

 

VOTE 47 (FarmStart) 
 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

VOTE 50 (The Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission) 
 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, I’m tempted to make some remarks 

about the length of the Agriculture Estimates this year and the length of all of the other departmental 

estimates up to Agriculture but I think I ought not to in the hopes that maybe we will see a little turn 

around in attitude here by the opposition. Hope springs eternal, Mr. Chairman. Perhaps I’ll just make 

one comment but when Health Estimates were before the committee they surpassed any other previous 

length of time for consideration of Health Estimates even during the deterrent fee argument by over six 

hours. The same thing with respect to Agriculture, this is by far the longest of times. I suppose the 

opposition will say that’s only an opposition doing its job and I say I would be awfully surprised if this 

opposition was able to carry out any tougher questioning of the department than any previous 

opposition. I just think this is a foot dragging primarily on the part of the PC Party for political purposes 

and political purposes only. That’s really a bad taxpayers’ thing. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

BILL NO. 6 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974 
 

Section 12: 14 

 

MR. KAEDING: – It simply adds, section 24 amended and subsection (d) (ii) it says: “The manner in 

which the size of the land holding shall be calculated for the purposes of the subsection 1 of section 

8(A)” and it should also include “and section 11”. That was left out of the original draft. It makes it 

similar to the previous act. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — An amendment presented by the hon. member to amend clause (d) of section 24 

of the Act, is being enacted by section 14 of the printed bill, by adding after section 8(A) in the second 

line and third line, the sub-clause (ii) and section 11. Is 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2103 

 

the amendment agreed? 

 

Amendment agreed. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — There is an amendment to clause 12 and this is by the Hon. Mr. Kaeding. 

Section 12 of the printed bill. There is really no change in the total section except for section 1 and 2. 

The concern last day was with section 2, which said that: 

 

The board may authorize any person to carry out investigations, generally, and it shall not be 

necessary for the Board to authorize each investigation. 

 

And the concern was expressed from the opposition that that was too wide a power and that we should 

find some way to soften that and the proposal here is that we would strike out section 2 entirely, and 

section 1, which is not in the printed bill here but in the original bill, would say: 

 

Where the board has reason to believe that a person has a landholding in contravention of this 

act, the board or a person authorized by the board, may conduct an investigation into the matter. 

 

And that really requires that the investigator would have to go to the board in each case before an 

investigation could be made, and I think that answers the concern which the opposition had last day. 

 

MR. WIEBE: – Then what this amendment does is what we had suggested is that the board grant 

authorizations first and then the individual goes out to conduct the investigation. We’re in full 

agreement. 

 

Section 12 as amended, agreed. 

 

Section 16 agreed. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

BILL NO. 43 – An Act to amend the District Court Act 
 

Sections 1 to 7 agreed. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

BILL NO. 44 – An Act to amend the Married Women’s Property Act 
 

Section 1 
 

MR. CAMERON: – Well, Mr. Chairman, if you remember, we wanted to suggest that the name of the 

act be changed. It is currently known as The Married Women’s Property Act and applies to both spouses 

equally. It is largely a matter of appearance although there is one small aspect of substance to it and that 

is that it is confusing to people to be named The Married Women’s Property Act when it applies equally 

to both spouses; that is to say a husband is as equally entitled to apply under the act as what a woman is. 

That is the first point. 

 

The second point is that women’s organizations have been anxious to have the name 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

 

2104 

 

changed to reflect what is actually the fact rather than to have it continue to be called The Married 

Women’s Property Act Having said we want to do that, I want to move, seconded by Mr. Wiebe: 

 

That Section 1 of the act be amended by deleting the words ‘The Married Women’s Property 

Act’, and substituting therefore the words ‘The Married Person’s Property Act: 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! We have a motion moved by the member for Regina South (Mr. 

Cameron) that section 1 of the act be amended. 

 

My thinking on this is that this would only amend the present bill. It would not amend the act. 

Therefore, I would have to ruled the motion out of order. It would just change the bill and it wouldn’t 

amend the act, which this relates to. So my ruling is that it is out of order for that reason. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I will just tell the hon. member that I think he raises a fair point, 

a good point. I don’t think we can do it on this particular bill, but ask the committee to approve the bill 

and I will undertake that at some appropriate convenient time; we will make some appropriate changes 

as suggested by the member opposite. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): – Do you agree to do it this session, Mr. Attorney General? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, I can’t say for sure. I will try and do it this session but I think we have 

about 17 more bills to come. I suppose another one wouldn’t ‘really hurt, so I will be prepared to look at 

it with a view to considering another bill. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Item 2 deleted. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 o’clock p.m. 


