




















































Hansard: April 25, 1978


 

 

1907 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

 

April 25, 1978. 

The Assembly met at 2 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to this Assembly this afternoon, a group of 32 adults from Prince Albert from the 

Community Awareness Program, and their teacher, Laura Neufeld. They arrived in town a little early 

and they have visited the RCMP Barracks. I will be meeting with them after question period for a few 

soft drinks and some pictures. I would like to welcome you to the Assembly and I hope your stay here 

this afternoon is informational and educational and I do hope you have a very safe trip back home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. FESCHUK (Prince Albert): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the hon. member for 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake in welcoming the adult students from Prince Albert. I wish them a pleasant 

stay and a safe journey home. Thank you. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to introduce to you and to 

this Legislature, 45 students from St. Michael School in Saskatoon. They are sitting in the west gallery 

over there and are accompanied by their teacher Mr. Len Wawyrk and his colleagues. I had the 

opportunity of meeting with those students a few weeks ago when I presented the school with a portrait 

of the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh and we had a very lively discussion. They are a very 

enthusiastic group at St. Michael and I look forward to continuing that sort of dialogue later on this 

afternoon when I meet them in the rotunda area. I hope they have an informative afternoon and a safe 

journey home to Saskatoon-Mayfair. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): —Mr. Speaker, I understand that with these students from 

St. Michael are students from St. Charles/Bishop Murray Schools. Some of those students live in my 

constituency and I would like to join with the member for Saskatoon-Mayfair in welcoming those 

students to the Legislature. I hope they find the afternoon to be worthwhile. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, through you and the members of this 

Assembly I am pleased to welcome a group of Grade Eight students from Thomson School. They are 

accompanied by Mr. Forrest, their teacher, and I am sure they will have a pleasant stay this afternoon 

and visit throughout this fine building. I must say that Thomson School was the place where my 

daughter took her elementary training and I had the privilege of being president of the Home and School 

Association for some 



 

April 25, 1978 

1908 

 

seven or eight years. I call it my home school. So with that I am sure they will gain much in the 

proceedings this afternoon, and I will meet with them a little later on and have a chat with them. Again, 

a warm welcome. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I too am pleased to welcome a group 

of students. I believe they are in the Speaker’s Gallery, from St. John School. Am I correct? Yes, there 

they are — a happy bunch. And the teachers, (I hope I have the names pronounced the right way) are 

Messrs. Schnieder, Tourigny and Miazga. Did I pronounce them fairly closely — I think? No? I 

welcome them to the gallery and to the Legislature hoping that it will be an entertaining and informative 

afternoon. I think it will be. I wish them a very safe and pleasant trip back home to Saskatoon. 

 

MR. KOWALCHUK: (Melville)— Mr. Speaker, through you Sir, I would like to welcome a group of 

trustees from the Herbert School Unit and particularly the chairman, Mr. Grieves, with whom I had a 

pleasant association way back many, many years ago when I was also chairman of the Melville School 

Unit Board. It is indeed a pleasure to welcome a person like Mr. Grieves here, with whom I have had the 

close association for many, many years. I hope we all welcome and wish him a safe journey back home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, let me as well join with Mr. Kowalchuk in welcoming the 

trustees from the Herbert School Unit. They represent the school unit in which I received my education. 

I am very pleased to see them up in the galleries and I look forward to having coffee with them later on 

in the afternoon. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

MOORE INQUIRY — WALTER CHESTER 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) — A question to the Minister of Social Services. In the latest report of 

the Department of Vital Statistics which was tabled in this Assembly yesterday, there was a dramatic 

increase in the number of homicides in Saskatchewan in the last year and in the number of violent deaths 

by suicide. Would you be prepared to dramatically prove to the law enforcement officers of 

Saskatchewan that the government is supportive of their efforts, by immediately offering the complete 

reinstatement of Walter Chester with a reinstatement of all his lost wages and lost benefits due to the 

actions of the government office? 

 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we have a psychiatrist 

in the House for the member opposite. He obviously is very disturbed. I was going to say that he should 

have directed his question to the Attorney General because he started with homicides and suicides and 

then he jumped from there to reinstatement of a guard at the Prince Albert Correctional Centre. I really 

do not understand the question. I have answered him before, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the individual 

member he is referring to, that any employee of the government of Saskatchewan, if he feels that he has 

been aggrieved, has the arbitration procedure before him. Mr. Chester has that procedure at his disposal 

and, as I indicated before, I will await the outcome of those procedures. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1909 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — On page 66 of the Moore Inquiry Report, they are very laudatory of Walter 

Chester. In light of the fact that Mr. Chester has, in fact, been exonerated by the District Court of 

Saskatchewan, would you not admit that your decision to demote Walter Chester, flying in the face of 

the Moore Inquiry and the district court decision, in fact in the case of the law enforcement officers of 

Saskatchewan that you are not subordinate of their efforts. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Next question. 

 

URANIUM FIND AT MIDWEST LAKE 
 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Charge of SMDC. The Leader Post and other news media have been carrying 

stories recently about Esso’s recent uranium find at Midwest Lake in northern Saskatchewan. Esso owns 

this land with two other companies, Numac Oil of Edmonton and Bow Valley Industries at Calgary. My 

question of the minister, is it the intention of the government through SMDC or some other agency, to 

share in this particular discovery and obtain a 50 per cent interest as you are entitled by law? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, it may be, Mr. Speaker, but it is too 

early at this time to respond on behalf of SMDC. We have not had an opportunity to study the area of 

the find or the significance of that find. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question. Is it not the government’s intention to share in all finds in 

northern Saskatchewan in the uranium sector? I can recall certain speeches of the minister and other 

members of the government giving the government’s intention to become a 50 per cent partner in these 

finds notwithstanding the fact that those who find the mineral may not be desirous of having the 

government as a partner. Will the minister be able to tell us within this week whether or not the 

government is intending to move in this direction? 

 

MR. MESSER: — No. Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. What is the criterion that the government will 

be looking to to determine whether or not they should become a 50 per cent partner with Esso and the 

other two companies involved? 

 

MR. MESSER: — The same criterion that has existed for about the last year in regard to all joint 

ventures that we have reviewed and/or undertaken to acquire an interest in. 

 

BAYDA INQUIRY 
 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister if he now has word 

when the Bayda Inquiry Report is coming down? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I’ll take the next question. 

 

MOORE INQUIRY 
 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. He didn’t get an 

opportunity to answer my last question. Will you not admit that in light of the laudatory comments made 

by Judge Moore of Walter Chester and in light of the fact that he has now been exonerated by the district 

court, are you now prepared to 



 

April 25, 1978 

1910 

 

completely re-instate Walter Chester and prove to the law enforcement officers that this government 

does in fact support them? 

 

Mr. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker. I have already answered that. There is no doubt that Mr. Chester, as we 

have indicated in our letter to him and as we indicated in the Moore Inquiry, that there were many good 

points about Mr. Chester. But, Mr. Speaker, at that time when we demoted Mr. Chester we had indicated 

many other reasons as to why demotion or suspension at that time was necessary. I had hoped that many 

of these reasons would not have to be made public for the interest of Mr. Chester, but Mr. Speaker, it 

seems to me that I have no alternative and in estimates I will make those particular reasons available to 

the House as to why Mr. Chester was demoted and why, finally, the department made a decision. Mr. 

Speaker, we will await, as I said before we will await the outcome of the grievance procedure that every 

employee has under the government if they feel they have been aggrieved. Then they should ask their 

union on their behalf to proceed with grievance procedure and I will at that time study the outcome and 

make my decision at that time. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Supplementary to the Minister. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Next question. 

 

LIQUOR LICENSING LEGISLATION. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana) — Question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister in charge of 

the Liquor Licensing Commission about the legislation now proposed. I ask the minister whether by the 

amendment substituting clause at the amendment regarding the electronic deletion, is it your intention to 

stop all ads regarding any form of liquor or is it your intention to stop local companies from advertising 

in the United States which they may not now do through Williston and then get into the Saskatchewan 

market? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the intent is clear in the explanatory notes which say that the 

amendment is aimed at creating a prohibition against the advertising of liquor by electronic means and 

was prompted by the introduction of cable television into the province. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister, perhaps out of hypocrisy, why now you feel 

that something has to be done, when for many years you have allowed Weyburn and Estevan to have 

liquor advertising coming to their area and why you allow all magazines and other forms of liquor 

advertising to come into this province even though you feel that liquor advertising has such a terrible 

effect on people in this country? 

 

MR. BYERS: —Well, Mr. Speaker, there has been cable television in the province at a number of 

places like Prince Albert and Elrose and Weyburn and Estevan that has been shown for a number of 

years. However, with the licensing of the cable operators by the CRTC in the four major cities where the 

messages will be beamed at substantially larger numbers of people, it is therefore deemed expedient to 

merely extend the current law as it applies to liquor advertising on the national networks to the cable 

operators and that does not seem like an unreasonable approach. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, does the minister not believe that given the fact that it will place 

such an onerous expense upon the cable companies to delete the ads that 



 

April 25, 1978 

1911 

 

you could get most of the effect of stopping Saskatchewan sellers from going to the United States and 

advertising in Williston if you used your current powers under The Liquor Act to stop those companies 

from advertising rather than worrying about what little American advertising might come in if you took 

that step and didn’t take the overall step? 

 

MR. BYERS: — That would be a very inappropriate way, Mr. Speaker, because there may well be 

distributors of certain products that are not now listed with the Liquor Board and they may then use the 

method suggested by the hon. member of the opposition to promote sales so they could argue their sales 

were up so they could get listed. 

 

MOORE INQUIRY 
 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — A question to the Minister of Social Services. Would the minister not admit 

that his recent admission or his previous admission that he in fact withheld information from the Moore 

Inquiry colors further this government’s position when it has the reputation of not being supportive of 

our correctional officers and law enforcement officers in the province? 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, I indicated before and I will indicate again if the 

member would only listen, that we have made those points, I think, available to the Moore Inquiry. We 

had hoped that the character of Mr. Chester would not have to be further defamed and that it could be 

protected but if the members insist, then I think we will have to make that public and that we will have 

to go into the other reasons. I will be prepared to do that if the members so insist in Estimates. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, on page 66 of the Moore Inquiry, Judge Moore 

says that he was satisfied that Chester was a dedicated employer, a leader respected by both staff and 

inmates and a disciplinarian but with a sense of fairness. Are you now prepared to say that the 

information that you have given to the Moore Inquiry which was overruled by Judge Moore, that Judge 

Moore in fact is totally wrong and you are carrying out a vendetta against a correctional officer? 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, and in no way did Judge Moore overrule our decision. 

In my conversations with Judge Ben Moore, he clearly indicated to us that there were some difficulties, 

certainly, and in my discussion with him, certainly we took his advice and I am following that advice, 

Mr. Speaker. I will again say that I will await the decision of the arbitration board and make my decision 

at that time. 

 

I will repeat, Mr. Speaker, our decision to suspend and then to demote Mr. Chester was not solely based 

on the assault charge that was laid against Mr. Chester. We are not particularly concerned as to whether 

he was guilty or not guilty of that assault charge. Our decision was not entirely based on it and I have 

stated that in the House before. 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie) — Mr. Minister, if we are going to delve through the Moore report 

and drag up a number of other things, are you also considering possible charges to members who were 

included in the report including members to my left? 

 

MR. ROLFES: — That, Mr. Speaker, will certainly be taken under advisement. 

 

NORTHLAND AGREEMENT 
 

MR. A.M. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister 



 

April 25, 1978 

1912 

 

responsible for Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I am under the impression as a result of an article run in the Star Phoenix that the new Northland 

Agreement which expired on March 31 is about to be re-entered by the provincial government. I would 

like to know if the minister can give me the assurance that before the provincial government signs the 

final form of that agreement if they will make every opportunity available for representatives of the 

northern government LACs, LCAs and NMCs to make presentations to the provincial government so 

that the northern viewpoint might be better understood by both parties entering into that agreement? 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN:(Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): —Mr. Speaker, in the development 

of the agreement, the Northlands Agreement, every opportunity has been provided for the Northern 

Municipal Council and the local councils to be involved. In fact there was funding provided for them to 

make representation to the Northlands Agreement and I would not make any further commitment with 

respect to it. 

 

MR. McMILLAN — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, is it not a fact, Mr. Minister, that the NMC felt that 

on every occasion where they attempted to in fact put their case before the provincial government before 

it entered into a final agreement on the Northlands Agreement, they were snubbed as a result of the 

attitude of your civil service and your ministry in particular. 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — The answer to the question is, No. I indicated already to the member, Mr. 

Speaker, that there were provisions and funding for not only the Northern Municipal Council but for the 

local councils and for the representative groups, the Association of Non-Status and Metis people as well 

as the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. They made their representations to the clauses in the 

proposed agreement and as I indicated already I would make no further commitments with respect to the 

agreement. 

 

PRINCE ALBERT CO-OP FISHERIES. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister in charge of Co-operatives. 

Mr. Minister, last week in a press release it said that the Prince Albert Co-op Fisheries of Prince Albert 

is in danger of bankruptcy within a month and will have to close its doors putting some 100 plant 

workers out of work and interfering with the lives of 1,500 other commercial fishermen in 

Saskatchewan. The Co-op has been forced now to go under the management of the Fresh Water Fish 

Marketing Corporation apparently, the very corporation that caused them financial hardship in the first 

place. Mr. Minister, will the government at this time reconsider its decision and give financial assistance 

to this Co-op at this time? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): — Mr. Speaker, the department of the government has 

given financial assistance in the past over a number of periods of time with respect to Co-operative 

Fisheries Ltd. I think the question should be more properly directed to the Minister of Northern 

Saskatchewan who is much closer to that scene. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister of DNS answer that? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: —Mr. Speaker, we have over a rather lengthy period of time given assistance, 

financially and otherwise, to Co-operative Fisheries Ltd., in their difficulties which they experienced 

with their relations with the Fresh Water Fish Marketing 



 

April 25, 1978 

1913 

 

Corporation. We will continue to do that or we will continue to consider that at least. That does not 

indicate that we will provide financial assistance to the CFL now without some other considerations and 

some more study in detail with respect to what the implications of that would be. 

 

MR. WIPF: — . . . you said we may give them more financial assistance, Mr. Minister, is it not true that 

right at the present time they are in need of more moneys, or else they are going to have to close the 

doors and put some 1,500 people out of work — probably as commercial fishermen. Would you not 

agree that at this point if we did give them some money to help them over the problem that they have 

right now, it would be of great benefit to the 100 plant workers and the 1,500 commercial fishermen in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would agree with that. Every consideration is being given 

to the implications of what would be involved if Co-operative Fisheries Limited was to cease operations. 

There is a meeting scheduled tomorrow with their Board of Directors in Prince Albert, at which time I 

will be attending a part of that Board Meeting, to decide and to determine the current state of affairs with 

respect to them and to what relationship the department should take or the government should take, in 

their future operations. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it not a fact that your provincial 

government is seriously considering the establishment of a provincial fish marketing board or agency? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. When you say serious consideration, I would say that 

because of the implications which the Fresh Water Fish Marketing Corporation has had on the fishery in 

Saskatchewan and specifically, with respect to the agents operating in this province and for the 

maintenance of a fish processing industry in Saskatchewan, we find that it is necessary and incumbent 

upon us now, because of the financial implications and financial disaster which has been brought about 

on the agents and fishermen of this province, to consider alternatives to the Freshwater Fish Marketing 

Corporation. 

 

MOORE INQUIRY (CONT’D) 
 

MR. MALONE:— Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of Social Services. A moment ago, in 

response to the member for Qu’Appelle, you indicated that you had discussions with Judge Moore in 

connection with Mr. Chester. Now, this is the first time that I have been aware that there were 

discussions between you as a minister and the judge conducting this inquiry. Would you tell us at this 

time when these discussions were held? Were they held at the time the inquiry was going on or before 

and whether or not Mr. Chester was made aware that you were discussing his case with the Judge? If so, 

was he invited to attend these discussions? 

 

MR. ROLFES: —— Mr. Speaker, the only time I ever met Judge Ben Moore was when he submitted 

his report to me. It was at that time that we discussed the report and also his comments in regards to the 

handling of Chester affairs. The only time I ever spoke to Judge Ben Moore and it was the only time I 

ever met him. I haven’t met him since, nor have I spoken to him since. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the Attorney General in view of Judge 

Moore’s findings in his report about the actions of Mr. Bogdosavich and 



 

April 25, 1978 

1914 

 

the actions of Mr. Thompson in consulting with the officials of your department and with the judge 

involved in the Chester case, have you recommended or taken any disciplinary measures against these 

two civil servants for acting in the manner that they did, that is, seeing the judge or the prosecutor before 

the case was heard, talking to your members of your department about an appeal, not on the merits of 

the case but because of some embarrassment that would be caused to the department. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I have not and I do not intend to. I do not believe that is my 

responsibility. Furthermore, at first analysis, I do not see anything particularly untoward from a criminal 

justice point of view, with respect to the representations that are made. Any judgment calls or opinions 

with respect to the whole Chester affair in the social services context — Well, we have Judge Moore’s 

views on that; but in terms of the criminal justice situation, I think that there was no impropriety. Indeed 

I think Judge Moore found that allegations which were made during the course of the inquiry, that there 

had been an interference with the administration of justice, simply were not so. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I take it from the Attorney General’s 

answer then that he approves of government officials having consultations firstly with prosecutors 

before a case has been tried, and secondly having government officials contact his department to be 

advised on an appeal, not on the merits of the case, not on whether justice has been done or not been 

done, but just on the basis that it puts the department in a difficult position? Do you approve of that 

procedure? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I stand to be corrected because it has been some 

weeks and months indeed since I looked at the Moore Report but my recollection is that there is no 

evidence of anybody having talked to the prosecutors in advance of the charge having been heard and 

determined. I stand to be corrected by that but I believe that that is an accurate recollection of the facts. 

 

As the second aspect of it, namely the urging of the appeal, the person can make an urging of an appeal 

to the department. The key question is, was the correct decision taken or not taken by the department in 

light of all the circumstances? In this case I submit that the decisions taken by the department were 

indeed proper and I think Judge Moore has indeed substantiated that. As I said, the allegation by the 

Leader of the PC Party was right during the middle of the inquiry of Ben Moore, that there was some 

sort of a substantial interference with the administration of justice by the Department of Welfare. 

 

Judge Moore specifically said, relating to this incidence which arose from the allegations, that was not 

so, and I stand by that. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — A supplementary to the Attorney General. Would you not admit that 

condoning the actions of the senior civil servants, of going around to push a prosecution and push an 

appeal, and demoting a corrections officer for actions that the Minister of Social Services said took place 

in 1968, indicates in the strongest way that you are not prepared to give support to our corrections 

officials and will further increase the morale problems that exist in the correctional system? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I, and I am sure the entire government, 

supports the difficult job that correction officers and police officers have to fulfil in our society today. 

We back them 100 per cent of the way. Having said that, there will be occasions of which Chester may 

or may not be an incident I do not know, where through the normal procedure of grievances, some 

disciplinary action may or 



 

April 25, 1978 

1915 

 

may not be necessary against an individual person, be that a corrections officer or anybody else who 

works for the government of the province of Saskatchewan. The position that Chester is in now, I say to 

the hon. members opposite, this is something which is before, the mechanism of the collective 

bargaining agreement, we ought not to be making it a political football at this stage of the game, we 

should be allowing that process to run its normal and due course with a final decision after it has been 

taken. 

 

MOORE INQUIRY — WALTER CHESTER. 
 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

Today in this assembly, the Minister of Social Services stated categorically that he had information 

pertaining to Walter Chester that he was prepared to now release that was not formally released to Mr. 

Justice Moore in his inquiries. The Attorney General has just categorically stated that no one spoke to 

Mr. Justice Moore prior to the report issued by Mr. Justice Moore in which Mr. Walter Chester was 

praised. My question to you is this, as a Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan, in order to prove to 

law enforcement officials across the province that we, the government of Saskatchewan are behind the 

law enforcement officers and the duties that they have to perform in our society, will you ensure that the 

Minister of Social Services does not merely state that he is going to blacken an individual law 

enforcement officer’s name but Mr. Premier, will in the light of the comments made today, insist that 

Mr. Walter Chester be reinstated. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, three points. First, Mr. Walter Chester’s rights are being 

determined pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement between the government and the 

Saskatchewan Government Employee’s Association and we intend to keep our bargains, we intend to 

keep our bargains, and that will determine whether or not Mr. Chester is reinstated. Point number one. 

Point number two. We yield to no one in supporting the forces of law and order in this province. We 

have consistently supported them and we will continue to support them. Point number three. I am not 

aware that the Minister of Social Services has indicated the remarks attributed to him by the member for 

Nipawin. I sat here. I listened, I didn’t hear what he heard. 

 

COMMITTEE TO LOOK INTO STRIKES AS PERTAINING TO PERISHABLE PRODUCTS. 
 

MR. WIEBE: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Yesterday, the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Agriculture, in presenting its brief to cabinet, make the recommendation that cabinet and government set 

up a committee to look into strikes in essential services, i.e., especially as pertains to perishable 

products. Is it the intention of your government to accept that recommendation and set up such a 

committee? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Cameron, we haven’t had time to evaluate that particular request on the part of 

SFA. I simply indicated, as I did to the press, that I felt that the negotiations procedure which we 

undertook worked out very well. We were able to make use of a negotiator and a mediator, we were able 

to get an agreement which seems to be satisfactory to both sides. It seems to me in any negotiation that 

is still the best method to use and unless we find some real good merit in a different proposal I suspect 

that that’s the method we will continue to use. 

 

MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. As is the case today, a lot of concern is 

expressed regarding the concerns of labor and management and very little concern is shown in regard to 

the innocent third party. As an example, the recent dairy producers’ strike. Is it the intention of your 

government, can I ask you once again to 



 

April 25, 1978 

1916 

 

provide the kind of assurance that the innocent third party does need in regard to labor and management 

strikes and look into the recommendation that the SFA has asked your government to do and at least set 

up a committee to study the possibilities of strikes in essential services? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the recommendation is better directed to the Minister 

of Labour. However, I do believe that there is a need for us to look at a better way of handling 

labor-management relations but I suspect that that is not only true in terms of agriculture but in many 

other areas of industry. I suspect that the Minister of Labour will have noted what was said. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 2:38 o’clock p.m. His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor, entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the 

Throne and gave Royal Assent to the bills presented to him. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 11 — CONDEMNATION OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RE 

WESTERN ALIENATION 
 

MR. R.L. COLLVER: (Leader of the Conservative Opposition) moved, seconded by Mr. R.H. Bailey 

(Rosetown-Elrose): 

 

That this Assembly condemn the federal Government for failing to come to grips with western 

alienation by refusing to act upon legitimate economic and social concerns of western Canada. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this motion and to make this motion to this Assembly, I 

would like to, first of all, draw to the attention of the present government of Saskatchewan that there is 

contrary to some of the rewards made by the Premier at the recent meeting in Yorkton, continuing and 

growing feelings of alienation amongst the people of western Canada and, more specifically, in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

These feelings of alienations were brought about by long time problems pertaining to freight rates and 

pertaining to centralization of power in Ottawa over areas of jurisdiction that have traditionally been the 

province’s over the last number of years. 

 

Continued lack of economic development in the province of Saskatchewan, caused by these centralized 

policies and caused by the lack of concern or apparent lack of concern of the present government of 

Canada to implement for example the Hall Commission, to implement material changes in their attitudes 

toward the entire freight structure of western Canada, the continued attitude of the government in 

Ottawa to develop policies by planners in Ottawa relative to unemployment insurance as an example, 

relative to the Canada Pension Plan as an example, where these policies made in Ottawa are not felt by 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan or the people of western Canada to in any way, enhance the 

development and the social development of western Canada. 

 

Now in his remarks made at Yorkton, or the impression of the remarks made at Yorkton and also the 

remarks that the Premier made at Banff, there seems to be in the mind of the Premier of Saskatchewan, 

some kind of change in that attitude over the last few years. At least that was the impression that I got, 

especially from his speech that he 



 

April 25, 1978 

1917 

 

made to the Alternatives Canada Conference in Banff. 

 

He seemed to imply that Ottawa now is listening to Saskatchewan and yet what do we see Ottawa do 

with reference to the oil legislation in Saskatchewan? We have a continued attack by Ottawa on western 

Canadian resources with reference to oil. We have an export tax on oil, as an example but do we have an 

export tax on nickel? No, we don’t. Do we have an export tax on the products of eastern Canada? No, 

we don’t, but we have an export tax on oil which is the product of two provinces in western Canada 

primarily. Certainly, we in western Canada have come to believe for some considerable years that if oil 

for example, were found in Ontario near Thunder Bay or in Ontario near Toronto or in Quebec near 

Montreal, near Quebec city, then the entire policy of the federal government would change. The 

population centres of Ontario and Quebec, of central Canada, would bring their power to bear on the 

parliament of Ottawa and certainly then, the export tax would be removed because otherwise the 

government of Saskatchewan and the government of the province of Alberta, in attempting to deal with 

their natural resources which belong to the people of those areas and which by constitution are under the 

jurisdiction of the provinces, could benefit all of the people of Saskatchewan and Alberta (and to a 

greater extent in Saskatchewan because Alberta is getting their substantial amount of money now out of 

that resource) but could benefit secondary industry and the development of real jobs and opportunities in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Instead, we have a federal government that continues to insist that only 

the interests of the population centres in Ontario and Quebec should apply across Canada. 

 

We haven’t seen, with relation to the federal government in Ottawa, any change in the attitude of the 

present government in Ottawa towards western Canada. Look at the record over the last ten years. Look 

at the kinds of policies that have been implemented. When the western Canadian farmers couldn’t sell 

their wheat the Prime Minister of Canada threw it in their faces. That’s what he thought of western 

Canadian farmers — threw it in their faces in Winnipeg, (and the members to my right laugh) but every 

resident of western Canada and every resident of Saskatchewan remembers. The members to my right 

think that the people forget these incidents — forget the incident in the past but they remember all too 

clearly, the attitude of the Prime Minister at the time that western Canadians couldn’t sell their wheat. 

Then the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board, the man who was supposedly going down 

to Ottawa on behalf of western Canadians and he was going to . . . (I remember this, Mr. Speaker, 

because he was the candidate for election in Saskatoon). I remember many of the speeches then. He was 

going to go down and teach Ottawa about the concerns of western Canada. He was going to tell them, he 

was going to shake them loose; he was going to (in his words) back in 1968 and again in 1972 in those 

two famous campaigns in Saskatoon-Humboldt. He was going to shake that federal government because 

he was the only man that could go there and join with the government. A very similar pitch he made 

back then, Mr. Speaker, to the pitch being made by the member of Regina South and the member for 

Regina Wascana today where they say, elect me because I can join with the winners. Don’t elect me 

because I can stand up for western Canada, don’t elect me because I traditionally have stood up for 

western Canada and I have forcibly drawn to the attention of the government in Ottawa the concerns of 

western Canadians, the real concerns, don’t elect me for that reason, elect me because I can join the 

winning team and by doing so I can make a major impact on the future of western Canada. Let’s look 

for a minute at the major impact on the future of western Canada made by that gentleman from 

Saskatoon-Humboldt who has been a member of Cabinet ever since in the last 10 years. Have we seen a 

dramatic change in the development of secondary industry in Saskatchewan? The reverse is true. We 

have lost 



 

April 25, 1978 

1918 

 

our meatpacking industry, we are down to one plant and that is half owned by the present government of 

Saskatchewan. The others are closing their doors or planning closures. Have we seen development in the 

rapeseed industry? No, we haven’t. The development and processing of rapeseed? No we haven’t. The 

plant in Nipawin and others in the province of Saskatchewan have had less volume lately than they used 

to have. Why? Because the implementation of this gentleman who was sent down to Ottawa to stand up 

for and represent western Canadians wanted to implement his own brand, his own brand of western 

Canadian politics. Mr. Speaker, that’s what the member for Saskatoon-Humboldt, the member of 

parliament really wanted to do was to create a rapeseed crushing industry in Windsor, Ontario. That’s 

how he represents the people of western Canada and the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Have we seen any dramatic improvement with the marvellous location — Mr. Speaker with deference, 

may I ask you to call the members behind me and the members to my right to order, it is very difficult 

even to hear myself let alone try and listen to them. It is very difficult, back and forth. I wish you would 

call them to order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, has there been any change in western Canada or in the 

province of Saskatchewan, especially in the province of Saskatchewan relative to the creation of jobs 

and opportunities? The answer is a resounding, No. Our manufacturing sector in the province of 

Saskatchewan has deteriorated in the last 10 years; it has deteriorated. We have local Saskatchewan 

organizations such as Morris Rod Weeder, out in Yorkton, who have had to open, who have improved 

their business all over the world., all over the world, but where are they creating the manufacturing jobs 

— North Dakota, Minnesota, not in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we can talk about the present government’s policies of decentralization and the fact that we don’t 

think that they exist and that they are not really trying to create these opportunities in the small centres 

but the government in Ottawa has got to take their share of responsibility for this. We are faced with a 

situation in western Canada where it is our time, where it is our era and we are not proceeding to get the 

kind of treatment from the central government in Ottawa that is necessary and essential for us to develop 

those jobs and opportunities here. What kind of policies could the present federal government enact, for 

example? What kind of policies could the present government in Saskatchewan insist that the present 

government in Ottawa enact in order to improve the situation in the province of Saskatchewan and in 

western Canada? Well, first of all, I must commend the NDP for this, they can insist that the present 

government today implement the Hall Commission. And they can do this as forcibly and as dynamically 

as they possible can so that we can have a real and meaningful improvement in our grain-handling 

system in the province of Saskatchewan and in western Canada. 

 

What could they do further? They could insist that the federal government create a tariff pool from the 

tariffs that we pay on the manufactured goods and extend the crowrates to the processing industries of 

our agricultural projects. Who will that help? That will help the processing industries, rapeseed crushing, 

the meatpacking industry. It will help a great many of the processors to establish right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan rather than to establish in heavy populated centres and see our raw materials 

exported out of the province of Saskatchewan at world market price while we have to pay the protected 

price for the merchandise that is brought in to protect the eastern Canadian industry. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

those are a couple of things they could do in the economic sphere. 

 

Is DREE establishment in Saskatoon really benefiting the people of Saskatchewan? The answer is no. 

Do they really make decisions in Saskatoon that apply to the province of 



 

April 25, 1978 

1919 

 

Saskatchewan? About $4,000 a month in telephone calls between the DREE office in Saskatoon and the 

DREE office in Ottawa counters that particular statement. Decentralization? Nonsense! Additional staff, 

additional civil service directed and controlled by Ottawa — that is correct. Really, what projects has 

DREE really gotten off the ground that would not otherwise have gotten off the ground in Saskatchewan 

by the people of Saskatchewan anyway? If we had tax benefits, if we had equalization amounts so that 

the government of Saskatchewan could determine priorities, we are convinced, Mr. Speaker, totally 

convinced that the projects that develop in the province of Saskatchewan would dramatically improve 

and would greatly enhance the industrial sector of our province. 

 

The fact is that when these planners in DREE, for example, and many, many other central bureaucratic 

organizations out of Ottawa, through the Department of Industry and Commerce and other such 

organizations, attempt to try to develop western Canadian industry with central Canadian thought 

processes, they are doing so on one basis and one basis only; throw those western Canadians a soup 

bone while the real development takes place down here where the population centres are. Yet, Mr. 

Speaker, at the same time that that is happening, we see in the province of Ontario and in the province of 

Quebec tremendous social problems developing around the major cities: smog, pollution, rampart crime. 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the people of those areas are very concerned about continued development 

of that kind of nature of secondary manufacturing and so on in Ontario, the Golden Triangle, and in 

Quebec. 

 

They are equally concerned about increasing their population centres. They are equally concerned and 

here we are, in western Canada, having to export our very prime resource and that is the educated young 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are still doing it, Mr. Speaker. We heard in Health Estimates this year, the minister agree and admit 

that the percentage of the Saskatchewan population over the age of 65 is dramatically increasing while 

the population in total is relatively stagnant. What that means, basically, Mr. Speaker, is that people in 

the productive years of their lives still are leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now admittedly, many of them are going to the province of Alberta but many of them as well, Mr. 

Speaker, are going to the central or populated areas of our country because that is where jobs and 

opportunities are continuing to develop. Why, for example, has the Premier in his statements at the 

Premier’s conferences — why has he not made dramatically clear in the economic sense, dramatically 

clear, that the people of western Canada expect now, not in 10 years or 20 years a slight improvement, 

but now expect to be able to be creative in the development of those opportunities economically. Why 

has he not made it eminently clear, eminently clear, that the — 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — What do you see about Saskatchewan that brought you to Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — What do I see about Saskatchewan that brought me to Saskatchewan? 

 

AN HON. MEMBERS: — In your younger years. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Well, everyone has to go somewhere. Ted and I thought I wanted to be near you. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1920 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point is that we want those jobs and opportunities here in Saskatchewan. We think the 

government of Saskatchewan could be doing more in emphasizing throughout Canada the importance of 

the development of these jobs. We do commend the present government for their stand, for example, 

with reference to the right of the government of Saskatchewan to tax their resources as they see fit, we 

commend the government for that and for standing up for that. We commend the government of 

Saskatchewan for the demands on the Hall Commission but we think you could do more. We think the 

government could be making suggestions with reference to the development of some kind of system to 

extend the crowrates. The suggestion that the Premier made at Yorkton which was a copy of Dr. Grant 

Devine’s suggestion of about a month before the Premier made his suggestion, we think is a step 

forward and we hope that the Premier will continue in the statements that he makes outside the province 

of Saskatchewan to try to extend those benefits of crowrates to the processing industry which will help 

to develop the province. 

 

We hope, as well, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier in his meeting with reference to the federal provincial 

meetings will take to heart the continued centralization of power in Ottawa with reference to things like 

DREE and will ask, instead of having the DREE office located in Saskatchewan, for additional 

equalization payments, so the government of Saskatchewan can determine where their resources should 

go, not the government in Ottawa, who do not understand the real problems of the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this motion also suggests that there is western Canadian alienation relative to some 

social issues. I would like to address my mind to those in addition to the economic issues that I have 

mentioned already. Such social issues, for example, as in unthinking, uncaring, federal government that 

abolishes the death penalty against the wishes of the Canadian people. Some issues as the development 

of welfare programs and health programs in Ottawa and educational programs as well and imposing 

them through their grant system — and I am sure the Premier will have some comments on that one — 

imposing them through their grant system on western Canadians. Take for example, Mr. Speaker, the 

development of research in the province of Saskatchewan through our universities. The research grants 

coming out of Ottawa, rather than to be filtered through the, for example, the research council of the 

province of Saskatchewan, where the decisions could be made here, only decisions relative to our needs, 

are made out of Ottawa and they are made on the basis that the western Canadians, that the 

Saskatchewan educators have to apply to Ottawa and to be told by an Ottawa board where these moneys 

are to be spend. Such decisions, for example, as a requirement in terms of Canada Council Grants for the 

arts, for theatre, for these decision have to be made by planners located in Ottawa rather than in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is wrong. We believe it is wrong, for 

example, that last year the Canada Council in the arts almost totally excluded the province of 

Saskatchewan in their grants. Absolutely true. The member for Regina Wascana says, not true. Well the 

member for Regina Wascana I am sure will be able to list all of the Canada Council Grants made to the 

field of the arts in the province of Saskatchewan relative to the total grants made in Canada in that very 

important area. 

 

Now, again, I have to commend the government of Saskatchewan for their efforts in terms of the 

promotion of culture in the province of Saskatchewan. But I think they can go further, and I think that 

the government can go even further. If it wasn’t limited by the fact that the government of Canada 

insists on making the decision as to what kind of art they think is right rather than what kind of art we, in 

the province of Saskatchewan, think is right. The really internationally famous artists as an example 



 

April 25, 1978 

1921 

 

and I am only suggesting that because it is true in the field of art, it is true in the field of music, it is true 

in the field of research, it is true in all those cultural and social activities. The really internationally 

famous people are the ones who develop their talents here in Saskatchewan, not through any great 

Canada cultural grants but develop their talents here in a home grown fashion. If the government of 

Canada really wanted to make western Canadians feel that they were a part and a total and complete part 

of Canada, they would insist that the government of Saskatchewan and that the people of Saskatchewan 

be allowed to make these decisions themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no, some of it wasn’t filled in so you have to do this properly, Mr. Speaker, in a couple of 

minutes I am going to move that this assembly condemns the federal government for failing to come to 

grips with western alienation by refusing to act upon legitimate economic and social concerns of western 

Canada. In summary, Mr. Speaker, we in western Canada believe it is our turn. We believe it is our turn 

to make the decisions that we need to make as good Canadians and as good western Canadians here at 

home. We are in exactly the same position today, Mr. Speaker, that Canadians were in, relative to 

Britain back in 1867. We in western Canada don’t want to be treated as colonials; we don’t want to send 

our supposed spokesmen down there to Ottawa (as we did with the member for Saskatoon-Humboldt), 

who was going to look after strongly, the interests of western Canada, and who in turn was usurped by 

the eastern Canadians and proceeded to create such marvellous policies as LIFT and that sort of 

programs that did not do very much for the people of western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe the government of Canada can do much more, both in the economic and social 

areas, as well as the cultural areas. They could develop the kind of western Canada or help us through 

unconditional grants to western Canadians. They could help us . . . well the member for Regina Wascana 

laughs . . . he thinks that unconditional grants — that we are not entitled to a share of the profits of 

Imperial Oil whose head office is in Toronto, that we are not entitled to a share of the profits of Shell or 

any of the other major corporations, doing business in western Canada, that those profits which are taxed 

in Ontario and are taxed by Ottawa in Ontario, that they shouldn’t be given back to the people of 

western Canada. I say, let the member for Regina Wascana stand on that issue, we think that western 

Canadians are entitled to a share of that taxation revenue and that is what unconditional revenue sharing 

is all about — for the benefit of the member for Regina Wascana. 

 

We believe that the government could do more in this area and could conserve by means of real 

decentralization of power, by real and meaningful turning over to western Canadians, their own destiny 

as good Canadians, that we in western Canada could in fact, achieve our era as we should. Therefore I 

move, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

MR. MALONE: Mr. Speaker. I noticed this particular motion on the order paper now for some weeks 

and I assumed the member who moved it, the member for Nipawin, would prepare his speech and come 

to this Assembly today and have perhaps a new slant on the problems of western alienation. I can think 

of a number of things that I could have spoken on without giving too much thought to, which would 

have been much more appropriate than the remarks from the member for Nipawin. In fact, indeed Mr. 

Speaker, it is seldom that I have heard such an inane speech in this Legislature. It reminds me of the 

person who got up and said. ‘I really don’t know too much about the subject matter’. Spoke and 

proceeded to over-demonstrate the point to his audience. I think that is the situation the member for 

Nipawin finds himself in today. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1922 

 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to compare that speech with the speeches that we have been hearing for 

years, from the members opposite. It was the same speech, Mr. Speaker. The same speech that goes on 

and on about this jealous feeling towards central Canada, the jealousy towards Alberta and British 

Columbia, but really no constructive suggestions as to how this very vital problem can be solved. We 

have heard the Premier make the speech, we have heard the Attorney General make the speech, we have 

heard the members opposite applaud and pound their desks when they went through the same inanities 

that the member for Nipawin just did. It is rather strange for us sitting on this side of the House, to hear a 

speech that the NDP have given for years, come from a leader of a party that says he wants to defeat the 

NDP. Time and time again, he congratulated the Premier, he congratulated the NDP, he said what great 

fellows they were, what a good job they were doing for the province of Saskatchewan! 

 

If he feels that way about it, Mr. Speaker, I suggest he just move his chair over there and join with the 

rest of them! Because that’s all his speech was, that was all it was, a speech saying what a great group 

the NDP are. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have not done very much for Saskatchewan. 

The member for Nipawin seems to think that their oil legislation is appropriate. He seems to think that 

bill 42 was a good idea and Bill 47 was a good idea. Presumably if he takes that approach towards oil, 

we can believe he takes the same approach towards potash. 

 

He also talked about unemployment insurance, the Canada pension plans, as being plans that somehow 

are not for the benefit of the people of western Canada and the people of Saskatchewan. I suggest he go 

out on the hustings and try to sell that message, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think there is anybody in 

Saskatchewan who does not acknowledge the Canada Pension Plan and the Unemployment Insurance 

are good plans, although subject to abuse. That seems to be the thrust of that speaker’s remark, Mr. 

Speaker, that these aren’t good things and that somehow they are not coming to grips with the interest of 

western Canada. But I was particularly appalled, Mr. Speaker, with this continuous reference to Quebec 

and Ontario. Quebec and Ontario do this; Quebec and Ontario do that. Nothing, in my opinion, Mr. 

Speaker, leads to Canadian unity being harmed when one region attacks another region. Whether it is the 

Atlantic provinces attacking Quebec, whether it is western Canada attacking Ontario, we have had these 

attacks in the past, Mr. Speaker, and at no time have they done anything to improve the situations of 

westerners. 

 

What we need to cure western alienation, what we need to solve the problems of Canadian unity is not 

speeches like the member for Nipawin gave. But speeches that say to people of western Ontario and to 

Quebec and Ontario, that here are legitimate concerns in Saskatchewan. Here is what we feel should be 

done on the national scene to help Saskatchewan and we should be able to say at the same time we are 

giving those speeches, that we understand in Quebec that you have a problem, and to the Atlantic 

provinces that you have a problem, and if you are prepared to listen to our concerns and to act upon 

what we consider is important, we are prepared to listen to your concerns and to help you with your 

problems. Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, did I find any sense of that in the member’s remarks. Simply the same 

bitter, jealous remarks about what is happening somewhere else and supposedly how we are being 

ripped off in western Canada. 

 

There are problems, Mr. Speaker. There are very serious problems; problems that have to be faced up to 

soon, not several years of months down the road. But the approach to 



 

April 25, 1978 

1923 

 

be taken is not the approach by the member for Nipawin. It is an approach that recognizes legitimate 

concerns all across this country for Canadian unity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member also dwells on what has happened in Saskatchewan since there has been a 

Liberal government. I want to remind that speaker that prior to the Liberal government taking power, 

there was a Conservative government. A government that has the largest majority of any party in the 

history of Canada. A government that was headed by the member for Prince Alberta, Mr. Diefenbaker, a 

westerner. A government that had many westerners in its Cabinet, Mr. Hamilton and others. They had an 

opportunity to do many things in those years to help the people of western Canada to right some of the 

traditional wrongs of the people of Saskatchewan. They had an opportunity to put in things such as 

two-price wheat. Did they? The answer is, No. A Liberal government did that, Mr. Speaker. They had 

the opportunity to have such things as a grain stabilization bill. Did they do that, Mr. Speaker? The 

answer is, No, but a Liberal government did that, Mr. Speaker. Did they attack the problems of 

transportation in western Canada in those years? Again, the answer is, No, but a Liberal government is 

attempting to come to grips with those problems. 

 

The list goes on, Mr. Speaker; hopper cars, record wheat sales, all of these things have come to pass, not 

under a Conservative government, not under Mr. Diefenbaker’s government, and they would not have 

come to pass under a Broadbent government or a Douglas government, but they have come to pass 

under a Liberal government. 

 

More things need to be done, Mr. Speaker. Much more needs to be done for western Canada and 

Saskatchewan, but from the record, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody in Saskatchewan will believe 

that the Conservative government will do anything for western Canada. You are still a party that is 

dominated by the money interests of Toronto and Montreal. Nobody in Canada in their right mind would 

expect an NDP government to do anything in this regard, because their chances of success are remote, at 

the very best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this type of speech given by the member for Nipawin, is given strictly for political 

motives. He puts this resolution on the order paper on the eve of a federal election. He tries to use this 

opportunity to get up and rant and rave about so-called western alienation and the so-called evils of the 

Liberal government. If the member had the courage of his convictions, I would suggest that the 

appropriate place to give such a speech, is not here, it is in Nipawin, on some public platforms in rural 

areas in Saskatchewan and in the cities of Saskatchewan. I dare the member to go out and give such a 

speech for public consumption! I dare the member to go out and speak to the political audiences of 

Saskatchewan and give a speech in the manner that he gave in the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. I 

hope he does, Mr. Speaker, because if he does, votes will leave the Conservative party in droves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal more to say about the resolution at a later date, and accordingly at this 

time, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 4 



 

April 25, 1978 

1924 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lane (Qu’Appelle) that an 

Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 4) showing: 

 

The amounts paid by the Government of Saskatchewan to any real estate companies in 1975, 

1976 and January 1, 1977 to September 30, 1977 and the work done for each payment and the 

project for which the work was done or the transaction giving rise to the payment. 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON: (Minister of Government Services): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to speak very briefly on the motion proposed by the member of Qu’Appelle, I guess it was. Yes. 

We are I think, prepared to supply the information he wants. He phrased his question however, in a very 

general fashion. 

 

There are certain things, that traditionally, the government has refused to supply to the public. One of 

those things for instance which comes to mind is the amount paid on rent. We have generally not 

disclosed rents that the government pays on leases. The motion which is before you, Mr. Speaker, would 

be so broad as to include amounts such as rents paid on leases. 

 

I propose to amend it as well so as to refer to the fiscal year rather than the calendar year. A reference to 

the fiscal year would vastly simplify the work of the staff of the government in answering the question. I 

think, with the amendments that I am going to read in a moment, we will be supplying all of the 

information requested by the member for Qu’Appelle, or at least, wanted by him and it will minimize 

the expense in answering the question and will cut out any extraneous information which we don’t want 

to disclose and I don’t think he really wants. 

 

I propose to move, seconded by the member for Humboldt, that the motion be amended so as to read: 

 

The amount of commissions paid by the government of Saskatchewan to any real estate 

companies in the fiscal years, 1975-76, 1976-77 and April 1, 1977 to September 30, 1977, and 

the work done for each commission and the project for which the work was done or the 

transaction giving rise to the commission. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is a fairly full explanation and I will move it now, if I might, as an 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 12 — FREIGHT ASSISTANCE FOR LIVESTOCK EXHIBITS. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Katzman (Rosthern): 



 

April 25, 1978 

1925 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to establish freight assistance for livestock 

exhibits to Canadian Western Agribition on the same basis as for the Toronto Royal Winter Fair 

— i.e. 75 per cent of the total cost of shipping. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — I would just like to say a few words about this bill, 

in the end finally as an amendment to it. 

 

I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the member for Rosthern is so anxious to support an activity which 

is already under way in our department. I am sure that he will be supporting the amendment then which I 

will be proposing at the end of my remarks. 

 

The Canadian Western Agribition has enjoyed a spectacular growth both in quality and quantity, to the 

point that it is now the greatest show in North America, rivalling and even surpassing the Royal 

Agricultural Winter Show in Toronto. The Canadian Western Agribition was a co-operative effort of 

livestock producers, industrial contributors, civil leaders and prairie governments working together to 

achieve an annual show without parallel anywhere in western Canada. The dedication of many people, 

each contributing to a common goal has proven once again that the spirit of the West is far from dead. 

Our thanks must go out to those people who gave so much of their time and effort to this worthwhile 

achievement. 

 

Because of the Canadian Western Agribition has reached the stature and indeed in many ways has 

surpassed the achievement of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair, the time has come when this show 

should receive the same financial support by way of grants and exhibitor support as the enjoyed by its 

eastern Canadian counterpart. We have been successful in attracting entries from across Canada as well 

as from many parts of the USA which has led to the international reputation of the show. We would like 

to attract even more contributors from eastern and western parts of Canada. 

 

To this point, the government of Canada has provided substantial assistance in the form of a contribution 

towards freight costs of exhibits moving from western Canada to the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair in 

Toronto. We are appreciative of this support and are anxious that it be continued. We do believe, 

however, that now that the Canadian Western Agribition has achieved the recognized status as the major 

livestock show in Western Canada, that reciprocal assistance should be made available for the many 

very good producers in Ontario, Quebec and the Maritimes who would also like to compete in our show, 

but find themselves unable to do so because of the high freight costs involved. Some six months ago, 

representatives from the Canadian Western Agribition began negotiations with the Minister of 

Agriculture in Ontario to develop a joint submission to the government of Canada which would be 

acceptable to both provinces and the national government. These proposals are being actively pursued at 

this time. We are hopeful that we will be able to announce a successful arrangement before the next 

show season. 

 

I proposed, therefore, to amend Resolution No. 12 by deleting all of the words after ‘assembly’ and 

substituting therefore: 

 

Commends the government of Saskatchewan for undertaking negotiations with the government 

of Canada to establish freight assistance for the livestock exhibits to Canadian Western 

Agribition on the same basis as for the Toronto Royal Winter Fair, i.e. 75 per cent of the total 

cost of shipping. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1926 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all members will want to support that resolution. 

 

Debate continues concurrently on the motion and the amendment. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, since I would like to have time to consider just what the 

amendment entails. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTIONS 
 

CAMPAIGN LEAFLET — MR. MERCHANT 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Allen(Regina Rosemont): 

 

That this Assembly regrets the action of the member for Regina Wascana in printing and 

distributing a leaflet containing a picture of that member taken within the Assembly in 

contravention of the rules of the Assembly and orders the member for Regina Wascana to return 

all remaining copies of said leaflet to Mr. Speaker forthwith and to apologize to the Assembly. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the other day to adjourn this matter because I think it took us 

all somewhat by surprise, the statement by your Honor and perhaps more surprise the motion that was 

immediately introduced to the typewritten form by the member for Regina Rosemont. I have had some 

time to reflect upon the motion and why it was presented to this Assembly. There is only one conclusion 

that anyone can logically draw from the motion. I don’t believe that the member who introduced the 

motion is particularly concerned about the rules of this procedure, for this Assembly. I don’t think he is 

particularly offended by the fact that a picture was taken and that there was a political leaflet printed and 

distributed containing that picture, but I think what he perhaps is concerned about is the fact that the 

member for Regina Wascana, as he is presently known, is soon going to be the member for Regina East. 

 

This particular motion is politically motivated and that is the only reason for it being brought before this 

Assembly. The members opposite, particularly the Regina members, are very sensitive about the fact 

that their two candidates in the federal election are looking worse every day. They are particularly 

sensitive about the fact that there have been two vigorous campaigns launched in those two federal 

constituencies by my colleagues in this Legislature, campaigns that in my view are first rate campaigns 

involving door knocking, involved handouts, involving leaflets, all of the traditional things that you do 

in a political campaign. What is particularly galling I am sure to the member for Regina Rosemont is 

that he knows that his colleague, the NDP candidate for Regina East simply can’t match the campaign 

that is being run in that constituency. He knows that that particular candidate doesn’t stand a chance in 

that constituency on a campaign fought on the usual political lines of a campaign, intensive door 

knocking, intensive canvassing, political pamphlets being handed out, advertising an all the traditional 

uses of political devices. 

 

So what does he seek to do, well he knows that he can’t win on that basis, so what he 



 

April 25, 1978 

1927 

 

tries to do is to slur the member for Wascana. He tries to drag him down into the gutter and fight a 

campaign that will be fought in the gutter, an area that seems to be very familiar to members who sit 

opposite from me. 

 

That’s the reason for this particular motion, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the only reason for this particular 

motion, I say to the member for Regina Rosemont that this is a shameful motion for you to put on this 

order paper. I don’t believe that you really believe in it. I suspect that somebody in the back rooms of the 

NDP insisted that some backbencher come out with this motion in a desperate attempt to try to 

embarrass the member for Regina Lakeview. Obviously it hasn’t worked, obviously it’s not going to 

work. I suspect that the members opposite would like to see this motion just disappear and go away, Mr. 

Speaker. Obviously that can’t happen now because it has been introduced to this Assembly. 

 

I say the motion, Mr. Speaker, is a spurious motion. It has nothing to do with the business of this 

Legislature and is simply on the order paper in a desperate attempt to build up the fortunes of the 

candidates for the NDP in Regina East. But, perhaps there is a serious aspect within this motion, Mr. 

Speaker, and that I regret to say, Mr. Speaker, is your involvement. A number of concerns have … 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I want to caution the member and I’ll ask him to make a retraction at the 

conclusion of this statement. I want to caution the member about what he is saying. The Speaker’s 

actions cannot be criticized incidentally in debate or upon any former proceeding except a substantive 

motion and I will ask the member for Lakeview to withdraw the comment made about the Speaker. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Well, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to make a motion. I didn’t think I did anything 

critical. If I did, I certainly withdraw the motion: I refer to you involvement. I didn’t say anything 

critical towards your position or to you personally. If I did, I withdraw that comment, but what I’m 

trying to get across to you, Mr. Speaker, and I intend on moving an amendment to the motion that’s 

before this assembly and perhaps it would be appropriate for me to read the amendment at this time, so 

members know what I’m going to be leading up to. So with leave, Mr. Speaker, I will read the 

amendment right now. The amendment goes as follows: that all words after the word ‘action’ in the first 

line be deleted and that the following be substituted therefor. And if the amendment is accepted, Mr. 

Speaker, the motion would then read: 

 

That this Assembly regrets the action of Mr. Speaker in permitting the taking of still and motion 

pictures from the public galleries on opening day without authority from the Legislative 

Assembly and directs, Mr. Speaker, to disclose to the Assembly — 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I find the motion out of order and I refer the hon. member for Lakeview to 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms fourth edition 1958 on page 62, citation 72 ‘the Speaker’s 

actions cannot be criticized incidentally in debate or upon any form of proceeding except a substantive 

motion’ and I will tell the member to withdraw what he has said with regard to an alleged amendment he 

is moving to the motion. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, you put me in the position obviously where I have to withdraw and 

because you put me in the position, I withdraw. You have requested me to withdraw a motion or an 

amendment to a motion which in my view is not in any way critical of you and if you feel that way, Mr. 

Speaker, then obviously I must withdraw to 



 

April 25, 1978 

1928 

 

keep my position in this Assembly and to speak to this particular motion. 

 

What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that let’s go back to the day that this matter arose. Mr. Speaker came 

into this Assembly and he read a statement. Now I understand that the member for Regina Wascana had 

been approached by you and advised that a certain telephone call had happened and that you were 

looking into the matter. You read a statement, and I think all of us on this side were quite prepared to 

accept the statement. We didn’t know what it was about but immediately upon that statement being 

given within minutes, the member for Regina Rosemont stopped moving a motion, a motion dealing 

with the facts that you put out in your statement. A motion that was not hand written, a motion that 

wasn’t sort of put out on the spur of the moment, but a motion was typed dealing directly with the matter 

you raised in this Assembly. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a coincidence which we believe just did not 

happen. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I am going to caution the member again and I am not going to caution the 

member any more. This is the last time I am going to caution the member for Lakeview. 

 

What the member for Lakeview is saying is quite clearly the citation that I have made to him. It is in 

contradiction of the citation I have made to a member from Beauchesne’s (Parliamentary Procedures). It 

is not my citation; it is a citation developed over years and years in this jurisdiction and in other 

jurisdictions and it is used by the members of the House for their own protection and for the protection 

of the Chair. The words that the member for Lakeview is saying are in contradiction of that and I will 

not allow the member for Lakeview to continue in that vein. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, the vein on which I have been continuing is not critical of you. I 

simply said there was a coincidence; I said nothing about your office. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The member is now debating my ruling. The member is not permitted to 

debate the Speaker’s ruling and that is quite clear because I cited it the other day in a ruling I gave 

before the Assembly. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Let me go on, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker’s statement indicated there was a phone 

call or some communication to you. Now, a motion followed after your statement. We are now debating 

that motion before this Assembly. 

 

In order for us to properly debate that motion, Mr. Speaker, I suggest we have to have in our possession 

all of the information surrounding the motion, surrounding your statement. I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that we want to know who phoned you. We want to know the date such a phone call was made. 

We want to know, Mr. Speaker, and I hope the answer will be very, very simple, a ‘no’ answer, whether 

there was any communication between the member for Rosemont and Mr. Speaker in Mr. Speaker’s 

office. We want to know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not there was any communication between you and 

other members of the Assembly. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I will ask the member to give me a moment or two… 

 

Order. I have repeatedly warned the member for Regina Lakeview about the comments and I made the 

citation that was necessary for me to cite at this time in order to support the ruling. I refer the member to 

Rule No. 25 in our rule book and it says. Subsection (2) on 25. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1929 

 

Mr. Speaker, or the Chairman, after having called the attention of the Assembly of the 

Committee to the conduct of a member who persists in irrelevance or tedious repetition, either of 

his own argument or the arguments using by other members in debate, may direct him to 

discontinue his speech and if the member continues to speak Mr. Speaker shall name him, or if in 

Committee, the Chairman shall report him to the Assembly. 

 

Now I want to warn the member that he has been repeatedly warned about linking the Chair in any way 

whatsoever to his remarks and I have given him the citation. I think I have given the member all kinds of 

warnings and opportunities to withdraw those kinds of remarks. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to accept your ruling. Obviously I am unable to say 

anything about yourself or the Chair, and of course when I say yourself I do not mean personally. I mean 

the office that you hold. 

 

Let me then, if I cannot talk about that particular incident, talk about, again, the motion. Mr. Speaker, for 

us to properly debate the motion, I have to move an amendment. I am going to move the amendment, 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you to let me move it; if you find it to be out of order, that is your decision. I will 

move, Mr. Speaker, an amendment to the motion by the member for Regina Rosemont: 

 

That all words after the word ‘Assembly’ in the first line be deleted and the following be 

substituted therefore, 

 

And directs Mr. Speaker to disclose to the Assembly: 

 

(a) the name of the person who brought to Mr. Speaker’s attention, the fact that the member for 

Regina Wascana printed and distributed a pamphlet containing a picture of the member taken 

within the Assembly; 

 

(b) the date the pamphlet was brought to Mr. Speaker’s attention; 

 

(c) the date and nature of all conversations, if any, between Mr. Speaker and the hon. member for 

Regina Rosemont regarding the pamphlet which resulted in the hon. member for Rosemont 

introducing a motion immediately following Mr. Speaker bring the matter to the attention of the 

Assembly; 

 

(d) the nature of all conversations, if any, between Mr. Speaker and other hon. members 

regarding the pamphlet: 

 

(e) an explanation by Mr. Speaker for his actions in permitting still and motion pictures to be 

taken from the public galleries on opening day without authority of the Assembly and in 

contravention of the established practice of the Assembly. 

 

I so move, seconded by Mr. Merchant. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): —Mr. Speaker, on a point of order… 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What is your point of order? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, my point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that the proposed 



 

April 25, 1978 

1930 

 

amendment must surely be out of order . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, my argument is that it must be out of order, clearly on the basis of 

the recitations that your Honour has given to the House already about bringing the Speaker into the 

source of the debate directly or indirectly. I will close my argument if your Honour allows the 

amendment. 

 

Presumably, the debate on the main motion and on the amendment would continue concurrently and one 

can only but imagine what the natural direction of the debate would flow from that point of view and I 

think, flying clearly in the face of the dictates and the precedent of Beauchesne and May and every 

parliamentary practice going, so I argue, Mr. Speaker, that it must be out of order. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Clearly the amendment, Mr. Speaker, does not in any way hold you to ridicule, 

contempt and so on. It simply asks for information. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I am going to declare the amendment offered by the member for Regina 

Lakeview out of order and the basis on which I declare the amendment out of order is the citation which 

previously cited from Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, 1958, Page 62, 

Citation 72: 

 

(1) The Speaker’s actions cannot be criticized incidentally in debate or upon any form of 

proceeding except a substantive motion. 

 

An amendment to a motion is not a substantive motion; therefore it is out of order. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address myself to this motion at some length. 

 

First let me refer to the words that you used when you brought the matter to the attention of the House, 

followed very precipitously by the motion. The operative words, Mr. Speaker, that you used were: 

 

The appearance of this picture (etc.) is an embarrassment to me because I had, prior to this time, 

denied a member of another caucus a request to have his picture taken working at his desk to this 

Chamber. 

 

In the sense, Mr. Speaker, that it may have caused some embarrassment to you for that reason, I did not 

seek to cause you any embarrassment and said so to you in your private office. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that had the matter been handled in the way that Mr. Speaker though it should have been handled 

when you brought the matter to the attention of the House, it would have ended there. Indeed it would be 

clear to anyone on a fair reading of what Mr. Speaker said, that Mr. Speaker did not consider the matter 

to be a particularly serious breech of the practice. 

 

Of course, as members will know, very likely half the members of this assembly did not know whether 

that was the practice or not, prior to Mr. Speaker rising to make comments that you made that day. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1931 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very important that members remember that it is not contrary to the rules 

but contrary to what you described as the practice. I also think it is important that members remember 

that in that self same statement you said that it was up to the House to have control over the use of 

photographs and the taking of photographs, though I noticed, that, Mr. Speaker, in exactly the same 

statement admittedly that you had allowed photographs to be taken on that opening day without, as far 

as I know, any authority or authorization from the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what could be more natural, I suspect, in the minds of the public than to see a photograph 

of a member of the Legislature, a member of the Legislature who tends to be at this desk a fair amount, 

actually at his desk. Indeed, I noticed that even the member from the national house, from Regina West, 

chose to have picture taken of himself at his desk. Of course, Mr. Speaker, he chose to have the picture 

taken that depicts that he is a thousand miles down away from Mr. Speaker, at the very back of the 

House and nobody was there. He looked liked he showed up on a Sunday and perhaps had the wrong 

day. But even, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina West, with the little political experience that he may 

have, realized that it was natural for people to see him working at his desk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also suggest to you in relation to this part of my remarks that I don’t know how I would 

have had any way of particularly knowing that you would have found some embarrassment because you 

had previously denied to some Conservative the right to have his picture. Well, Mr. Speaker, indicated 

to me in our private conversation that is was Conservative. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think the member is attempting to drag the Speaker into this. I did 

no such thing to the member in private. I said a member of another caucus, exactly as I said in the 

statement. I would prefer if the member would keep me out of his debate for whatever reasons he is 

bringing me into it. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — It is very difficult, Mr. Speaker, to keep you out of the debate when you so 

deliberately . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I will ask the member to withdraw that statement because he is 

criticizing the chair. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — I withdraw that statement. Mr. Speaker, it seemed to us, no small coincidence, 

that the motion followed so quickly. I am satisfied, perhaps, that it was a coincidence I suspect, 

however, that for members of the public bearing in mind, as I am sure they do, that you are not only an 

NDP member of this Legislature, but also a former Cabinet Minister, that one motion following upon the 

other . . . 

 

MR. ALLEN: — Order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Are denying that he is a former Cabinet Minister? I see, I see. Well if you 

choose to deny that he is a former Cabinet Minister that is up to you. I thought he was a former Cabinet 

Minister. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The subject matter before this House is a resolution which was tabled in the 

House before and it is this: 



 

April 25, 1978 

1932 

 

That this Assembly regrets the action of the Member from Regina Wascana in printing and 

distributing a leaflet containing a picture of that Member taken within the Assembly in 

contravention of the rules of the Assembly and orders the Member for Regina Wascana to return 

to all remaining copies of said leaflet to Mr. Speaker forthwith and to apologize to the Assembly. 

 

That is the subject matter of the question and if the Member for Wascana insists on discussing other 

matters and not the subject matter of the motion before the House then I am going to have to rule him 

out of order. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, when I was addressing to myself to actions that surrounded the 

taking of that photograph and things that were said and done on that day, is that not germane? Now if 

Mr. Speaker finds that what I was saying . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, the member is now criticizing my ruling. I did not say anything about what 

the member was saying now. I was making the point of order with regard to the statement the member 

just made and the record will show that the member was discussing something that was not in the 

motion. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, when I was, when I sat down, I was discussing the perceptions 

that people in the public will have of this particular motion and the perceptions that people in the public 

will have as a result of what I am sure will be . . . oh, you will decide everything. 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Let the public decide. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Yes, I will and I also suggest to members of this House what the public will 

think when you use your steam roller majority. And I have the full right and will exercise that right to 

philosophize, if you like, about what I think the public will think and what the public thinks now of the 

way you constantly use your power as steam roller power in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the day in question members will recall, there were, I would say, 20 to 25 various 

people in the public galleries, in the three galleries, taking photographs of one sort or another, 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Not when this picture as taken. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — How do you know when that picture was taken? There were people taking 

photographs with lights; there were people taking photographs in all of the galleries — members of the 

public. I estimated that there were, I don’t know, 20 or 25 people taking photographs. 

 

One of the things, I suspect, that members would be interested in knowing is whether any or all of those 

photographers were authorized to take the photographs that they were taking. It certainly gave the 

appearance, Mr. Speaker, that for whatever reason on that day, all photographs were allowed. It was 

permissible for whatever reasons on that day to have the various photographs taken. Indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, may recall a conversation with the hon. member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) after that day, 

when the hon. member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) after that day, when the hon. member for Lakeview 

said in essence to Mr. Speaker, as the person presumably in charge of the House, what happened today 

that so many photographs were taken and that so many people were taking photographs in the House? 



 

April 25, 1978 

1933 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is for that reason that this party, at least, thought it would be of interest to members to 

know who the matter came to the attention first, of the House, and how the matter first came to the 

attention of Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague for Regina Lakeview . . . 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Certainly wasn’t on opening day. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — It was on opening day. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — It was on opening day? 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — It was on opening day, or it was on Budget day. That was opening day, the 

same day. It was the same day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps we should break off into little committees to discuss the day, eulogy day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Regina Lakeview began to discuss the motivation for moving this 

motion and I think that members, before they decide how they will cast their vote on this motion, should 

consider the motivation. I suggest to you that the whole thing is a little contorted play of political games 

playing. We do a whole, almost performance, in this House. 

 

I heard Mr. Speaker say the other day, of himself, that he holds some near quasi judicial function. We, as 

members, quite rightly treat Mr. Speaker with all sorts of deference of one sort of another, but as I was 

saying earlier, nobody — and I suggest no member of this House — ever forgets that Mr. Speaker, is, 

himself, an elected politician elected to one party and facing re-election in one year. We talk, Mr. 

Speaker, about members’ privileges and the member for Rosemont raised this matter as a matter of his 

privileges, as though he takes offence. And that is the reason, he says, that he raised the matter. 

 

I ask the members of the House whether that is very likely to be believed. My colleague behind me talks 

about him as the Assembly tattletale. Twice in three years that member has appeared in print. That is the 

kind of service he gives to Rosemont. Twice in three years he has been reported as even being a member 

of this House. Once making an accusation against the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) and 

now making an accusation against me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what purpose . . . yes, the highlight of what may be a short career. What purpose I ask, Mr. 

Speaker, would be the motivation for presenting this motion to the House? What purpose, indeed, is the 

motivation for a series of political gainsmanship that we’ve seen from members opposite against this 

party and against the Conservative Party. In this case, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s because the hon. 

member for Rosemont has some dream of growing into a political hatchet man. He worked as a political 

hireling, that was his job, he was a political hireling and then when he got elected he couldn’t remember 

that now he had constituents to represent and matters of importance to deal with and he can’t seem to 

remember that now he shares in part the responsibility of this province. Instead his aim is to go on being 

a political hatchet man that he was when he took money from a political party to do the bidding of that 

political party. It’s quite an aim in life to be a political hatchet man. I say to the hon. member that as 

long as he 



 

April 25, 1978 

1934 

 

thinks of himself as nothing more than that political hireling, as long as he is incapable of raising his 

perception of himself then no one in public and no one in this House is going to raise their perception of 

him either. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, whatever motivation the resident Legislative tattletale may have had in bringing up 

this matter, what about the merits of the hurt to the House. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that you will seldom 

see a matter brought before you that grasps more furtively almost at trying to make a mountain out of a 

molehill. The pamphlet doesn’t even say that it is taken in the Legislature. It’s a picture that the public 

would say, what could be more natural than to have a photograph of the person doing the job that we 

elected him to do. Yet, members opposite, Mr. Speaker, would drag that down like stinky little alley cats 

down into the gutter where they can deal with it. It’s sort of a boring and stupid motion. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what about the motion itself. You know, I think members will want to think about 

the motion. Some members may want to think about the motion before you cast your vote in the flat 

political way that I am sure you will. Well, first, Mr. Speaker, the motion in the fourth line says, ‘in 

contravention of the rules.’ Well, of course, it’s not in contravention of the rules. I notice that you, Mr. 

Speaker, were in no great rush to spring to your feet to correct that but it is not in contravention of the . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I will ask the member for Wascana to retract that statement about the Speaker 

springing to the defence of the member for Regina Rosemont. Order! I will ask the member for Wascana 

to retract the remarks that are on the record, that he just put on the record. Order, order! I will cite the 

citation: 

 

The Speaker’s action cannot be criticized incidentally in debate or upon any form of proceeding 

except a substantive motion. 

 

The member was criticizing the Speaker’s actions or lack of actions and I will ask the member to 

immediately withdraw that statement that he made. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will hear from the member for Wascana. The record clearly shows what 

he said. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, having given an example of what I mean by springing to your 

feet, I ask you what you want me to withdraw and I’ll repeat what I said . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If the member wishes I will get the record and I will make a statement in the 

House and the member can make the withdrawal then. Otherwise he can make the withdrawal right now. 

All right, I’ll check the record and the member will make the appropriate move then. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — I will withdraw at that time, Mr. Speaker, anything that I am directed to 

withdraw. But I say to Mr. Speaker that I did not accuse Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The member may go on with his statement. He may not deal with the point of 

order now because I have already said I will look into the matter. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I was commenting on the fact that the motion reads, ‘in 

contravention of the rules’, and clearly this is not in contravention of the rules and I think that’s 

important for hon. members to remember. As I said earlier, it may well 



 

April 25, 1978 

1935 

 

be in contravention of a practice but it is not a practice that I suggest all hon. members were even 

familiar with, never mind knowing well enough not to fall foul of on a day when members were blinking 

from cameras going off in all of the galleries. 

 

Now, the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is the request that all of the pamphlets be returned. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, fortunately in Regina East we have a great surplus of workers. We have good pamphlets and 

we have a lot of workers and I’m afraid that all of the pamphlets have been distributed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared just out of kindness and charity to the hon. member for Rosemont to 

give him some maps and lists where all of the pamphlets are because I can give him directions where he 

can go up and down the alley ways and to and from all the houses, about 26,000 of them and he can get 

all the pamphlets back. You know, I say to the hon. member, I’ll bet a lot of them were in the garbage 

can until this stupid motion came and probably most of them have been retrieved and are better off than 

they ever were then, much better off then. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I in the spirit of brotherly love I’m even prepared to knock on some doors with the 

hon. member for Rosemont in his attempt to recover these pamphlets provided he asks for the pamphlets 

and I get to give the political speech. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier I’m sure that members opposite when this matter is finally resolved, 

will use their majority to pass whatever motion they decide. I some suppose of their supporters will be 

stupid enough to think somehow they scored some kind of a victory, but surely those supporters are 

scoring a very hollow victory. They think that in some way the little picky misinterpretation and twisting 

of these rules will have some effect on the outcome in Regina East, because people who are apt to see 

that I should be elected in Regina East are more apt to think I should be elected in Regina East if that 

crew decide that they should go out on some personal attack and then get at me. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as this election approaches provincially, you watch because in the next year people 

will be watching you and judging this kind of stupid attack and they will watch the kind of things you 

have been doing in the last year because Mr. Speaker, I say to you that this motion taken with the half 

dozen similar kinds of motions that have come before this House in the last year or so, the motions, Mr. 

Speaker, which, with respect, have often times not by your intention embroiled you in things which you 

should not have been embroiled. Those kinds of motions and those kinds of attacks and ignoring the 

things that this province should be thinking about those kinds of things are doing more to demonstrate 

the NDP as tired old government and all of their policies and all of the stupid legislation they bring 

forward. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Everything in this House need not be political. Everything that members 

opposite in the government do need not be motivated by the kind of cheap politics that they demonstrate 

with this motion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry that you feel that the amendment is out of order, sorry, because there is 

further information that we would have said the public is entitled to have before they can judge the 

conduct in this case, before they can judge whether showing a member doing what he does 



 

April 25, 1978 

1936 

 

for the public, speaks in this House, represents them in this House and perhaps showing the member for 

Rosemont doing what he does for the money he gets from the public and then he acts like a political 

hatchet man. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the public would have been interested to compare those two things. 

The public would have been interested to have the information to decide but, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

the public isn’t going to get that information because like the great steamroller that it is now and won’t 

be after June of next year, like the great steamroller that it is now, members opposite will use their 

majority to pass whatever they like, whether it’s clearly wrong because it says rules, or clearly stupid 

because it invites return of a delivered pamphlet. 

 

I repeat that I apologize in the sense that I may have caused you some embarrassment. I think that it’s 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite didn’t have the good sense to leave the matter as Mr. 

Speaker put it, to leave the matter in the gentler hues, the gentler tones that Mr. Speaker used in saying 

that you had been embarrassed and in explaining how you came to be embarrassed. It’s unfortunate that 

members opposite always decide, always think they can take anything, twist and distort it into some 

great political victory. You know, you don’t win elections scoring little petty political victories, you win 

elections giving good government and I know that would be harder for you and I know you think you 

can eke it out with the little petty victories, but it won’t wash. You haven’t been washing, it won’t wash 

in Regina East and it won’t wash in June of 1979 when you next go to the polls. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address some very few comments on this matter. I 

had some doubt in my mind until I heard the last speech. I may say I found it outrageous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I find it outrageous because I hear the suggestion coming from the wounded, 

from the member for Wascana who is wounded by these comments. I thought I heard the member for 

Wascana suggesting that that picture was taken on budget Day. On a day when the place was full of 

people, on a day when there was — I did not see cameras going off but they may have been. I, Mr. 

Speaker, took a look at the picture and it seems to me that Budget Day was March 7 . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I know. I see the comments on Page 10 of March 6. The member for Wascana was 

suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that the picture was taken when the Assembly was full of visitors, when the 

Assembly was full of people taking pictures. That wasn’t in fact what happened, as the member well 

knows. That picture was not taken when this chamber was full of people with cameras, I noticed that 

when I saw the picture, because there are no chairs in the picture. In any case, the member did not speak 

on Budget Day. He spoke on March 6, the opening day. On that day the place was virtually deserted . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . If I hear one more person get up and suggest that that picture was taken on 

Budget Day when the place was full of people, I am going to start calling them a liar. Because it was not 

taken when the place was full of people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is actually irrelevant when it was taken because no one, by this motion, has condemned 

some innocent person who may have taken a picture not knowing the rules. What we are suggesting by 

this motion is, that it is most improper of the member for Wascana to use the picture; never mind when 

it was taken, The members of the public may not know whether or not they should take a picture on 

Budget day . . . 

 

MR. CAMERON: — On opening day! 



 

April 25, 1978 

1937 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I am using the words of the member for Wascana. I ask to be excused if I 

listened to the member for Wascana, because that is where my information came from as to when he 

thought it was taken. He said he thought it was taken when the Chamber was full of people and it 

wasn’t. It was taken on a day when this Chamber was virtually deserted. Mr. Speaker, I have hoped that 

we would hear the member for Wascana get up and say he wasn’t aware, he wasn’t familiar with the 

rules, he wasn’t aware it was against the rules to use the picture, and that he wouldn’t use the pamphlets 

and he wouldn’t use the picture again. Of course we haven’t heard that, I suppose in part because the 

member for Wascana has not got the kind of humility to admit that he made a mistake. Instead having no 

defence, the hon. member for Wascana goes on the offensive; tried to attack the Speaker when not 

blunted by the rules of the House, not the practice, but the rules of the House, and then went on to attack 

the member for Rosemont. That is an easy way to argue, Mr. Speaker. It is easy to attack the person 

rather than his idea. It is very easy to attack . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He is suggesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is proper for a member who knows the rules to flagrantly disregard them. I had hoped, 

Mr. Speaker, that the member would get up and say that he did not know any better, he would apologize, 

he would invite us all to his bonfire for the pamphlets he would not use. I noted, Mr. Speaker, that he 

never suggested that those pamphlets were all handed out before he knew it was a violation of the rules. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Yes they were. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well you did not say that on your feet, when it could have gone in the 

record. I would also liked to have heard from the member for Wascana an undertaking that that picture 

would not be used again. I did not hear that in his speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not want to drag into this debate a lot of extraneous material . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Don’t press me for it, (laughter) I don’t want to drag into this debate a lot of other 

matters that have irritated me. I just want to say to this House that I am bothered by the flagrant 

disregard of the rules which we have seen. 

 

At the last session, Mr. Speaker, it was the members of the Conservative Party and I have to say, in 

deference to the members of the Conservative Party, they seemed to have cleaned up their act this 

session They are much better behaved this session. I say to the member for Prince Albert that they are a 

little closer to deserving the mantle of John Diefenbaker than they were at the last session. Now we 

seem to see the same sort of flagrant disregard of the rules from the members of the Liberal Party, of the 

practice of the House, Mr. Speaker, the member for Wascana suggested that somehow this was being 

done in the House of Commons. I do not know the rules or the practice of the House of Commons. I saw 

one and it was Mr. Benjamin’s and the member was right, I suspect it was taken on a Sunday. I suspect 

it was taken on a day when the House was not in session. That is something very different than using 

apparently a picture of the member when the House is in session. 



 

April 25, 1978 

1938 

 

Mr. Speaker, it isn’t the rules that make a society civilized, it is the respect for those rules. I am 

bothered, as I was during the last session, when I saw a lack of respect from the members of the 

Conservative party. I am equally bothered when I see the members in the Liberal party show such a 

flagrant disregard for the rules of this House as to take a picture, apparently knowing it was wrong. He 

never said to the House that he though he had the right to use that picture, distributing all the pamphlets, 

then coming and attacking first yourself, Mr. Speaker, then the member for Rosemont. Mr. Speaker, I 

support the motion because I believe that the members of this House have to respect the rules. If we 

don’t respect the rules, basically we don’t respect the House. I say to the member for Wascana when he 

knowingly disregards the rules and takes those pictures and uses them, my guess is that other members 

of the House might also use pictures of themselves in here if it were allowed. My guess is the member 

for Wascana isn’t the only one who wants to do it. If they disregard the rules, Mr. Speaker, it seems to 

me they disrespect the House and that’s what I find objectionable in the conduct from the member for 

Wascana. 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments in regard to this motion .I don’t want 

to take too much time. I think that what we are engaged in this afternoon is what has become, 

unfortunately in the last year and a half in this Legislature, an emphasis more on what political points we 

can score rather than what our responsibility is as MLAs in this Chamber. Here we are wasting a couple 

of hours on a private member’s day for something really that I don’t think should have been brought up 

in the first place. First of all, let me say that there has been no rule whatsoever broken. This was 

mentioned in the motion. I looked through Beauchesne. I looked through our little green book. I could 

find nowhere in either of the records of rules by which we guide ourselves in this Assembly, as to what 

rule has been broken. There has been no rule broken. 

 

What has happened is that a practice which over the years has been a custom in this House, has been put 

into question. Why was that practice there? Why is no one allowed to take pictures in the galleries? The 

reason why most members of this Assembly have not allowed those pictures to be taken is for the fear 

that a picture may be taken by an opponent and used in a campaign against that particular member. 

That’s basically the reason for the stipulation that is there, not a rule but an agreement by members in 

this House. 

 

What has happened in this case here? I could certainly see us as MLAs getting excited about someone 

taking a picture in the gallery, for example, if a member has taken a picture of Mr. Merchant and showed 

him a very difficult way that would be embarrassing to his constituents, and then was using that 

particular picture because of political gain out on the hustings. That, Mr. Speaker, and members of this 

Assembly, I think is something that we should get ourselves involved in and concerned about. But that’s 

not the case. That’s not the case. A member has taken the use of a picture of himself and he himself is 

using that particular picture in the campaign and throughout the province. So that particular picture is 

not breaking any kind of an agreement or stipulation or . . . not a rule but a feeling that this House has in 

regard to protect other members. He is using it of himself, and I might mention as well, that I am sure 

that he has received the agreement from the member for Shaunavon, agreement from the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to also appear in that picture. I am sure that if those two members were 

aggrieved by that particular picture being in that paper, they 



 

April 25, 1978 

1939 

 

would have possibly taken strong exception to it and might have raised a motion similar to the one from 

Mr. Allen, or had stood up in this debate and spoken in support of this particular motion. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have more important things to do than to talk about something as ridiculous as this. 

Another point is that particular day, the opening day of the Legislature, not Budget Day, the opening day 

of the Legislature is when that particular picture was taken. As was said, there were about 25 camera in 

the galleries that particular day. What position would I be in as a member if my picture was taken that 

particular day and it appeared in the Leader Post? I am sure that there were some pictures that appeared 

in the various papers throughout the province on opening day. What would have happened then if I 

would have used a picture that appeared in the Leader Post in one of my campaign pamphlets? Would I 

be dragged before this Assembly as Mr. Merchant is today? Would I be ridiculed by all members of this 

House, not for breaking a rule, but because I happened to take a picture that appeared somewhere else 

and used it in campaign material? This just shows how ridiculous this entire debate is and how 

ridiculous that motion is. No member’s privacy or no member’s honor has been hurt by that particular 

picture being used. Had it been used in regard to what all of us hold as the reason why we do not like to 

see pictures in the gallery, I would have no objection to supporting this particular motion. But because 

of the light in which it is presented, because of the fact that there really is no rule that has been broken 

and I defy the next speaker from the government side of the House to quote to me what rule has been 

broken. I think we’re wasting an awful lot of the taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN ((Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some comments about this 

at some future time and beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 10 
 

Malone Wiebe Merchant 

Penner Cameron Anderson 

Stodalka McMillan Nelson (As-Gr) 

Clifford 

 

NAYS — 30 
 

Blakeney Thibault Bowerman 

Smishek Romanow Messer 

Snyder Byers Baker 

Robbins MacMurchy Mostoway 

Banda Whelan Kaeding 

Kwasnica Dyck McNeill 

MacAuley Feschuk Rolfes 

Tchorzewski Shillington Vickar 

Skoberg Allen Koskie 

Johnson Thompson Lusney 

 



 

April 25, 1978 

1940 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — I’m sure the members opposite will appreciate how flattered I am at your vocal 

request for my continuance in this debate. I know that if you hang on the edge of your seats waiting for 

my every word and it certainly doesn’t surprise me that you could have left the situation pass for a few 

days until I might better prepare myself. Once again, I thank you for that and it is as well a pleasure to 

respond to all those happy smiling faces across the way. I don’t particularly know what went on in your 

caucus lounge while the bells were ringing but whether you all became diseased emotionally or 

physically, I don’t know. Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I never considered this supposed breach of 

practice to be very serious. As a matter of fact, when I initially saw the pamphlet after it was brought to 

my attention by the Speaker and the member for Regina Rosemont, I must say I was rather impressed 

with the picture of the member for Regina Wascana. It’s a picture that I’m sure many of the 

backbenchers on that side of the House would never have the opportunity to have taken . . . because so 

few of the members participate in debates in this Legislature. And I’m sure if the member for Rosemont 

as a result of this debate ever decided he’d like his photo snapped in the Legislature that he indeed, 

would have to get a quick camera man and in fact, I’m sure the member would have to get a touch-up 

artist to remove the tears that are so generally on his face when he rises in his chair and to fix up the 

scowl that is generally on his face when he gets up to make these hard-hitting points such as the motion 

that he has put on the blues. I would like to ask members of the legislature as well, it is no surprise to me 

that members on that side of the House only come to their sense on rare occasions. It is like a bolt of 

lightening, you can be expected to be hit by it once or twice in your lifetime if you stand under a tree in 

a thunderstorm all the time. It is no surprise to me that members on that side of the House have only 

finally realized that, in fact, they are having photographs taken of members of the legislature on more 

than one occasion. I would bring to the attention, well I am glad to see that you have all finally 

awakened, I was hoping that we wouldn’t have to wait until seven o’clock this evening to get your 

eyelids open and your attention back in this legislature. The bells woke them perhaps and that is an 

encouraging sign because many, many times previously that has failed to do the trick. 

 

I would like to point out to members of this Legislature that while we are on the midst, at least the 

government is in the midst of trying to politically steamroller one member of this Legislature with this 

39 vote majority or 38, I guess we shouldn’t count the Speaker in this attack. I wonder if they wouldn’t 

consider approaching some of the other people that have been involved in picture-taking sessions, sordid 

picture-taking sessions of this Legislative Assembly while members were in their seats. I refer 

specifically to the member for Saskatoon Eastview who has been badly done by, by members of the 

photographic gallery in Saskatchewan when he, in fact, and I might add, mind you at this time I am 

much younger and sprightlier looking than the member for Estevan. 

 

In 1975, November 13 opening up the Legislature when people in Saskatchewan, probably professional 

photographers, and I am sorry to say, then certainly those members that were absent on that day can be 

exonerated from any guilt associated with having your picture taken while you are in your seats. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Legislative Assembly have on many occasions previously had their 

pictures taken while they have been in their seats, pictures that have honestly been shown in public 

publications. Circulations that have not only gone to my seat and your 



 

April 25, 1978 

1941 

 

seat but the seats of the member for Rosemont, etc. 

 

I would like to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, a situation which I find even more horrifying. That 

undoubtedly, without your knowledge, someone has snapped your picture at your desk in this 

Legislature and is currently handing that picture out down at the front desk in this Legislative Assembly 

office and I know that those few members on that side of the House who are currently awake will find 

this situation just as bad as the situation that surrounds the member for Wascana. I am not sure if there is 

a of authority needed. There seems to be some serious question about what exactly the practice is with 

respect to taking pictures in this Legislature. According to the Speaker, whose rule this side of the House 

will never challenge, there is no such thing as a rule preventing members of the Legislature from having 

their pictures taken in their seats. The Speaker said that decision is to be made by the Legislature as the 

whole. I am sure no one was breaking the rule when they snapped the Speaker’s picture at his chair in 

this Legislative Assembly. The Speaker’s office promptly had that picture blown up into a calendar to be 

handed out at the front desk . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would remind the member that that is not the subject that is before the 

House for discussion at this time. I would also remind the member that the Speaker’s actions cannot be 

criticized, incidentally in debate, or on any form of proceeding, except a substantive motion. I would ask 

the member to acknowledge that and abide by that particular rule. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 


