



















































Hansard: March 30, 1978


833 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 
 

March 30, 1978 

EVENING SESSION 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Department of Health 
 

Vote 32 
 

Item 1 continued 
 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): — Mr. Minister, at 5:00 o’clock I was just beginning to 

make some comments about the comments made by the Leader of the Conservative Party and the 

resolution which he had just moved which seemed somewhat unclear. I mentioned before we left for 

supper that in the resolution, no mention was made by the Leader of the Conservative Party about what 

indeed he was seeking in that he said that the consideration of the estimates of the Department of Health 

should not be proceeded with until the financial statements or the interim financial statements were 

tabled in this House. Well he in no way indicated what he meant by interim financial statements and 

therefore all we can conclude and all that anybody can conclude is that his only intention in moving that 

resolution was to take up more time of this House and stall for reasons that are well known by people in 

this Legislature. 

 

Let me just give you an example of the kinds of things that have been happening since we began the 

consideration of these estimates. Yesterday, the Leader of the Conservative Party came into the House, 

used some of his strange arithmetic that he is so well reputed for and he said move the motion that this 

Legislature not consider the Department of Health estimates with the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan report was tabled. Well, there was a debate and we outlined to him and his caucus and we outlined 

to the Liberal caucus how the fiscal year of the hospitals of Saskatchewan had been changed, how they 

had supported the change of the fiscal year so that some of the difficulties that used to exist between the 

fiscal year of the province and the fiscal year of the hospital could be rectified and done away with and 

then the Conservative Leader found that he was cornered. He had moved again too hastily without 

knowing what he was doing. The Legislature defeated that resolution because it was nonsense. 

 

Today, he asked for the financial and statistical information for the 1977 calendar year of the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. I gave him the assurance that I thought that indeed we could 

provide that information; not officially, it won’t be audited because the hospitals will not have their 

audited statements in until after the end of this fiscal year which is the end of this month. But we can 

provide that information and indeed will. 

 

Well, once again, the member for Nipawin found himself cornered because he found that he could not 

delay any longer, so he did not give up. Just before 5:00 o’clock when he ran out of words in his 

15-minute speech in trying to kill time, he moved another resolution asking for the interim financial 

statements. Once again whatever statements he was asking for no one knows, so clearly that’s an 

indication that once again all that he is wanting to do is stall for some more time. 

 

Now I have to ask, Mr. Chairman, what’s going on? I have to ask and I’m sure that other members in 

this House and I’m sure even some members of the Conservative caucus are asking what’s going on? 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

834 

 

 

Well, I want to say what I think is going on and I think it’s becoming very transparent. What is going on 

is that the Leader of the Conservative party and the member for Rosetown and the member for Estevan 

and the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake are trying to take away the attention from what the real 

issues are. They are trying to take away the attention of the people of Saskatchewan and this Legislature, 

from the kinds of things that the people are finding out about the Conservative Party and also trying to 

take away the attention from the kind of spectacle that they have made of themselves in this Legislature. 

 

Let me clarify first of all some mistakes that the member for Nipawin made in his remarks. We had a 

discussion today about the change in the fiscal year of Saskatchewan hospitals. He said and he asked – 

why change it for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and not change it for the Medical Care 

Insurance Commission? Well, that’s very clear. The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan provides 

funding for the hospitals so therefore it makes good sense to have the fiscal years of both at the same 

time. The Medical Care Insurance Commission does not provide payments at hospitals. It provides fees 

for physicians and optometrists and the medical profession in general. 

 

The member for Nipawin then proceeded to use his little games. He began to take a look at the 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission Annual Report 1977. He went to page 18 and he 

read some words. Simply because it said, Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan Community Health 

Associations, that somehow that had to mean that that was related to the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan appropriation. Indeed, it had nothing to do with it at all, Mr. Chairman, and he knew it. He 

knew it, but he was trying again to misinterpret what is in these reports and in the appropriations for two 

reasons. (1) To stall for time, again, and filibuster this Legislature and waste taxpayers’ money. (2) To 

try to mislead the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I noted with great interest his attack on community clinics. He, again, made that 

attack on the rights of people, on the rights of people to join together in a co-operative effort to provide a 

service for themselves as they do for the community clinics. That is on record and he used this 

misinterpretation of this information to do that. 

 

I want to say in this Legislature and put on the record, that this government and the New Democratic 

Party wholly supports the desire of people to set up community clinics. We always support the co-op 

movement in this province, which has helped to build this province. We will put every energy that we 

have in fighting the efforts by the Conservative Party, and even some of the Liberal members, in trying 

to destroy that co-op movement and the philosophy on which it was built. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Tory Party also tried another trick yesterday and he carried on again 

today. When I listened to the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) yesterday, I couldn’t help but think 

that he was, as I call it – a closet Social Creditor with his funny money approach to some things. Well, 

as I listened to the arithmetic of the member for Nipawin, I had to conclude that somehow he might even 

fit in that category, too. And from the rumors that we have been hearing, of late, it may mean that he is 

already looking for some other political party to run to. 

 

In that funny arithmetic that he used yesterday and again today, once again, there was 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

835 

 

an attempt made to try to mislead the people and mislead this Legislature on what the facts were. He 

estimated a salary increase of 11 per cent for this year. I don’t know where he gets his figures, where he 

gets the substance to make such a suggestion. It took what was the settlement last year and he began to 

try to swing it around to apply to this year. Presumably he took this 11 per cent increase in salaries for 

hospital workers by considering the ’77-’78 per cent increase and the cost of 3.7 per cent for the 

Co-operative Wage Study. Well, I want to correct some of the assumptions that he made and some of the 

misinformation that he provided in this House. 

 

First of all, the 3.7 per cent only applies to salary expense for the CUPE and SEIU employees, not all the 

hospital workers in Saskatchewan. The cost of implementing results of the study when applied against 

the total salaries and wages is actually 2 per cent, not 3.7 per cent. Because CUPE and SEIU employees 

represent approximately 60 per cent of all hospital employees. So total salary increases in 1977-78 

would, therefore, be about 10 per cent and not the bloated figures that he was using. 

 

I want to add one other thing for his clarification and for the clarification of the members of this House. 

The Co-operative Wage Study was fully funded in 1977-78 and, therefore, the allowance for salary 

increases in 1978-79 need only provide the results of the collective bargaining for the upcoming year. 

 

I found, with great interest, the kind of thing that was attempted here, yesterday, in that the Leader of the 

Conservative Party was trying to create a situation in this House that would interfere with the collective 

bargaining process that is now going on between the Saskatchewan Health Care Association and 

Saskatchewan workers. That is the basic reason why a specific amount is never stated that is allocated 

for salaries, because we don’t determine that precisely until the salary negotiations are complete. If we 

determined that, what would we be doing? We would be doing what the member for Nipawin wants 

done. We would be saying, you can do collective bargaining, but here are the limits and you aren’t going 

any further. 

 

He also used some comments about the increase in cost of non-salary items. He estimated that there 

would be an increase in cost of 15 per cent and he used SPC as an example. He neglected to mention 

that in the budget speech delivered by the Minister of Finance that SPC electrical rates this year will be 

frozen to no increase, and the maximum increase that will be allowed, if any is necessary for natural gas, 

is 8 per cent. Once again, he tries to use his own set of figures, rather than the ones that are the accurate 

ones. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, let me just touch on some of the other comments that were made. I said earlier, that 

there is in this Legislature, the most unfortunate kind of development that I ever could possibly imagine 

would happen in here. Certainly, when I ran for election in 1971, I did not think that kind of thing would 

be happening in the 1970s – and that is, the deliberate . . . 

 

Mr. Penner: — Didn’t think you’d ever win did you? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh yes I did. I was thinking I was going to win, that’s why I’m here – it’s the 

positive approach. (Inaudible interjection). The thing I am referring to, Mr. Chairman, is the deliberate 

attempt, not only to delay the people’s business of this Legislature for some political reasons, for some 

grab for power, for some hunger for power; the rest of the world and everything else of importance 

doesn’t matter. There are all kinds of examples and I won’t talk about them, because this may be 

somewhat off the 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

836 

 

subject. I could have talked about the filthy hospital debates which I stopped from talking about when 

you asked me to, Mr. Chairman. I could have talked about the attempt by the member to somehow 

influence the work of the Moore Committee, when he made his comments about asking the Minister of 

Social Services to resign a judicial committee. I could have talked about the attempt to use racial 

discrimination in the Pelly by-election by the Conservative Party and the Leader of the Conservative 

Party, and I could have talked about the constant attacks on the Public Service of Saskatchewan by the 

Conservatives and in this case, helped by the Liberals. Those are all examples of the kinds of things we 

have seen happening. It is an attempt to mislead the public. The reason why no one, Mr. Chairman, in 

spite of the things that the member from Nipawin talks about, the Conservatives won’t put in deterrent 

fees, and all these other things the Conservatives might or might not do, in spite of that I am saying that, 

it is a question of whether he can be believed, or whether his party can be believed. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the New Democratic Party and this government do not believe in deterrent fees. We do 

not believe in a health premium or a health tax, and it was this government that removed it in 

Saskatchewan, and it is this government and this party that are going to prevent it from coming back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The member for Nipawin says he suggested it. Well that’s great, that’s very 

interesting – he suggests it. He also said something else in his little speech. He said that none of his 

caucus, no Conservative, ever suggested there should be deterrent fees. Well, I want to say something 

about that. First of all I want to say, when I listened to him I thought of that little saying that someone 

once said, ‘Methinks that she protests too much’. Now, all I can conclude from that and ask is, what is 

he afraid of? Why does he protest so much? Why does he say, as it is quoted here in The Leader-Post of 

this morning, “Collver critical of Manitoba Progressive Conservatives”. That seems to be the kind of 

disunity of the Conservative Party across Canada that seems to be developing in the Conservative 

caucus in Saskatchewan (Inaudible interjection). I found that comment and that headline almost 

laughable, Mr. Chairman, and if it were not a serious thing that we were considering, I think it would 

have been laughable. Is he saying, when he says, “Collver critical of Manitoba PCs” he will tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that not one of them should vote for not one Conservative candidate in the 

forthcoming federal election? Because if he really means what he is saying about the Manitoba approach 

to health care, then surely he must object to the leader of the federal Conservative Party, Mr. Clark, who 

recently said that health insurance today encourages people to abuse the system by making unnecessary 

trips to doctors. Surely he would object to Mr. Clark saying that he will discourage what he sees as 

over-use, by establishing a system in his own words, and I quote: “To consider all or a portion of the 

doctor’s visit as taxable income for the patient.” In other words, the Conservative Party’s policy (and the 

leader enunciates it), the Conservative Party believes that anybody who went to see a doctor would take 

the cost that was paid for the doctor or the hospital and have it become a taxable item. That’s why 

nobody believes what the members opposite are saying. Now the member also said, Mr. Chairman, that 

none of his caucus have ever expressed any belief that there should be deterrent fees. Well, I want him 

to be reminded of something; I want him to be reminded of a certain Progressive Conservative 

Saskatchewan meeting in which Dennis Ham, the member for Swift Current, rose in the meeting and 

said that he would voice his personal support for reintroduction of deterrent fees. And then the member 

for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) . . . 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

837 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Say it again . . . 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh, he wants me to say it again. Well, this was Star-Phoenix, October 28, 1974. 

Dennis Ham, a candidate in Swift Current rose to voice “his personal support for reintroduction of 

deterrent fees” speaking as a Conservative, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) protests loudly that somehow the 

comments being made by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) are being misinterpreted. He 

says he never said that people would be glad to pay $10 a day to get into a hospital. Well I want to say 

that he did. He may deny it but the press knows it because they were here and people in the gallery know 

it because they were here and every member of this House who was here knows it because they heard it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Saskatoon Star-Phoenix March 16, 1977 said, “There are probably 

people in Saskatchewan right now who would pay $10 a day to get into a hospital” – unquote – member 

for Rosetown (Mr. Bailey). Who is going to believe them and who is going to believe the Leader of the 

Conservative Party when they try to enunciate that they don’t support deterrent fees? I don’t think 

anybody is going to believe them. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I could go on. The point I am trying to make with what I am saying is this; that it is 

not always and often not, what people say that makes a difference. It is not what is said, it is what is 

done after that, after what is said, that really makes a difference. It is not what is said, it is what is done 

after that, after what is said, that really makes a difference. You only have to look . . . (interjection) . . . 

I’ll get around to your party in a little while yet, too. Mr. Chairman, you only have to look at what has 

been happening across Canada to know what will happen in Saskatchewan if either the Liberals or the 

Conservatives were ever to form the next government again. You only have to look at the province of 

Ontario where they recently reduced taxes to mineral corporations. They reduced certain taxes to 

mineral corporations so that a mining company like INCO, which has laid off thousands of people, if it 

takes this ore out of Ontario and ships it out of the country for processing, it can deduct that cost as a tax 

deduction. You know why they did that? You know how they are paying for that, Mr. Chairman? They 

are paying for it by having the people of Ontario pay $528 a year for health premiums. Now if that’s 

Conservative justice then there are no people in this country who ought to have it perpetrated upon them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would just like to draw to the attention of the member that I think we 

had better try and get back as close as we can to this motion. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I admit that I may have strayed a little bit but I was 

trying to make a point and I was responding to the things that the member for Nipawin, the Leader of the 

Conservative Party was saying, that I am pointing out that what he says and what, in fact, really 

happens, are not the same thing. I think that’s an important thing to say in this Legislature because it is 

an important point that the people of Saskatchewan ought to know and which more and more of them 

are beginning to know and that is why they are so nervous. That’s why they are so paranoid 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

838 

 

every time we talk about the policy of the New Democratic Party in the government about deterrent fees 

and health premiums. We believe that health care ought to be available to everyone in the province, 

regardless of income, equally available to all, without penalizing people because they happen to become 

ill. That’s the policy of the New Democratic Party and this government and the actions that we have 

taken. The budget that we are providing in these estimates are an indication of that commitment. If you 

take the actions that are happening in other provinces you know that that’s not the commitment of any of 

the other parties. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, all I want to say about the resolution again, in conclusion is that that resolution 

ought to be defeated by this House. That resolution that the member has sponsored opposite does not say 

anything. It asks for something that is not available. It comes after the member has received an 

assurance that we will provide the 1977 information unaudited, because we don’t have the auditor’s 

statement from the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. In fact, Mr. Chairman, it’s a nuisance 

resolution and its only intent is to delay the proceedings of this House, and I think that’s a showing of 

contempt for this House and this Legislature ought to defeat it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I am sure that if you grant the same latitude in my remarks this evening, 

that you granted to the speak from 7 o’clock to 22 minutes after, which developed quite some interesting 

theories about Item 1 for the Department of Health estimates, I’m sure that the people of this province 

will know who is delaying the business of this Legislative Assembly. Now, Mr. Chairman, I would like 

to, because we did not mention, I did not, in the hurry to write that motion, I did not mention in that 

motion that the SHSP financial statements were . . . what I had intended to say . . . I would like to 

withdraw that motion, if I may and place a new one that includes SHSP or if you want to defeat that one 

. . . I’ll introduce it again after, if that’s what you want to do. I was trying to save time of the House. I’d 

be happy to introduce the motion if the members, Mr. Chairman, if you will allow me to withdraw that 

and replace it with one that mentions SHSP formally, I will do so. If not, we can go through the motions 

of that motion and introduce another one. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d like to inform the hon. member that he can only withdraw with the 

consent of the House. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I believe I asked the House to allow me to withdraw that motion in order to introduce 

another one. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I will ask the House if they give him consent to withdraw. 

 

Consent to withdraw motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and at the conclusion of my remarks this evening 

I am going to move that the estimates for the Department of Health, not now be proceeded with but 

stand until an interim financial statement for SHSP for the year ended December 31, 1977 with 

comparative figures for the year ended December 31, 1976, are tabled in this Legislature. Now, Mr. 

Chairman, I don’t know what it is that the Minister of Health has to hide in the SHSP financial 

statements. I don’t really understand what he’s trying to hide. Mr. Chairman, we would be happy to have 

him table the documents. Therefore, this motion should be acceptable. All we’re 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

839 

 

saying is we want the information in order to question the minister about the estimates for the future. 

Now, I don’t think that’s an unreasonable position to take. The minister says, we’ll table that 

information in the Legislature when we feel like it but in the meantime, pass the estimates for next year. 

That’s what he’s saying, Mr. Chairman. Because all this motion says is, that what the minister offered to 

us, the interim financial statement of the period for the 12 months which is comparative with the 

previous 12 months, will be tabled in the House enabling us, Mr. Chairman, to examine the situation as 

it relates to SHSP with some degree of accuracy from last year, and then be able to ask our questions in 

estimates with some degree of intelligence. It is difficult to ask questions of a minister, that (a) doesn’t 

have the answer and (b) doesn’t have the information before the Legislature. 

 

For example, the member for Saskatoon Centre says, ‘hogwash’. And he knows about that stuff. Mr. 

Chairman, last stuff, yesterday, in this Assembly, last night the minister said the assessment, the court 

study reflected 3.7 per cent. Those were his words – in his words the study was 3.7 per cent. Today, he 

counters that and he says it is now 2 per cent – the wages, Mr. Chairman, he further states that the 

assessment for last year for power and gas for example, that he knows he says that Sask Power have 

frozen their rates, but, Mr. Chairman, I would like to remind the minister that that doesn’t affect the 

expenditures of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association because what is reflected in the financial 

information of the Saskatchewan Hospital Association up until March 31, 1978, includes the rate for 

most of last year that was lower. So in other words, Mr. Chairman, the rate increase from last August or 

September when it was introduced is going to apply in 1978-79 and that rate increase was over 30 per 

cent and my assessment of 15 per cent was a very reasonable position to take – that it was a half of a 

year from last year that was on the old rate, and a half of a year from the coming year that is on the new 

rate. 

 

So the minister is trying again to get out of the reasonable position that states that there are going to be 

increases in expenditures for this coming year for the Saskatchewan hospitals. Now, Mr. Chairman, we 

are concerned about what the minister has allocated for this coming year. We have said that. We want to 

know how he made out last year during the first few months of his sojourn as a junior minister in that 

government – a minister who is brand new to the job. We would like to see some kind of results of this 

young man who has taken over the Department of Health – a department that spends over 25 per cent of 

the budget of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is a possibility, Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that the ministers and some of the younger ministers 

especially in the benches opposite, are attempting to put on a show for the people of Saskatchewan in 

this Legislature because of their leader’s obvious intention to run federally for his party. There is little 

question about that. Anyone, Mr. Chairman, anyone who attended the Alternatives Canada Conference 

in Banff as I did, with the Premier of Saskatchewan, knows full well that his intention is to present not 

the position of the people of Saskatchewan but some position that would be more rational in a federal 

party and in a federal party sense. 

 

(Inaudible interjection) 

 

Mr. Collver: — Oh no, no, no. I would much rather fight what we have got. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we believe very strongly that we have to have the information. The minister says he 

wants open government, Mr. Chairman. He says he doesn’t want to delay the proceedings of this 

Legislature, and, Mr. Chairman, neither do we, but we are 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

840 

 

elected by the people of the province of Saskatchewan to investigate the expenditures of the treasury 

benches. That’s our job and all of the new regulations that have been brought in by this government, Mr. 

Chairman, with no legislative review, with the kind of executive branch control of the government 

which has the NDP catch-up clause that says, if this law doesn’t apply we’ll pass an Order in Council 

and we’ll legislate anyway in the Cabinet. 

 

What little power we have left in this Legislature is to investigate the expenditures of the treasury 

benches, and the only way we can investigate the expenditures of the treasury benches . . . for the 

Attorney General’s benefit. 

 

(Inaudible interjection) 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well, I think he is going to vote for this motion now. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the only way we can investigate it is to have the information at our disposal. He wants to 

. . . I have heard him on many occasions, Mr. Chairman, when bills are introduced in this House with 

that lovely catch-up clause at the bottom that says, the treasury benches are sacrosanct; they can do 

anything that they want. In every bill that they have introduced it has this. I have heard him say that this 

is absolutely necessary for the improved efficiency. Then when we come before this Legislature and ask 

the Minister of Revenue, for example, well how is your department going to improve the deficiency, he 

says, it will – I assure you it will. It’s terrific – have faith. When we ask the Minister of Health, what are 

the estimates going to do – have faith; believe in us, we’re going to make reasonable settlements; we’re 

going to deal rationally and reasonably; we’re going to be very reasonable people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Prudent. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Prudent, yes, prudent. But, Mr. Chairman, no facts. He wants to deal in facts; he wants 

to deal in the way things are, but, Mr. Chairman, where is the way things are? We want the information. 

We have asked for the information; we have demanded the information. We have come before the 

members of this Legislature to say that in every other year when legislators were asked to examine the 

estimates of the Department of Health, the financial report for SHSP was available. In every other year, 

but this year it is not available. The minister says he will table it. We say, Mr. Chairman, that the 

ministers’ word is good, therefore, let us postpone any more examination of the Department of Health 

until such times as he tables the information and enables us to do our job. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I should like to move this motion. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS – 17 
 

Wiebe McMillan Ham 

MacDonald Clifford Berntson 

Penner Collver Lane (Sa-Su) 

Cameron Larter Wipf 

Anderson Bailey Katzman 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

841 

 

 

Stodalka Birkbeck  

 

NAYS – 27 
 

Thibault Whelan Shillington 

Romanow Kaeding Vickar 

Byers Kwasnica Skoberg 

Baker Dyck Nelson (Yktn) 

Matsalla McNeill Koskie 

Robbins Feschuk Johnson 

MacMurchy Faris Thompson 

Mostoway Rolfes Lusney 

Banda Tchorzewski Allen 

 

Mr. D.M. Ham (Swift Current): — I think it’s time that I go on record in this Assembly. Mr. 

Chairman, it would be made very clear for those members in this Assembly that are not aware of the fact 

that I represent a constituency, an area that was the forerunner, the beginnings of what we now call 

medicare in Saskatchewan or Swift Current Health Region No. 1. 

 

At this time I will go on record, Mr. Chairman, to state that I have never and at this point will 

unequivocally state that I am opposed to deterrent fees and the people of Saskatchewan should know 

that. Whether it should be said in this Chamber or outside the doors of this Chamber, I am opposed to 

deterrent fees and will continue to oppose deterrent fees. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a quick comment and then will give the 

opportunity to the member for Rosetown and all the other members to state their position. You know, I 

don’t want television very much, Mr. Chairman. Occasionally I do take the time to watch things other 

than the hockey game and football games and the news as well, but recently I spent a week-end at home 

during Easter and I saw a very interesting commercial. I can’t remember the precise name of the 

product, but I think it was called shikido and the commercial shows a rather attractive lady in front of 

the screen. You don’t know what’s happening till she reaches up and pulls off a plastic cover over her 

face and instantly she has changed her appearance and changed her position. And it’s interesting to 

watch some of the members opposite under the heat of what is happening across Canada and under the 

thumb of their leader, all of a sudden taking a lesson from that television commercial and pulling off or 

putting on that veil over their face, actually when you really take a close look at it, awfully transparent, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

I don’t know, I just want to make a comment on the resolution we just completed because I think it’s 

relevant. I assured the members opposite that we would be able to provide them and that I will provide 

them with the statement of the year 1977 of the operation of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

and I’m going to do that. I want them to know that and I want the Leader of the Conservative Party to 

know that. In fact, I am quite sure I will be able to do that as early as tomorrow. If the members 

opposite, Mr. Chairman, are really serious about doing the business of this House and doing the business 

of the people of Saskatchewan in this Legislature, they would proceed to move on with the estimates 

because with the time we have left, it is not likely that we are going to get to the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan which I think is subvote 25 in 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

842 

 

the time that we have available to us today. And I issue that challenge to them, if they are really not 

attempting to delay the proceedings of this House, if they are not really attempting to try to take the 

issue away from some of the things we talked about, then let’s proceed with these estimates of subvote 1 

all day. Maybe we should give the Liberals a chance to make some comments yet. They might have a 

few to make. But if you are really serious about them, we should proceed because you will have those 

statements tomorrow. 

 

The member for Swift Current now gets up in this House and makes the statement of denial, but he can’t 

deny statements that have been made by the Leader of the Conservative Party of Canada. He can’t deny 

statements that have been made by Dr. Dodd who was the Conservative candidate in the Yorkton 

constituency who said – he told a meeting he favored some measure to curtail needless medical 

treatment. He praised former Liberal Premier Ross Thatcher for bravery in introducing the utilization 

fee. Maybe that’s why Mr. Colin Thatcher is now sitting on their side of the House. And he can’t deny 

that he said at a meeting and publicly stood up and voiced his personal support for the reintroduction of 

deterrent fees. He can’t deny that. He has been quoted and it’s on the record. 

 

Mr. S.M. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, I want to raise a matter of some genuine 

concern with the minister to take advantage if I can of an obvious attitude that he has at the moment, he 

has been very aggressive politically in terms of his estimates. Some of us are beginning to think he has a 

political goal in mind beyond where he currently sits. Let me take advantage of that, but I want to raise 

with him a matter of genuine concern and I invite members to consider it too, in the same spirit. That is 

this – in my experience here in the last three years and I am sure other members have found this too, we 

run across many couples and they are young couples who have to have children treated outside the 

province for disorders or diseases which we can’t treat in this province. While the medical care 

insurance scheme pays the direct medical costs involved it doesn’t of course pay the transportation costs 

or the living costs associated with taking the child outside the province for treatment. 

 

I raised with the minister an example of this some few months ago and had a reply from the minister 

indicating that this isn’t covered and it is to this effect: A young couple has a child who requires 

treatment at Sick Children’s Hospital in Toronto and this happens a number of times and I am sure all 

members are familiar with cases. What is required is that the child frequently has to go to Toronto and 

spend some period of time there in the company of one or the other parent of the child. The 

transportation costs of the child and of the parent are not covered under the insurance plan. What I 

would like to do is to ask the Minister of Health to consider and to examine a proposal whereby the 

transportation and related costs would be considered as an insured coverage or an insured service under 

the plan. What I would like to know from the minister . . . well, if my friend to the left, the sort of yappy 

member for Saskatoon, is not interested in my resolution I urge him to take an interest, because there are 

people in his constituency who are currently consulting the member for Saskatoon Eastview about their 

problem and you ought to know about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — If you had any interest in your constituents’ problem what you would do is be joining 

with me in this resolution. What I want to do is ask the minister to examine . . . (interjections) . . . 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

843 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I want to ask the minister to ask his department to undertake a review of the history 

of this respect, that is to say how many such cases have existed in the course of the last five or ten years. 

What would be the cost of providing the transportation and related costs of a child accompanied by a 

parent in those circumstances and what difficulties re there with respect to an inclusion of that sort of 

service under the plan? What I would like to invite the minister to do is to take those things under 

serious consideration, go back to his department and in due course and perhaps in the next sitting of the 

legislature, come back either with a proposal to amend the regulations or the plan or the law to provide 

for these costs or alternatively, to indicate to members why we are unable to do it. That is to say, the 

number of people in these circumstances, the cost that would be associated with them, the difficulties, if 

any, that may arise in respect to including that service under the plan. I needn’t tell members, I am sure, 

of any individual cases because we have all seen them and there is very real hardship attached in many 

instances. 

 

Now I know that one of the reasons that the Department of Social Services will provide financial 

assistance in some cases in those circumstances. Let me say, though, that before you are entitled to have 

the money from the Department of Social Services, you may have to make out a case, in effect, for 

destitution. That is debilitating to people and it requires drawing down their reserves – and we are 

talking in the main about young people – to a level that isn’t fair to them, before they are entitled to go 

to the Department of Social Services. What is happening in many of these situations is that the friends of 

the people that are found in these circumstances are getting together and raising money for them. That’s 

a very kind and generous thing to do and a very charitable act but the recipient of that, I am sure, in 

many cases is quietly embarrassed at having in effect his or her friends to look after them in these 

circumstances. 

 

Now, what we have here is a plan essentially of insurance to insure us against the devastating costs 

associated with health care. But when a child is required to have treatment outside the province because 

we can’t here treat the child, then I think we ought to be prepared to treat the transportation and the 

associated living costs as part of the same costs in the same way as we treat the medical costs. 

 

Therefore, I would like to move, Mr. Chairman, seconded by Mr. Macdonald, the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley: 

 

That this committee urge the Minister of Health to undertake a full examination of providing 

transportation and related cost of children and one parent where a child is required to be treated 

medically outside the province, such provision of cost to be part of the insured medical services 

available to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to prolong the debate in 

this regard but I think it would be remiss if I didn’t say just a few words. Yesterday or the day before, it 

seems to me we have been on Health estimates for about two weeks, and if the minister would kindly 

keep quiet and not talk so much you wouldn’t have to accuse them of filibustering. I think you are doing 

a better job than anybody, but the other day he did project a document indicating that the government 

had reviewed the cost, or the assistance, or the payments for medical services outside the province of 

Saskatchewan. I would like to point out to the minister that in many 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

844 

 

cases, as the member has indicated, all of us has had experience with them, that it is an unfortunate set 

of circumstances that two neighbors or two children, one can get treated in Saskatchewan and one 

cannot. It becomes a very, very real hardship. The Department of Social Services is not the place to find 

assistance. To go there and bare your soul to indicate that your own resources are not available is 

something that most people do not like to do. I would like to ask the minister to consider carefully this 

motion, all members, it’s the kind of a thing that says we in Saskatchewan are supposed to provide 

health care as an insured service, here is a health problem and we can’t look after the health problem in 

the province of Saskatchewan, surely then those related costs should be considered part of the insured 

services. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I will not take a great deal of time to speak on the motion. I am 

going to ask all members of the House to support it and I will explain why, but first of all for the benefit 

of the member who moved the motion and wondered whether I had other ambitions, I want to assure 

him that I declared myself not interested in running federally. I don’t have any further ambitions than 

what I have here and to represent my constituency. I also want to advise him that when he is defeated as 

a federal candidate in the next election campaign that he should try to get himself a job in Ottawa and 

persuade the federal government to get back off their position where they refuse now to share any 

expansion of health care services, otherwise there may have been across Canada in many provinces, 

including maybe Saskatchewan, some expansion of services already. It is an unfortunate position that 

the federal government has taken in that they have reneged and said we are no longer responsible for 

health care, on the cost sharing basis for health care programs. I hope that he can use his influence to see 

if he can bring that about. 

 

Furthermore, I want to say that we already have been exploring exactly the kind of alternatives, as I 

mentioned to the member for Saskatoon I believe last night. I’m sorry that the member for Regina 

wasn’t here, we are already exploring alternatives including the ones he mentions and how we might 

deal with that unfortunate kind of situation. We have done some work already and we have changed the 

extended benefits under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan which was distributed to all members 

here yesterday. So we have already made some moves in rectifying some of the discrepancies that exist 

and, indeed, I would be most happy to continue the investigation that we are making and hope that we 

can come up with an adequate solution for the kind of situation that has been mentioned here two times 

already in the last two days. So I am asking the House to support the motion. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say in conclusion that I am pleased with the substance of the 

response that the minister will undertake. The motion is designed to underline the point more formally, 

the point that was made with you in the last session, the point that was made with you by me in some 

private correspondence and the point that was made again by my seatmate the other day. What we want 

to do, of course, is move off the sort of consideration of the things the sort of consideration of the thing 

soon and to get all the facts before us to see whether it isn’t possible to do this. I would think that all 

members would want to do it if it is at all possible. 

 

You indicate politically, you make a little point about the federal government and its withdrawal of 

some financial support. It is always interesting to see those arguments come from the other side of the 

House. The Attorney General and your Premier are always talking about the incursion of the federal 

government into your jurisdiction and always decrying that fact. 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

845 

 

Secondly, is that the federal government, as you know, under the new arrangements moved to you 

greater taxing power than you have had as a province in a very long time, partly in response to the 

cutback in these other areas. 

 

Thirdly, is that the Minister of Revenue, the former Minister of Finance, keeps decrying the large federal 

deficit. Yet we always see, despite those arguments on the one side of the question, all kinds of 

comments such as yours on the other side of the question. Political response aside, I am pleased at the 

response you have given us. I hope that in voting for the resolution we will underline as members, our 

desire to if at all possible amend the act to provide this kind of service. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to hear the response from the minister and I am quite sure 

that when the vote is put it is going to receive the support of this House. I have some reservations about 

one member, however, Mr. Chairman, supporting this particular motion. 

 

I have before me page 1270 of Hansard, January 3, 1978 and it is going to be interesting to me to see 

how the hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Nelson) votes, because at that particular date, and I quote. He 

spoke into Hansard and it says, “Mr. Nelson: Let’s cut out hospitalization.” I hope that he will support 

this particular motion as well. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Item 1 agreed? Item 2 agreed? 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, No, on Item 1. We said, No, from our chairs and we were on our feet. I 

think that is trying to bully through the legislation . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! Was the hon. member in his seat when he said No? 

 

Mr. Collver: — I wasn’t the only one who said, No, Mr. Chairman. There were a number of others. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I am very sorry. I did not hear No. 

 

Mr. Larter: — Mr. Chairman, No was voiced by about three people in this caucus. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — In order, then to accommodate you I will go back to subvote 1 but I did not hear it. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I do appreciate that because we have a number of questions to ask of the minister, in a 

general way, on Item 1 that relate to the provision of health care services for the province of 

Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that to go through item by item before this 

minister has been allowed to present what he has already agreed to table in this Legislature, would be 

the height of indignity for the people of Saskatchewan. He has agreed to table the results for last year. 

Why doesn’t he do so tonight, I ask the minister? You have this information. Will you table the 

information for SHSP tonight? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will not, because I don’t have it in the way that I would want to table it. It is 

going to take some time to prepare. There has been already been some considerable work done by the 

officials, in preparing it. As I said, I am sure that we can have it ready and it will be tabled for you 

tomorrow. 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

846 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, since the minister has agreed to table this information tomorrow, why, 

then are we in such a hurry to proceed with the Health care estimates? Is he afraid of what that 

information will show? Is he afraid that the information might show, for example, a dramatic increase in 

in-payments to the community clinics in the province of Saskatchewan? A dramatic increase, an 

increase such, that the fee-for-service doctors are being short-changed? Is that what’s happened, in the 

last year and therefore the provision for this year would carry it even further. 

 

The minister suggested earlier, Mr. Chairman, that community clinics were a co-operative effort of the 

people of Saskatchewan. And I would ask the minister to remember one thing, to remember one thing. 

The community clinics are funded on a line by line basis by the government of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Federated Co-ops is not. The Wheat Pool is not. Other legitimate co-operatives are not 

community clinics, Mr. Chairman, are funded in such a way that it makes it almost impossible to 

determine whether the government of the province of Saskatchewan is rewarding its friends in the 

medical business to the detriment of everyone else or whether it is allowing its theory to override 

common sense. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it is important, no it’s essential that the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity, 

because of the stated stand of the government opposite which states that the community clinic principle 

in the provision of medical care, in the province of Saskatchewan is the one that the people should 

follow. And, Mr. Chairman, that kind of statement, that kind of provision, by this government, has to be 

subjected to the scrutiny of this Legislature. That’s only one of the items that should be scrutinized in 

the provision of health care for the people. Because if the minister is saying, Mr. Chairman, if the 

minister is saying, that he is not afraid of any bit of information that’s going to be divulged in the SHSP 

financial statement, that he has agreed to table tomorrow, then he is not afraid to allow the opposition 

members a couple of days to examine it, and then raise the issue in estimates, as we well should, as is 

our sworn duty. Now, it’s not possible, I know. The minister realizes this and I know that you realize it, 

Mr. Chairman. That it’s not possible if you pass that item on the estimates, it’s not possible to raise that 

issue, insofar as the remaining estimates are concerned. The rules don’t permit the members to raise a 

broad, general question such as whether or not community clinics is the way of the future, the wave of 

the future, as suggested by the NDP in many election campaigns in the past. 

 

And, their attitude in the Department of Health is the same, that that’s the way to go. Therefore, we’ll 

have to pay them more than the doctors who are out there on a fee-for-service basis. We’ll allow them, 

said the Department of Health, to retain their lab, we’ll allow them to retain their x-ray facilities, but we 

won’t do it for fee-for-service doctors. Fee-for-service doctors shall be ordered to close their labs and 

close their x-ray facilities so that their patients have got to be subjected to the indignities and 

inconvenience of having to traipse to the hospital and then traipse back to the doctor’s office again to 

receive a report on their lab and their x-ray results whereas in the community clinics this doesn’t have to 

happen. That’s the kind of policy that is enacted by the members opposite and by the government 

through the Department of Health. Yet, at the same time, Mr. Chairman, they don’t want to pay the price 

of having this information brought to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s like, Mr. 

Chairman, when they developed their advertising programs for election purposes. They sit down and 

they work out half statements and then state that those half 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

847 

 

statements somehow indicate that a political organization, or someone in competition with them, or 

someone that is trying to present a different story, that this is what they believe. And using their power 

as government, using the administrative and executive assistance at their disposal and the tremendous 

amount of money at their disposal for advertising, they attempt to mislead the people of Saskatchewan 

even though, even though, members in this Legislature, not only deny what the advertising states as it 

relates to deterrent fees, not only deny it but specifically states that they, as individual and we, as a party 

do not favor deterrent fees – and yet the government members opposite persist in advertising that this is 

true. Mr. Chairman, what I would like to ask of those sincere members of the government opposite, is 

that the kind of government that you support? Is that the kind of Treasury bench, is that the kind of party 

organization that you support? It is one that goes out of its way to mislead and misrepresent, in terms of 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, when individual members of this Legislature, specifically 

and categorically deny the kinds of allegations made in advertising by the party opposite. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we believe that the estimates this year for the Department of Health, under-estimate the 

needs of the health care of the province of Saskatchewan. The minister has stated that there are several 

factors which are going to influence an increase of health care costs. So I am going to start out by asking 

the minister tonight, to cost for us if he will, what he stated yesterday. I am sure that his officials have at 

their disposal, the estimated costs of the various changes that they anticipate in 1978 and 1979. What in 

the overall total of health care expenditures for the province of Saskatchewan is going to be the 

estimated cost for 1978 and 1979 and the estimated increase in cost, for the 2,000 senior citizens who 

are going to require health care in the province of Saskatchewan, the minister mentioned the other day 

who use 40 per cent of the health care needs of the province. There are 2,000 new senior citizens coming 

on stream – what is the estimated cost of that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, there is no such estimate. The member assumes in making his 

question (which makes absolutely no sense at all and he knows it – once again he is trying to stall this 

House), he assumes that every one of those 2,000 people are going to use the hospital and medical 

services of Saskatchewan. Now there is no way you can estimate that and I think it is even safer to 

assume that it will not, in fact, be the case. We do not establish the budgets on those kinds of basis. We 

establish budgets on the experiences of the past, keeping in consideration what might be the anticipated 

increases in costs in a general way, and then appropriations are provided. I have indicated for three days 

now that as has been the case in former years, we have in the Department of Health appropriation 

sufficient funds, to not only maintain the level of health services provided for all the people of 

Saskatchewan of all ages, but also in some areas (and I outlined that this afternoon), we have cases 

where we are trying some innovative approaches. We are indeed expanding in some cases, as we are 

with the provision of additional levels for beds, as we are with the additional funding for the nursing 

homes for heavy care type of patients, as we are, in this new approach at Moose Jaw, with the day 

hospital for senior citizens. So, for the member to argue that somehow there are going to be cuts and 

reductions in services, I have to say (and the budgets in the past and the budget here today indicate), 

there is no substance to what he is saying, and cannot be substantiated, I am prepared to stand up here 

today and say that I will be standing up here next year and indicate to the member (as experience will 

show) that what I have said and what we have shown in the information that we have provided, is true. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I might like to suggest to the minister that even if he is 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

848 

 

going to be in that portfolio next year at this time, (which might be doubtful) and even if he is sitting on 

that side of the legislature this time next year, which according to some members opposite, it might be 

doubtful – the point is, we can’t examine 1978, 1979 next year, and the minister knows it? We can’t 

examine 1978-79 until 1980 and the minister knows it. There is no way to judge in 1979 whether or not 

a minister was presenting the truth in his attempt to say everything is fine, everything is good, 

everything is wonderful. Next year because we don’t get to examine the expenditures for ‘78-’79 or the 

provision for health care in ‘78-’79 until 1980 and the minister believes that by that time there will be 

another provincial general election and the kind of nonsense that has pervaded this Assembly in the last 

day or two, pertaining to the presentation of information to the people of this province to which they are 

entitled, would not be brought to light before the election. That’s what the minister thinks. The minister 

has stated some other increases in the health care system today that he hadn’t mentioned before; let me 

ask him this. What assessment did his officials place on the cost for the coming year of level IV beds? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The budget speech indicated that we have allocated in additional $4 million for 

additional moneys for level IV beds. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Is the minister saying that he has no assessment of any kind whatsoever for the fact that 

the population of Saskatchewan is aging and that that again process increases the cost of medicare. Is 

there no established number that his officials derive that would state that because of this, his officials 

said that over the next five years the population is going to grow from 11 something per cent to over 13 

per cent, is the minister prepared to assess a number to that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the determination of the moneys that are required take into 

consideration a lot of factors. They take into consideration that the utilization and the projected increase 

of utilization of services and that has tended to be around, I believe, 2 per cent - 2 to 4 per cent, the 

utilization aspect of medical services. We take into consideration the mix that there is; that includes the 

mix of population, the mix of female-male population as well as age, it takes into consideration the mix 

of the kinds of treatments that are being provided because they vary from time to time and those things 

are all taken into consideration. If the member wants me to provide him with more specific details on the 

weight put on each of those, I will ask my people to see if we can work that out and by the time we get 

to consideration of Medical Care Insurance Commission and SHSP, which is in the latter part of the 

Blues, this information we will have for you. That is why I mentioned earlier that by the time we get to 

the SHSP which is certainly not going to be tonight, you will have the report which I will provide 

tomorrow, once we have been able to get it all ready and I have looked at it and therefore we should 

proceed with some of the other items. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, would the minister be prepared to present to us tonight then, an 

assessment roughly. I am sure he doesn’t even have to do it roughly, I am sure his Deputy Minister has 

this information at his fingertips. Could the minister provide us then, what assessment for all of those 

factors combined would be in terms of increased utilization, mix and increasing age of the population, 

what would be the total assessment of the increased budgetary requirement for that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Ask and you shall receive. The staff has already provided me with the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission breakdown of increases that have been budgeted for this year according to 

some of the categories which I mentioned – 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

849 

 

because of increase in population - $340,000. This is the increase to the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission – because of increase in fees - $4,363,000; because of increase in per capita use of medical 

services - $1,434,000; because of increase in coverage of foster parents - $10,000. I can’t give you those 

figures for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan precisely, because as I have already indicated we do 

not yet have all the budgets for the hospitals in and put together, which we will have by about the middle 

of April, because of the new fiscal year. But that is the information that you requested on the part of the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, other than the increase for medical fees, would the minister not agree 

that those items would be an increase relative to the change in population, not relative to any other 

factors. Certainly the increase in medical fees is one that would be budgeted normally, but would the 

minister be prepared to say that the rest of those items would be approximate assessment for MCIC for 

the change in population, change in mix, change in utilization? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Your question isn’t clear. Can you tell me what you mean by change in 

population? There is a change in population in total numbers; there is a change in population in ages; 

there is a change in population on male or female mix. Tell me what you mean in your question. 

 

Mr. Collver: — My question is this, and perhaps I could eliminate it by saying this. What I am looking 

for is the amount of increase that your department assessed with reference to the change of all 

descriptions in the population, not a change in costs of an item. For example, they have estimated $4 

million increase in medical fees, but the other items were estimated or assessed on the basis of a change 

in the mix of population for all reasons. That is what I mean by change, in other words, as opposed to a 

change in price level, as an example. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — In answer to the member’s question and I think this is the answer that he is 

seeking, the change in population is not the sole reason. It is not, I would suggest, the major reason. 

There are other things that are much, much more significant from the point of view of impact of cost, 

change to technology, for example, the provision of ultra sound at the Pasqua Hospital, these kinds of 

things, change in numbers and types of specialists dealing in particular areas. All of those things are the 

major factors. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, but what I am getting at is this. There are two basic kinds of changes 

that occur in a budgeting system. The first kind of change that occurs in a budgeting system is brought 

about due to inflation, an increase in price level. General speaking you can say that the increase payment 

to the medical doctors in Saskatchewan, because the population relatively has been relatively static, in 

terms of medical doctors; that the change generally is a change in price level. So you could say that the 

increase of some $4 million, I would gather is the number you quoted. I didn’t get a chance to write it 

down, the change of $4 million payment to physicians is a change relative to a change in price level. 

 

I am trying to get at those other kinds of changes that occur, not because there is a change in price level, 

but because there is a change in population mix, because the population is getting older, because there is 

higher utilization of the health care system. 

 

So your officials have given you one for MCIC. I would like to know, first of all, what is 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

850 

 

the total of those other kinds of changes that you mentioned. I didn’t write them all down but I’m sure 

you could just add them up quickly. I just want it in round numbers, don’t go to the penny or anything. 

Secondly, would you assess that those changes on MCIC approximately, as a percentage, would be 

approximately the same percentage for SHSP? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I just consulted with my staff; the member once did a similar kind of break down 

for hospitals under SHSP, is that what the question is? Because if it is, as I said earlier, we can’t break 

that down because we don’t have all that worked out and will not have until all of the hospital budgets 

have been considered. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, what I said was what was, what was the number for MCIC and would 

the percentage change for MCIC for those change factors, approximate those with the SHSP. In other 

words . . . 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I just finished telling you I can’t tell you that until we have the statistics for the 

SHSP after all the hospital budgets have been thoroughly considered and allocated. 

 

Mr. Collver: — So what the minister is saying, surely . . . 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It could be but I’m not precisely going to tell you it’s going to be exactly the 

same. 

 

Mr. Collver: — No, I didn’t ask for an exact number. I asked for an approximate number. What we 

would like to know – the Attorney General is making some kind of gestures with his hands – I don’t 

know whether they are fish stories – well, an approximation, about that close for Mr. Attorney General. 

Have you got that. I want it that close. Would you give me the number, Mr. Minister, for MCIC however 

for the changes in population? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The total increase for MCIC that I talked about is $6.2 million. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, the $6 million represents approximately 7 per cent of MCIC 

expenditures for last year. Would the minister be prepared to say that the changes therefore for 

Saskatchewan hospitals – I’m not trying to pin him down to an exact number – but plus or minus 1 per 

cent or 2 per cent would be 7 per cent? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I can’t say that and I won’t be able to say it until I have the SHSP and 

hospital budgets worked out as I have already stated. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well can you give us any kind of an idea at all since you don’t have those hospital 

budgets here, could you say it would be 5 per cent, would that be reasonable? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I want to be in keeping with the member’s desire to have facts in this House. 

When they are provided and when I have those facts I will provide them. I will not work on 

assumptions. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t quite understand then how the minister can suggest that 

this House can proceed with these estimates without knowing this kind of information. Now, the reason 

we ask for that and let’s assume and I will hold the minister to his comment because he doesn’t know, 

but let’s assume that SHSP has 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

851 

 

changed by some 7 per cent for changes in population and changes in mix, that there is going to be an 

increase in hospital care for changes in the fact that the population is older, the fact that there is a 

different, higher utilization and so on, of some 7 per cent. That would approximate $15 million in the 

current year. Now, Mr. Chairman, here is the fact, here is the point, here is what concerns us, here is 

why we are concerned about the minister’s refusal to answer questions and why we are concerned about 

the minister’s refusal to table the documents now. The minister has just told us that on three factors 

alone excluding inflation, excluding and I’m taking the presumption of 7 per cent on SHSP, that some 

$25 million have been allocated by his department officials – for level IV beds, $4 million MCIC $6 

million, and SHSP if you take the 7 per cent of the factor, $15 million. That means that of a budget of 

$435 million in total, some $410 million is the amount, Mr. Chairman, after deducting the amount that 

we are allowed for those changes and increases. That means, Mr. Chairman, that in allowing his budget 

for 1978-79 the minister has allocated some $7 million on last year’s expenditure of $403 million for 

increases in salaries, increases in costs, increases for power and lights and so on, some $7 million on 

$403 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that represents 1½ per cent. Is the minister trying to tell this Assembly that he is 

going to be able to settle or the hospital association is going to be able to settle with the employees of 

the Saskatchewan Hospital Association for an increase of 1½ per cent? 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, for the benefit of the minister who keeps worrying about stalling the Assembly 

when people are trying to get just some information from him, perhaps if he’d listen to the questions 

asked, he might possibly be prepared to answer them. Perhaps if he did his homework when he came 

into this House, he would also be able to answer the questions. 

 

The minister has stated this evening, that he has allowed in his budget $4 million for the increase in level 

IV beds. That’s what he said. He nods his head yes. The minister has said that he has allowed in his 

budget an increase of $6 million for MCIC for those items of change in population, change in the age of 

population and increased utilization. That’s what he said. Those two items alone total $10 million. It is 

logical to assume, Mr. Chairman, more than logical to assume that if there is an increase in MCIC or of 

some 7 per cent for utilization type factors that there will be an increase in SHSP where utilization 

factors of approximately the same per cent. That’s only logic. The minister refuses to give us the facts, 

so we have to presume that. If that’s the case, Mr. Chairman, that means that some $25 million have 

been included in this budget for increase in level IV beds and the change in utilization of the plan by the 

people of Saskatchewan for one reason or another. That means that the same allocation for last year as 

applied to this budget, would have to deduct the $25 million allocation for this year. That brings the 

allocation down to $410 million. 

 

Last year, Mr. Chairman, was expended some $403 million. That’s an increase of $7 million or 

approximately 1.6 per cent. Is the minister attempting to tell this Assembly that in the negotiations with 

the hospital association in Saskatchewan that for 75 per cent of that expenditure which the minister 

agreed to yesterday was the employee or wage portion of the total expenditure, that for 75 per cent that 

they are going to settle for 1½ per cent? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not telling the member that, that’s his funny arithmetic and if 

he wants to argue his arguments on the basis of that kind of an arithmetic, he may very well do that. He 

has been doing it for three years and every time 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

852 

 

he’s done it, he’s been proven to be wrong and he will be proven to be wrong again. Just let me give you 

an example of the weird arithmetic that he is talking about. He claims that there will be a 7 per cent 

increase in utilization in hospitals. Well, anybody with any amount of mathematical skills and I don’t 

pretend to have very many, because that’s not my particular specialty. But anybody can figure that from 

that 7 per cent utilization rate increase, utilization of hospitals would double every 10 years. Now surely, 

surely he can’t be even deceiving himself to such an extent that he would believe if the rate of utilization 

of hospitals would double every 10 years, an example of the kind of mathematics that he is attempting to 

use again to make a point that is completely irrelevant and staff the proceedings of this House. He 

wanted information on the amount of the increase in funding for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan and hospital care. I have provided that already yesterday; I provided it the day before yesterday 

when he was not here and missed much of the debate when most of the questions that he is now asking 

had been answered. Had he been here he would know the answer to those questions. 

 

There is an increase in the 1978-79 budget over 1977-78 for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

and grants in assistance of clinical services provided by the medical educational systems of 12.3 per 

cent. Now, 12.3 per cent is not an insignificant amount of an increase. It is adequate to provide the level 

of services that we have; it is far greater than what is being provided anywhere else in Canada. It is 

certainly greater than 2.6 being provided in Manitoba and is certainly greater than the 4.5 per cent being 

provided in Ontario. It is certainly greater than the increase being 4.5 per cent being provided in Ontario. 

It is certainly greater than the increase being provided in Alberta and you can go down the list from 

Newfoundland to British Columbia and the only place you will leave out is the province of 

Saskatchewan where we have an increase of as large as 12.3 per cent. Now, if the member chooses not 

to recognize that – in recognizing that it means that there is sufficient funding to provide a high quality 

of care in our hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan – he can do that. 

 

I have given the indications of why I believe and the government knows, we have adequate funding, and 

I know that the hospital world and the medical world in Saskatchewan know as well. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, would the minister be prepared to tell us what is the estimated cost 

of substantial increases in payments by the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan for treatment received 

by Saskatchewan residents while outside of the province? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, once again that is an item that should be asked under the particular 

subvote and I would suggest that the member should be asking that question at that time. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman the reason the question is being asked now is that it is another cost of the 

Saskatchewan Department of Health that has not been included in terms of any inflationary increase. 

That’s supposedly in accordance with the budget speech from the Minister of Finance where he was 

trying to get the maximum mileage and the maximum benefit out of the so-called ‘terrific increases’ in 

allocations for health. He said, and I quote: 

 

. . . substantial increases in payments by the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan for treatment 

received by Saskatchewan residents while outside of the province. 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

853 

 

 

We are attempting to figure out and determine what portion of the minister’s allocation for his budget 

was for inflationary increases for wages and what portion of his budget was for these great program – 

new programs that the minister is suggesting are going to be increased. I want to ask the minister once 

again, what is the cost estimate by his officials for the substantial increases in payments outside of the 

province? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — O.K. We have it now. The additional cost to provide the extended benefits is 

estimated to be in 1978-79, $269,000. 

 

Mr. Collver: — What is the estimated cost of an increase of 20 per cent in funds for health promotion to 

permit continuation of the Aware and the Lifestyles program? What is the amount included there? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We’re looking for it again. When we get to the subvote 1 will provide it to the 

member. 

 

Mr. Collver: — What allocation has the minister made in his assessment of the increased cost of 

administration for the new hospital at Kamsack? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The subvote where we deal with hospital construction, we will provide you with 

that information as well. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, what the minister is attempting to say is that without the information 

being tabled in this Legislature, quickly get off the period of time when the rules state that you can ask 

general questions about the total expenditure. Mr. Chairman, if we can’t go back to subvote 1 again, the 

Attorney General knows that, we can’t go back and say, because we are not provided with the 

information, once we piece together all the information, to find out, Mr. Chairman, as time is going on, 

to find out that the minister not allowed anything for increased wages. That’s what is becoming 

increasingly clear, that he is going to require those local hospital boards and those local hospitals, for 

example in my constituency in Nipawin, if they are to maintain anything like the needed service that 

needs to be provided to that community, they are going to have to place a deterrent fee and a big 

deterrent fee on the local ratepayers of that community. Otherwise, Mr. Chairman, they are going to 

have to bring about a dramatic reduced level of activity in those communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, you don’t get it both ways. The members opposite know that. The Minister of 

Health knows that. More than 25 per cent of the budget of the province of Saskatchewan is spent on this 

department and we can’t get legitimate information from the minister. But we are going to keep asking, 

Mr. Minister, until we get the information. We are going to keep at this until the people of Saskatchewan 

are aware that in the 1978-79 fiscal year their health care is going to be reduced again. They are going to 

be faced in the forthcoming year, Mr. Chairman, with such dramatic decreases that the hospital waiting 

list will increase even further, that people with legitimate illnesses will not be able to enter the hospital 

except after long waiting periods and even longer than what they are today. We are advised by those that 

are in a position to know and I am sorry that the minister never consults, for example, with the president 

of the Saskatchewan Medical Association and others, we are sorry he doesn’t because he might be 

prepared . . . (interjection) . . . well there’s someone that’s actively involved in . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He is a politician for the PCs . . . 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

854 

 

Mr. Collver: — He was a duly elected president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association who has 

expressed not only to the people of Saskatchewan but to the government, his very real concern about the 

deteriorating conditions in Saskatchewan hospitals. Now the Attorney General says, oh, that’s political. 

But, Mr. Chairman, we are expected to believe the non-political Minister of Health when he says, trust 

me, trust me . . . (interjection) . . . well, we feel, Mr. Chairman, I want this Assembly to know that the 

Progressive Conservatives in Saskatchewan are actively pursuing a course in which the doctors of 

Saskatchewan are going to be happy. I want you to be aware of this, Mr. Chairman, the fact is that not 

only will the doctors be satisfied, but the nurses will be satisfied and more importantly the people of 

Saskatchewan will be satisfied, because, Mr. Chairman, that’s who counts here. 

 

We think that the minister has got to justify this dramatic decrease that must come about as a result of 

this budget and show us, point out to us, what treatments are going to be eliminated from the coming 

budget year. When he allocates to those local hospital boards who are expressing concern all over the 

province of Saskatchewan. When those allocations are made, when that line by line examination is 

completed, as the minister suggests which will, of necessity, the minister says, occur after we have 

examined the estimates, after the Legislature adjourns, after the Legislature prorogues. Then and only 

then will those hospital boards be able to know that either they have got to put on a deterrent fee of 

magnitudes that they cannot possibly do on those local ratepayers or the have got to cut back services so 

badly that those local people are not going to have their health care needs met. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we are concerned about this and we are not prepared to accept the Minister of 

Health, who is going to go on and on and on not answering the questions, not providing us with the 

information. Let me just remind you, Mr. Chairman, what he said tonight, the increased level IV beds - 

$4 million, the increased reutilization factors - $6 million for MCIC (Medical Care Insurance 

Commission). He will not tell us the increase for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, but when he 

says that 7 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh no, he will not. Not the increased utilization. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — 12.3 per cent. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, 12.3 per cent – that is an allocation to the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan. That is not the amount that is allocated to the SHSP (Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan) for purposes of taking into account the increased utilization by patients, by doctors, by others, by 

increased utilization because of population change . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I don’t know 

about that. I don’t know how you would know anything, member for Saskatoon Eastview. You have 

probably been in them more frequently than the rest of us; however it’s the kind of hospitals that you 

enter, Mr. Member. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what he stated tonight is that the budget speech by the Minister of Finance, who stated 

that the addition of two more age groups to the children’s dental program so that all children born from 

1967 through 1974 will be covered. Is the minister prepared to tell us tonight what that portion – what 

that amount is? Mr. Chairman, I notice the minister is paying attention now, again. The Minister of 

Finance said that an additional two age groups would be added to the dental program. That’s over and 

above the inflationary increase. How much would that cost? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have been watching these estimates with some interest now for four 

hours today and I probably missed two or three days. I think I am 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

855 

 

very fortunate that I missed them, judging by the tenor and quality and competence of the questioning 

this evening. 

 

I simply want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I never was one who supported television in the Legislature but 

the member for Nipawin, the Leader of the Conservative party, is fast convincing me the other way 

round because if the people of Saskatchewan could see the kind of rambling, inane rambling, Mr. 

Chairman – that is the best way it can be described in this operation – from 7:00 to 09:00 p.m., with wild 

predictions of decreased medical services and hospital services – the kind of wild predictions we got last 

year from the Tories about filthy hospitals. Remember those, Mr. Chairman, under this particular vote, 

where we had to bring in outside people for the first time in the history of the Saskatchewan Legislature? 

Here we see this kind of prediction again, just made by the Leader of the Conservative Party. Well, I 

think, Mr. Chairman, that that is an insult to this Legislative Assembly and an insult to the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We are elected here to deal with specific issues of health matters and to have 

the Conservatives carry on this kind of a shoddy display, Mr. Chairman, is one – speaking for one 

member, I certainly find very deplorable indeed. I would say to the Leader of the Conservative Party, 

can we try to elevate our sights just a little bit? Let us move on to the specific subvotes. You have got 24 

or more of them there; you have been around now for four days on the general policy; you have made all 

kinds of predictions; you have got answers to the specific questions for the specific votes that you can 

have there. Stay as long as you want but please, please do not take up the time of taxpayers and elected 

representatives in this kind of aimless peroration about health services in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, that is a very admirable little speech by the Attorney General in trying 

to tell the opposition members what the duties are; however I do recall reading about the Attorney 

General’s performance when he was in opposition and most especially, Mr. Chairman, was I interested 

in – Well, it is hard to get the information from those days directly because, of course, they did not 

record Committee of Finance, but what was recorded, Mr. Chairman, in newspaper articles and other 

things was the fact that the Attorney General, in attempting to devise and develop the necessary attack 

that he felt was reasonable, as a member of the opposition, in a particular department. He felt that he had 

to go on continuing answering the questions until they were answered. That statement has been made 

many times by the Attorney General when he was sitting in opposition. Sure there’s a difference. He 

stated at that time, Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General stated at that time that the then Liberal 

government of the province of Saskatchewan was hiding facts from the people. Oh yes, it is a statement 

the Attorney General has gone through time after time to say what they believed in, Mr. Chairman, was 

open government. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Let me ask a question . . . 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well perhaps if the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) would be 

prepared to answer the questions that have been asked here on behalf of the Minister of Health, I would 

like to listen to him too. I give him the floor . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Well, just to get on and get away from this facetious argument, Mr. Chairman, first 

of all I want to tell the member for Nipawin and surely the Minister of Health should be able to tell him 

and respond as quickly as I can, that it doesn’t make any difference how much you use a hospital bed; 

you get paid the same amount of 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

856 

 

money. You can’t over-utilize it because it is on an approved patient-day basis and the approved costs, 

as you put in a budget for so many salaries or so many people and that is approved and that is the 

amount of money you get. It isn’t a question of over-utilization. So if you turn around, for example, a 

hospital bed is almost impossible to use more than 85 per cent of the time, just the people going in and 

out. So it isn’t a question . . . if you have a hospital bed and you are going to be paid for it in the hospital 

and you have a week that that particular bed isn’t used, you don’t lose any money. So it isn’t a question 

of utilization or over-utilization. When you turn it around and ask cost, it is an approved budget, the 

budget is paid to the hospital for that much money and approved recognized costs. That’s why it doesn’t 

make any difference whether there is such a thing as over-utilization or not. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I know that the member for Indian Head-Wolseley has far more 

experience in these things than many people but I don’t think he has had too much experience in this. I 

might like to explain to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley what it means to line by line budget. Mr. 

Chairman, first of all what happens is this. Hospital boards come to the Government of Saskatchewan, to 

the Department of Health and they present their budget to the Minister of Health. Now the minister goes 

through that budget rather carefully and he, as he suggested the other day, allocates or allows so much 

for approved positions, right? And he approves those positions as to 10,406 positions and he approves 

costs, line by line without any allocation for any increase. Then they also estimate what utilization the 

hospital is going to have. Then they work out the patient-day ratio that they are going to pay. Now when 

the member for Indian head suggests that it is not important what is allocated or allowed for salaries, the 

member for Indian Head quite simply doesn’t understand anything about budgeting. That’s certainly 

what we got from it, Mr. Member and Mr. Chairman, that’s what anybody would get from that 

minister’s statements. 

 

The fact is that it is extremely important to the local hospital boards that the Government of 

Saskatchewan allow in its budgeting sufficient to meet the costs of employees of those hospitals because 

if it doesn’t it means that they have to cut employees, Mr. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley. Once they 

have presented their line by line budget, and the minister approves so many positions, then it means that 

if that amount is not allocated for increases and they have to negotiate an increase with the union, it 

means that they are going to have to cut staff, Mr. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, to allow, Mr. 

Chairman, the hospital to meet the current needs. If they have to cut staff then they have to cut services. 

If they cut services then the health care for the people of Saskatchewan is not going to be met. It is the 

line by line budgeting that the member for Indian Head-Wolseley is forgetting. Sure they make an 

allocation for patient-days after they go through each hospital board and allow them line by line. But 

they allow them, Indian Head-Wolseley, that they are not going to be able to meet the current needs on 

the same basis as last year. The minister knows that and the Attorney General knows that. Does the 

Attorney General say that he agreed that the health care budget for the province of Saskatchewan, for 

this year, is going to require hospital boards to either levy a tariff against the local ratepayers, or cut the 

services? Is that what he is agreeing to? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I did not say that and the hon. member knows that I did not say that. I 

say to the hon. member I don’t know really what the political objective is here, for the PCs on this vote. 

You have been around on this point and you refuse to ask it under the proper vote. You refuse to take the 

figures the Minister of Health gives you. You have health officials, by the load, sitting here assisting the 

minister in giving you advice and that is not good enough. Now, look it. If you are going to wait until 

there 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

857 

 

is a federal election or something and you want to try and delay this so there can be a switch over, that is 

playing pretty shoddy politics at the expense of the taxpayers. 

 

I am saying to the hon. member, you know that. You say you have a new wave of political thought in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Show it, show some leadership and let’s move on to the specific items, O.K? 

 

Mr. Collver: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t think any one is agreed. I appreciate the sincere tone used by 

the Attorney General in this particular matter. I wonder if the Attorney General recognizes what has 

happened here this evening. 

 

We stated tonight in no uncertain terms we are prepared to go on to other estimates. There is no question 

about it. All the members opposite had to do was to agree to postpone the examination of the 

Department of Health until such time as the minister tables the information that we need to do our job. 

Now, surely, that is not too much to ask. The minister voted against it; the Attorney General voted 

against it; every member of the NDP voted against it. Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the information. We 

can’t do our job without the information. The only weapon at our disposal, Mr. Chairman, the only one 

is to make sure that these estimates don’t go off Item 1 until such time as we receive the information that 

the minister has already agreed to provide. 

 

The Attorney General wants to talk about responsibility. He goes on, tonight, to vote against a very 

reasonable motion that would have postponed, only postponed briefly according to the Minister of 

Health, until tomorrow, the examination of these estimates until we had the information at our disposal. 

The Minister of Health agreed to provide the statements. We have no other option in opposition and the 

Attorney General knows it. If we are to do our job, and we want to do our job . . . I beg your pardon. 

What was that, Mr. Member for Quill Lakes? Well, the member for Quill Lakes says, one hour and five 

minutes to go. We are perfectly prepared to go on to other estimates. The Attorney General quite easily 

could ask the Chairman to go on to other estimates in some other department. When we get the 

information that we are looking for, then we will go on in the Department of Health. That is a reasonable 

course of action; that is the course of action any responsible government would take. But, Mr. Chairman, 

instead of that the NDP decided to thwart the efforts of the opposition to get the facts. 

 

They decided, tonight, that they would vote against that reasonable request to get information that the 

Minister of Health has already agreed to table and to get the information prior to our examination of the 

estimates. 

 

Now, the Attorney General knows, and knows very well, that the only option left to the opposition then 

is to delay until we receive the information. We are more than happy to go on to other estimates tonight, 

more than happy to go on with the Department of Health as soon as that document is tabled. But, Mr. 

Chairman, I think the remarks of the Attorney General, tonight, have been shortsighted, have been 

unreasonable and unrealistic to suggest that some kind of political motivation should be attributed to us 

because we are here trying to get the facts from the Minister of Health and the Minister of Health refuses 

to get those facts, the question then becomes, not only in our minds, but in the minds of the people 

across this province, what is there to hide? Is in fact this budget correct and health standards are going to 

be maintained or is in fact going to happen like it did last year where the people are surprised with the 

long line-ups and have to stand and wait in line for 14 months for a hernia operation and two years for 

hip replacements? 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

858 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, we have raised this matter before. We have asked the Minister of health quite 

reasonably to provide this information so that we can do our job, so that we can find out whether or not 

the government is allocating sufficient to meet the needs of the people, or whether, in fact, they are 

allocating too little, in which case they are going to have to do one of two things. Either cut the service, 

which the people of Saskatchewan are not prepared to accept, or conversely raise the taxes further to 

meet a bigger deficit than that which is already predicated. 

 

Mr. Chairman, surely it is reasonable for us to request this information. I am going to ask the Minister of 

health again, will you agree to withdraw the consideration of these estimates on Item 1 until you table 

the information that is needed? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a comment on that because as House Leader, 

from time to time, I have something to do with respect to the ordering of the business of the House. I say 

to the Leader of the PC Party, no, I don’t intend to recommend to the Minister of Health and I don’t 

think he intends to adopt the position that we should be withdrawing the Health estimates, simply 

because you don’t have one facet of information which you say is important. Nobody in your caucus 

understands the point that you are taking. 

 

There have been about 15 reports tabled for the Department of Health. You say that we should stop the 

Department of Health estimates until we give you the one. You haven’t asked any questions related to 

that . . . Oh, they are on the subvotes! Now, Mr. Chairman, the member comes to the subvotes when it 

suits his convenience to argue the subvotes, but when we argued on the general point he wouldn’t. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the members says out loud, rhetorically he asks, do we know what is happening? I tell 

you if you could see yourself in the caucus, we know what is happening. The disintegration of that 

caucus is happening, tonight, by that kind of aimless dissertation. You know that it is the old story that it 

is not the son that is out of step, it is the army that is out of step. That is the position that you put 

yourself in by that kind of ludicrous arguing. I am saying that that is a high degree of irresponsibility. 

 

We had Revenue estimates here before and you kept that for three or four days of dragging it. You are 

doing it for one reason only. You are doing that because you want to get over the official opposition’s 

category. That is the simple reason. We had the Department of the Environment. That was another one. 

 

You say that is responsible opposition. I say that is irresponsibility to the highest degree. It is 

irresponsible and it wrong politically and it is wrong for the Legislative House business point of view. 

Absolutely wrong. You look at all those reports. The Minister of Health wanted to make this point. I am 

sorry, but now that I am on my feet I am making it. Look at all those reports and not touched on from 

3:00 o’clock today until 9:00 o’clock. You fellows should be ashamed of yourselves. You should be 

ashamed of yourselves, because the simple fact of the matter is that it is a very childish performance 

which is going on, that is not befitting of a political party which says that they think they can assume 

office. 

 

I don’t care. You can lecture us about your responsibility and things of that nature, but the people of 

Saskatchewan know, when they see that the reports are not even being touched on, on Vote 1, 

challenging the Chairman; ruckus, riotous situations all afternoon and early evening. Mr. Chairman, I 

say this is a very bad show for the PCs of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

859 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, it is very interesting that the Attorney General should suggest and hold 

up a great number of reports in his hand, like that, and say, look at all we have tabled in the Legislature. 

The only thing is that he didn’t say that we haven’t tabled this one, which represents 75 per cent of the 

spending. These, all of these, represent 20 per cent, 25 per cent. This one over here represents 75 per 

cent. It has not been tabled . . . the rules of the House says the minister responsible for Sask Power and 

the fiasco they are in. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the fact of the matter is that the House Leader knows, and the Minister of Health knows, 

that when you have 75 per cent of your expenditures budgeted for next year on SHSP and we have no 

report or no information on it, it is impossible to know as a general rule what these expenditures are. 

That is what Item 1 is all about. 

 

Now, the minister, Mr. Chairman, has a perfectly valid option. The Attorney General right now can rise 

in his place and evoke the rules, close this debate off and we get on to Item 2 – just like that. He can tell 

the people of Saskatchewan the Conservatives are irresponsible. He can tell the people of Saskatchewan 

that the Progressive Conservatives in this Legislature are not entitled to this information. He can say to 

the people of Saskatchewan that the Progressive Conservatives, in trying to find out whether or not 

health care needs are going to be met in 1978 and 1979, and being foisted information that is 

incomplete, inaccurate and inadvisable, Mr. Chairman, we say to the Attorney General right now, and I 

say to him, if he wants to get on with the Department of Health before this information is provided to 

this Assembly, then invoke it. Show power, you got the people, invoke the rules. And I challenge the 

Attorney General to invoke the rules on this principle. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the PC Party has every right to make a fool of his party 

and himself without me invoking or trying to invoke what the member says, are closure rules. I don’t 

want to. In a democracy, anyone has got the right to look foolish – even the PCs of Saskatchewan, 

especially the Leader of the PC Party. That is the situation you are in – I can’t stop the fact that you 

people want to waste the taxpayers money, I can’t stop that fact – it is a decision you will have to make. 

But you know, Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the PCs is smarting with all kinds of difficulties. He has got 

internal caucus difficulties and this relates to subvote No. 1 – that is part of the reason for the day – 

serious caucus problems. He has other difficulties relating to certain members who are not here today. 

That is another situation. As a result, one way to get off it is to go on at length on subvote No. 1. Now, 

Mr. Chairman, I think I have made my points. If I was the Minister of Health, I know how he has 

tolerated this kind of badgering and this kind of aimless questioning. I think he has done an admirable 

job. He says he is going to provide the material in question tomorrow. That apparently is not good 

enough. There are no other questions which the boys have. I guess all we can do is suffer them, and 

suffer them as best we can, Mr. Chairman. But I think the people of the province of Saskatchewan will 

have to be the ultimate judges of this very, very bad show this evening. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Since the Attorney General and the Minister of Health is not prepared to invoke the 

rules of the House to get on with the business, then I suggest that all they have to do is table the 

document and we will get on with the business of the Department of Health. The other thing, Mr. 

Chairman, is this. Here is another option. I think this House could move to leave Item No. 1 now, and 

return to it when the document we requested is tabled. I think that is a reasonable request so I say to the 

Attorney general if 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

860 

 

he wants to go on with the business, is he prepared now to go on with the further items in the 

Department of Health, but return to Item No. 1 when the document filed by the minister, which he has 

agreed to table tomorrow, is tabled in this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the Conservative leader makes a suggestion which I think has to be 

judged by his actions. His actions to date lend no hope for the possibility of a reasonable debate on 

health policies – none. And for the government, and after all we are the government still, you may not 

like it, you may be wanting to defeat us, but we are the government and we are trying to govern – we are 

trying to get the estimates through the House, trying to get on with the business of the people – that’s 

our objective. Your objective is to play political games all you want and make speeches, and delay and 

filibuster and drag, and do anything else you want in that area, but there is no reason why we should 

accept that kind of a tactical suggestion because of your views on this thing. As far as I am concerned, I 

just would not be prepared to recommend that to the Minister of Health or to anyone else. I think, Mr. 

Chairman, it is very significant to note that, apart from the Leader of the PCs, virtually no one else in the 

PC caucus has spoken on this particular issue or doddled it as long as it is. No one else, Mr. Chairman, 

for hours – no one else has any questions on any of the other plans which relate to the Department of 

Health. I think that highlights the very point I am trying to make. So my position, Mr. Chairman, if they 

want to continue on fine, let them keep going – there is nothing I can do about that. I am entitled to draw 

the conclusion, on behalf of the members of the House, that this is an act if irresponsibility and I am 

entitled to point that out to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, which I intend to do at every 

opportunity that I can. I am entitled, also, to draw, under some other circumstances, some very 

legitimate political conclusions as to why they are doing it. Mr. Chairman, I think it is obvious to most 

people in the province of Saskatchewan and in the Legislative Assembly. That is my position. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I can offer another amiable solution to get out of the 

childishness that is going on here and maybe – I am not sure, Mr. Chairman, that we should not go and 

ask the Speaker if he cannot find a way and a means to move the desks from here to there. I am not sure 

whether that would make any difference or not. I think the way you earn your respect in this place is 

how you perform – not really where you sit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — What I also would like to tell the Leader of the Conservative party is that there is 

an item – a subvote, on SHSP and the information that he is requesting is on SHSP. Because the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services vote covers such a wide latitude I am sure he has no question that it will 

not be possible to ask at that particular time. He says that all the other documents are on subvotes. I 

would suggest to him, so is the document he is requesting a subvote. If you want me to give you the 

subvote . . . all I am suggesting, Mr. Chairman, is let us find out. I do not think the request of the 

member is that unreasonable. I think the government should go along. I think both of you are being 

childish. Let us get on with the business; let us go to work. Do not sit here I say. Either stand Item 1 or 

please tell the member for Nipawin that there is a subvote (I think it is subvote 27) and let us get on at – 

25, and if you will look at that, the total of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan is included in that 

particular subvote. We could get on maybe, because I think there are some interesting questions on 

individual subvotes that might be worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, just one comment and I want to support what the 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

861 

 

Attorney General said. I have said, on a number of occasions, what the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley has said, that there is a subvote here called Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. There 

are two or three others, in conjunction with it, that can be considered and all questions that the member 

wants to ask can be asked there. It has no bearing, for example, on subvote 2, The Tuberculosis 

Sanitarium and Hospital Act; it has no bearing on personnel recruitment and training; it has no bearing 

on the Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Plan, which I am sure members have questions to ask about; it has no 

bearing on the Saskatchewan Dental Plan and you can go down the list. We could have, this evening, 

discussed very thoroughly, every one of these subvotes for the benefit of the members here and for the 

benefit of the people of Saskatchewan who have a right to know. The reason it has not been discussed, 

only the members over there know. Mention has been made what those reasons might be but that will 

remain as it is. The fact of the matter is we could have been discussing those things. The only reason we 

have not been discussing is that the Tory caucus over there has not allowed it to happen. 

 

Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, there are a few things I want to say about this 

debate tonight in regard to these Health estimates. So often I have heard the Attorney General get up in 

this House, after it has run into many difficulties and gotten bogged down on numerous occasions, and 

not because of the opposition; I have listened to him get up and take any one or two or three forms. 

Tonight he took a soft approach, speaking to the people of Saskatchewan, pleading like the Sermon on 

the Mount, as if he were the greatest thing since sliced bread but you know, Mr. Attorney General . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I wish I had said that. (Laughter from some hon. members). 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Yes, and there, Mr. Attorney General, is the responsible government sitting right 

behind you as they laugh at any word spoken responsibly from this side of the House. I can remember 

when the Liberals to our right, when we first came into this Legislature they said, look at those Tories. 

They just sit there. They say nothing. They have never got anything to say. Now we have got the 

Liberals over there, the same group, only fewer of them and they are saying, the Tories are saying too 

much. They are delaying the debate. They are prolonging things. They know how fast they are going to 

sink into third party status. 

 

But that is not the problem with the Liberals. The problem that we have is with the government. I am not 

going to address my remarks to the Liberals to the right of me. I’ll address my remarks to the 

government opposite. There are a number of members across this floor who are responsible members 

and good ministers of government who on most occasions provide answers to questions. The Attorney 

General is one that doesn’t answer a lot of questions asked in this House. But what he spoke about 

tonight, about trying to shut the Conservative caucus on questioning in estimates whether it is in 

Revenue or whether it is in Health or what it is, highlights to me what this government has been doing 

for a long time, long before I came in here but more importantly, ever since I came in here. They are not 

prepared to answer to anything even an oral question in the question period. They will take notice of it 

or give you some huffy-puffy answer that doesn’t get you anywhere. We can introduce motions in this 

House, Mr. Chairman, as you are well aware; we don’t necessarily get answers. We can introduce a bill 

in this House and you know very well, Mr. Chairman, this government – all 39 members – will stand up 

and defeat it and none one of them at the back will think for one second about the bill, whether it is a 

good bill or what it is. We had a good motion introduced by our member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

and it didn’t receive the support of the 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

862 

 

government. 

 

I spoke in this legislature with regard to metric conversion. No, no support from the Liberals even or the 

government. Now we are back at a different time and a different place and now we have got the support 

of both. Estimates is the same thing. Now I see a lot of support staff that the Minister of Health has in 

here tonight. You have been asking for questions, Mr. Chairman, you have been proper in asking that 

our questions be directed that are going to deal with estimates in their entirety that other items can be 

discussed as we go down the items. Let’s just take a look at the last one. 

 

We have the last one right here and it says $435,626,010. We are nearing half a billion dollars for health 

care in this province. So often . . . half a billion, yes, half a billion is what I said. The Minister of Health 

and the former Minister of Health have said in this House and so have other government members 

repeatedly – health care costs are higher in other provinces, in particular Tory provinces. I don’t want to 

debate that; I want to debate what the costs are to Saskatchewan people right here in Saskatchewan. I see 

a figure that is approaching a half a billion dollars and I tell you, Mr. Minister of Health . . . no, it is not 

too much, but I want to tell you that you have got to come clean with the people of Saskatchewan and 

quit misleading them and saying that these costs aren’t being reflected on the taxpayers of this province, 

because you know they are and I know they are. You talk about blatant lies and innuendoes that are cast 

about this province from these Chambers. Mr. Chairman, that is the type of thing that we have to debate 

here tonight. We are talking about estimates and I will ask a question. I will ask the Minister of Health to 

answer this question. He hasn’t answered any others. What is the cost to those people in Saskatchewan 

that are responsible for this $435 million? What is the cost per capita to those who are responsible to 

bear those costs? Can you answer that question, Mr. Minister of Health? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am tempted to say, agreed, Mr. Chairman. The member talks about the number 

of dollars and that it is a reflection on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Of course it is a reflection on the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan is a fair and just way as they only do in the 

province of Saskatchewan pay for their health services. Fortunately, though, they don’t pay as great a 

burden as they do in other provinces because of two reasons. Because we have resource policies that 

contribute very substantially to the consolidated fund, resource policies that provide 20 per cent of the 

revenues of the province of Saskatchewan coming from our resources . . . (interjection) . . . 26 per cent, 

where as you get in Ontario only .2 per cent of the revenues come from the resource companies and the 

resources of that province, so indeed it is a reflection on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan but it is a good 

reflection and better than anywhere else in Canada. It is a good reflection because they don’t have to pay 

unfair health taxes as they do in Ontario and Alberta and British Columbia and soon will in 

Conservative Manitoba. They do it through the income tax system which is progressive and they do it 

through resource revenues which makes sure that the revenues that come from our resources stay in the 

province of Saskatchewan and don’t get siphoned off as they did during Liberal years and are getting 

siphoned off in every Conservative province in Canada at this time. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Chairman, you would be aware and the Attorney General, if he were listening 

which he isn’t, he is over there visiting again as usual, if he were listening he would realize the Minister 

of Health did not answer the question that I just asked him. He circled around and he talked about 

resource revenues and, Mr. Chairman, if you had been there and if I had been the chairman, with all 

respect, I would have ruled him out of order. 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

863 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I think I will make that decision myself and I don’t need to be told whether I am 

right or wrong. You have the privilege of challenging it afterwards. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not challenging you ruling whatsoever, I am only telling you and 

I’ll tell the Minister of health, you never discuss - Mr. Minister, are you listening or is the Attorney 

General going to answer for you? You never answered the question that I asked you. It’s the question 

that the people of Saskatchewan want to know and I would suggest to you that you would do well to 

attempt to answer the question. I said you have lots of support staff there to work it out. I’m sure they’ve 

all got mini calculators and this could be done. Surely it can, but rather than that you skirted it, walked 

around and around it and discussed resource and blew up your resource policy because I know that’s 

what you are out there saying that, oh, yes, all the profits we’re going to make in that potash industry is 

going to pay for our health care services. That is not so. Now, Mr. Minister of Health, would you mind 

trying once more because I would suggest to you that if you calculated that 300 . . . (interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Minister of Health, if you would look at the figures and the numbers of people who work in this 

province and that actually pay taxes one way or another, you would know that that figure could be in 

excess of $1,300. So work it out, if it takes you a while, all right, let’s take a while and let’s get the 

answer. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me help the member, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Do you need help? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — If the member would spend a little time, take a pencil in hand and apply it to 

paper, he could take $435,626,010, divide it by almost 1 million which is the population of 

Saskatchewan and I hope that maybe he has already attempted to do that but somehow he has not 

learned how. I can tell him that roughly it will work out to about $457.89. Now, also keep in mind that 

that $435,626,010 it is less than the total revenues from our resources in the province of Saskatchewan 

which is $468 million, I believe, $462 million. Now that $457.89 that you break down by using that kind 

of mathematics, would give you even less than what the Ontario government is collecting in health 

premiums from the people of Ontario - $528 a year from a family. The member asked the question. 

There is his answer which he could have figured out for himself anyhow. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — I would like to ask some questions of the minister on a different topic right now. 

 

I followed an hour-long program on television not too long ago in regard to the very distinct problem 

which is known as the North American problem by the different health experts. I am also looking at 

some statistics from our own Department of Health, federal Department of Health. That is the area of 

venereal disease which is now being considered as our number one communicable disease. I wonder, 

Mr. Minister, if you have any information – what is the situation in Saskatchewan, is it comparable to 

the national level of this disease and also with that, the amount of attention that is going to be spent this 

year by your department is taking a look at this very serious matter? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can give you the situation. That is a perfectly good and legitimate question. I 

think it is a good question in an important area. I can give you the statistics of cases reported in 

Saskatchewan and we are trying to find how that might 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

864 

 

compare nationally. I don’t have it right in front of me but maybe it will come before I finish my answer. 

 

In 1973 the reported cases were 3,826 in 1974; 3,584; in 1975, 3,854; in 1976, 3,523 and in 1977, 3,612. 

I don’t see that there is any particular trend there. All I can say is that it’s a small reduction in 1977 

compared to what it was at the peak that I have here of 1973. 

 

Now, I have some specific examples of certain diseases and these are case rates for 100,000 population 

for western Canada by province in all of Canada, the comparison you asked for. 

 

If you take the example of syphilis, in 1974 the rate in Canada was 16.8; in Saskatchewan it was 11.7. In 

1975 the rate for syphilis, 17.4; in Saskatchewan it was 8.9. For 1976 I don’t have the federal statistics 

but I can tell you that in Saskatchewan it was 6. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

It would seem then, that for the figures you have given since 1973 the figure has remained fairly 

constant, with a slight trend up and down slightly between 3,500 and 4,000 is the figure which you have 

given me for the total which would indicate then, Mr. Minister, by your figures that the problem in 

Saskatchewan is not as acute as it is in other areas of Canada, and indeed, North America. 

 

Studies that we have and the materials that have been put out by, mainly by doctors, would indicate that 

the numbers which are reported or the numbers that are in the hands of the Department of Health, like 

yours, sir, indicate only those which are reported and there is an indication that a good number of these 

go unreported. This is the area on which I would like to ask a question – is the Department of Health in 

Saskatchewan at the present time, undertaking or planning any means by which they can get to the 

unreported cases? Now, I am not saying that you can have a witch hunt but if you will note that it is 

necessary if you are going to make any impact at all upon the spread of our number one communicable 

disease. The various departments of health are taking some very strenuous action in this year, 1978. Is 

your department planning any action or new programs to reach and to counteract this particular 

problem? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all, the latter question. We recently recruited, among one of our new 

medical health offices, Dr. R. Mathias, who has a special and particular interest in this field. It is our 

hope that he will be able to assist a great deal in improving a system which is now (and I don’t say this 

in a political sense at all) one of the best reporting systems in the country. That is recognized by the 

other provinces and by the Federal Department of Health and Welfare. Having said that, I can also say 

that the incidence of the reporting is improving all the time. It has been improving for the last several 

years. The problem is, that there is, as the member knows, a stigma that is attached that we nor anyone 

else has been able to break down. 

 

You will be aware of the public education programs that we have had and other organizations have had 

and I am persuaded that that has had some significant difference. So there have been some, I think, fairly 

positive indications of the kind of developments that are taking place. There is no denying that there is 

probably a substantial number of cases that go unreported because of the stigma and whatever other 

reasons there might be. But we are making efforts on the continuing basis to try to 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

865 

 

improve that every year. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The question which I have next for you, is mentioned in reply 

to the question which I had in regard to the public education program. You will recall that a few years 

ago we had some difficulty and some objection from getting a proper educational program dealing with 

venereal disease of the high school. I am not too sure whether the education shouldn’t have gone to 

some parents before it went to the high school. 

 

I suggest to you, and I present this to you in the way of a question. Do you not think it advisable at this 

particular time where we have health programs quite extensively in the province – I am thinking of such 

programs as Aware, such programs as Feeling Good and probably have some other programs. Have you 

anticipated or have you given any consideration to going more openly via the media as you have with 

the other programs, in educating the general public to this number one communicable disease that we 

have? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have been informed that, and I don’t know whether the member is familiar with 

them, although I think he is, that there is quite a substantial supply of films in the field that are provided 

to schools. There is a mechanism for a continuing review to see that they are updated. We make them 

available on request. We encourage their utilization and we inform schools and others of their 

availability. 

 

As far as the question, I think you would probably also admit, a public advertising campaign through the 

media. I think that is what you were referring to. Those kinds of plans are not included in the present 

appropriations although there may be some interest in the future. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — If I understand you correctly, I know the films and materials, but you are not then 

planning in the year 1978 to launch a campaign, a public campaign, to draw to the attention of the 

citizens of this province, to the awareness of Canada’s number one communicable disease; that you 

haven’t voted moneys for it. Did I hear you correctly in stating that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s right. There are no moneys provided for that particular specific purpose in 

this subvote. It has existed before, some of those efforts have been made. The results, I am informed, 

were not particularly successful. Certainly in the consideration of the review of films and other 

alternatives, we are also prepared to consider whether we can do a better job of the former method of 

using the media. At the present time we are not in a position to do that. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Minister, your Aware Program, is it not in part funded by the federal Department of 

Health? Am I not right in assuming that a portion of the Aware campaign that is launched, is not some 

of that cost borne by the federal government? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The member is correct. Out of the budget for Aware of $360,000 the federal 

contribution estimated in 1978-79 is $90,000. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — The total cost of the Aware Program during the last budget year was $360,000? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — This coming year. 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

866 

 

Mr. Bailey: — This coming year and of that $360,000, $90,000 will be borne by the federal 

government. I am assuming that if the Department of Health were to launch a campaign similar to the 

Aware campaign on the topic which I have brought to your attention . . . are you aware that the federal 

Department of Health would be prepared to pick up a portion of an intensive advertising campaign? 

Could you answer that question for me? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can assure the member that from the experiences that we have had there is no 

such assurance at all, that the federal Department of Health and Welfare would provide that kind of 

commitment. One of the unfortunate things is that from time to time those kinds of commitments have 

been made in the past and then with very little notice pulled out and withdrawn. There is no such 

assurance. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Minister, doesn’t it strike you as strange that if the reports coming out of the federal 

Department of Health as well as the CBC program itself – and I believe there is a great deal of truth to 

the program – there is some responsibility if I can hear you correctly as saying that the federal 

government then is negligent in their responsibility and in attacking Canada’s number one 

communicable disease. It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that while we may brag in Saskatchewan by saying 

that our number of reported cases and so on are pretty well remaining constant, we do have some 

responsibility here. I suggest, too, that your department should have some responsibility in suggesting to 

the federal Department of Health that some funds be made available so that this year, 1978, can be a 

year in which we can look at a very positive aspect and a very positive look towards controlling this 

particular disease. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to sum this up by placing this question to you. Has this matter ever been discussed 

at the federal health conferences with the health ministers of the ten provinces. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all, in my term as the Minister of Health in Saskatchewan it has not been 

discussed. I have only gone to one provincial meeting with the provincial ministers, it was not a 

federal-provincial meeting but I am informed that it indeed has been discussed and the urgency of the 

situation has been discussed at federal-provincial meetings. I regret very much also to inform the House 

that in those discussions no success at all has been achieved in persuading the federal government or the 

federal officials that they ought to provide some funding in this field so that they can share in the effort 

that is required. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — A final comment, Mr. Minister, could you then assure this House that the next time that 

you meet at the national level with the ten provincial health ministers that you, as the Minister of Health 

in Saskatchewan will draw to the attention of the other ministers and perhaps with your initiation we can 

commence a more positive program in the country. Could you give us that assurance and I think that it 

would be appreciated not only by this House but by the people of the province as well. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am certainly prepared to take that under advisement. Any area of need we 

constantly consider and it is a question that I think certainly is worthy of discussion among my 

colleagues across Canada, including the Federal Minister of Health and Welfare. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to – the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) 

mentioned the fact that there had been in the past and the situation is 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

867 

 

possibly a little better but not too much better on elective surgery. The Plains Hospital has 100 beds that 

are furnished and empty. Could the minister tell us when these 100 beds are going to be open? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all let me directly answer the question. As the level of referrals increases 

that level of increase will be used to determine the phasing in of those beds that the member speaks of. 

There are actually 57 of those beds that are yet there to be phased in. The phasing of them will depend 

on the level of increase in referrals. It will depend on the recruitment of certain specialists. It will depend 

on the renovations which are now I believe beginning. They certainly have been approved for the 

cardiac catherization facility and all of those things have to be taken into consideration. As those 

indications are made available then they will be phased in and the phasing in will depend on that. 

Certainly we can’t precisely predict what those things are going to be but they will determine it. 

 

Mr. Larter: — Would the Minister of Health suggest then when certain specialists in Regina and 

numerous specialists tell us that these beds could be phased in and could be filled on elective surgery at 

the present time that it could happen as soon as the government will permit these beds to open. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, first of all I want to make sure the member does not misunderstand. The 

rate of implementation or the rate of phasing does not depend necessarily on the government. He 

indicated that might be the case. The fact of the matter is, the specialists’ appointments are joint 

appointments. This is a teaching hospital, it has got to have a broad range of specialization. Those 

appointments are joint appointments by the College of Medicine and by the hospital and so, those 

appointments will determine, to a large extent, what happens with those beds. I might also add for the 

member’s information, there are presently discussions taking place on 22 of those beds, and that is, in 

the are of psychiatry, 10 beds, in the area of neurosciences another 12 beds. I again restate that the 

determination of the phasing in will depend on the appointments that are made in the specialized fields 

by the joint appointment committee of the College of Medicine and the hospital itself. 

 

Mr. Larter: — I agree with the minister and I commend you for your plans for the future use of these 

beds. But it still stands that there are people in this province waiting for elective surgery, and there are 

surgeons in Regina waiting to do the work on these people. I can see you phasing these into psychiatry 

whenever you want later on, but why can’t these beds be utilized for people that are waiting for hernia 

operations, or rupture operations and back operations, many operations that can be done right now and 

those beds utilized. The minister has to remember (in many cases you refer to how many beds 

Saskatchewan has) that this is a vast province, and many of these beds are in hospitals that cannot be 

elective surgery and cannot do minor surgery. So we depend on the hospitals in the larger cities for the 

rural patients and so it is very important that these beds are opened at the present time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I restate what I said two days ago. Every major urban hospital in 

this country has got a waiting list, that is why there is a categorization of the type of patient. If it is 

urgent, the patient will get in and have his operation. I would also like to inform the member that 

waiting list that he and his colleagues so often talk about, in the last year have been showing some pretty 

significant indication of decreasing simply because of efficient operation of the hospitals and because of 

the allocation of beds for the particular areas of need. A good example I could give the member is what 

has recently happened in the St. Paul’s Hospital in the city of Saskatoon 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

868 

 

where orthopedic surgery there was a great deal of pressure on it, with assistance from the Department 

of Health and some funding there was a study made by the board and by the personnel at St. Paul’s 

Hospital and there has been a reallocation of some of the beds and there are more beds available for 

orthopedic surgery. There has, as a result, been a very dramatic decrease in the numbers of people 

waiting and a decrease in the length of time for people who are waiting for orthopedic surgery. So those 

things are happening and the problems are not as great as sometimes some members for their political 

reasons try to portray them to be. 

 

Mr. Larter: — Mr. Minister, I am not portraying this for political reasons. I suggest to you that anxiety 

caused in families around this country for a person waiting. I don’t care if its for a hernia operation, the 

discomfort and the anxiety caused to families waiting for a bed and I say the surgeons are here to do this 

work and you are not permitting them to do this work. I ask you again, would you consider opening 

those 57 beds in the Plains Hospital? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just one brief comment. I share the anxieties that people have. I happened to have 

experienced some of those anxieties and understood them in my own family. But I want to say this that I 

am certainly very proud of the fact that in Saskatchewan at least those people know that when they 

finally get to have that surgery, when they get to have that treatment they are not going to be burdened 

with thousands of dollars of medical costs. They know that it’s available and they know that it’s 

available to all of them. I think that that is a point that we can well make in Saskatchewan and compared 

to anywhere else in Canada. Now give that availability universally to everybody in spite of income 

increases the number of people who are prepared to go for an operation when they need one instead of 

encouraging them because of the fear of financial pressures to keep away, then that’s good. I suspect 

that in other places in Canada, such as Ontario and Alberta, there are people as there were probably 

people in Saskatchewan before medicare, who are suffering quite immensely because of the financial 

burdens that they are burdened with because of the kind of ruination of the medicare system that is 

happening in those places. 

 

Mr. Larter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister, he would probably agree then that these 

people who cannot get the surgery and have to wait a number of months they may die but they’ll die 

happy because they have got a full wallet. Is that what he’s getting at? 

 

I would like to ask the minister also if only a government can afford to keep a factory going at 

two-thirds capacity. In the private sector you try to run a factory at two-thirds capacity you would go 

broke. But the government has the money to put up that mansion and then can’t use it all. I thought that 

would be a nice thought for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also like to ask the minister if there are plans in the future for having elective surgery for 

communities that have the proper surgeons around the province, such as Weyburn, Estevan. Are there 

any plans of granting these hospitals more use of elective surgery in these places in order not to dump 

the load on Regina, so more Regina people can use these new facilities? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the qualification of the physicians in the hospitals throughout 

Saskatchewan, physicians who are granted hospital privileges by the boards, of those hospitals, will 

determine the kind, to some extent, the kind of 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

869 

 

surgery that those hospitals are able to determine. 

 

The College of Physicians and Surgeons offers and is prepared to provide advice to hospitals on the kind 

of surgery that hospitals, with their facilities and with the kind of specialization their qualified surgeons 

they have are able to carry out. The hospitals of Saskatchewan rely, very greatly, on the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons and, generally if not almost totally, follow the advice of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons. And, we too, rely on that advice, that they provide to the hospitals. 

 

Mr. Larter: — Mr. Chairman, is there, though, where there are qualified physicians that qualified 

according to the College of Physicians and Surgeon standards, are there plans for your department to 

insist in upgrading if there are special units needed for these hospitals to take away this elective surgery 

load from the cities. I know that in Estevan in particular there are people perfectly qualified to do this 

surgery. Are there any plans in the future for doing this work? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — For elective surgery, I do not know that hospitals do not really have the facilities 

required of them to be able to carry out the procedures that they are carrying out or want to carry out. If 

the member would not mind, I would like him to give me some specific examples of special units that he 

thinks might be necessary. I cannot recollect requests that have come to us from hospitals for special 

units because most of them are equipped with operating theatres and recovery facilities and all of those 

things connected with elective surgery. 

 

Mr. Larter: — Mr. Minister, all I am asking is, if these hospitals do have the qualified people, and I am 

not suggesting they are not equipped, but I am saying that if they are equipped physically to handle this 

type of work, why are these hospitals not being phased in a little more? I know they are worthy and 

accredited by the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We do not know of any hospitals that are under-facilitated in that way. We 

provide funds to hospitals on the basis of the population they serve and if the member has a specific 

example, I would appreciate it if he would bring it to our attention. Once again I suppose . . . Well I am 

not going to argue the point . . . It is 10:00 p.m. now. The Conservatives have succeeded in filibustering 

again for three hours or so and wasting the time of this House but if the member wishes to give me an 

example, a specific example, we can look into it and maybe we can provide him with an answer today. If 

not, we will provide him with an answer after we have made the appropriate inquiries into what may 

have been brought to the department’s attention. 

 

Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister would consider 

decentralizing elective surgery, as such. In centres like Estevan, Swift Current, etc., we have lots of 

very, very well qualified doctors who do not have the volume of certain operations to maintain the 

expertise. Naturally we want the people of Saskatchewan to get the very best of health care. So they 

come to Regina, clog up our health delivery system to get the very best of surgeons on the job. Whereas, 

if we had people, for instance, a dozen hysterectomies a week going to Estevan to the hysterectomy 

specialist – if he is doing them once a month, he cannot possibly be expected to perform at peak 

efficiency. So would the minister give any consideration to the decentralization of elective surgery? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, that’s the first speech by that member in this House since this House came 

into session. It is very interesting to hear him ask a question. If you 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

870 

 

show them enough patience, Mr. Chairman, give them enough time, they will all get up eventually and 

make a 15-second speech. 

 

I’m not sure what the member is getting at but the fact of the matter is all of those hospitals now are 

doing elective surgery, every one of them. There is nothing prohibiting them from doing elective 

surgery. If there is a referral by a doctor from any area of Saskatchewan to a particular specialist, that’s a 

decision between the doctor and the patient. Is the member suggesting that the Department of Health or 

that the Minister of health or that the Government of Saskatchewan should interfere with that 

relationship between a doctor and his patient? He must be suggesting that because that is the thrust of 

the question. No, we are not prepared to do that. That is a decision between the doctor and the patient 

where it ought to be because the doctor knows best in consultation with the person whom he is trying to 

serve. The elective surgery is there, they do it in Estevan, they do it in Weyburn, they do it in Moose 

jaw, they do it in Swift current, they do it in Humboldt and they do a tremendous job, I might add. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — No, despite what the Attorney General said earlier that there had only been one member 

on these questions. I want to assure the Attorney General and the Minister of Health that during the 

course of the discussion today I have appreciated the answers that he has given on two basic topics that I 

raised and I appreciate it very much. I found his answers very interesting and stimulating. So, Mr. 

Attorney General, I think you were quite wrong in stating that there has been nobody else into the 

questioning at this particular time because I spent a good deal of time and I want to thank the minister 

and his advisors very much for the information given. 

 

I sometimes think, Mr. Chairman, that I should have been the critic for Health because I have an idea 

that I can probably brag of more hospitals in my constituency than any other member in the House. I 

doubt if any other constituency has seven hospitals located within the borders as I have and I say that 

with some sort of pride, Mr. Minister . . . (interjection) . . . yes, they are all operating as well. It is 

regrettable at this time, Mr. Chairman, and it is close to 10:00. I did want to thank the minister and I 

have some sympathy with the staff that he has brought in for the long delay. I am sure that it must have 

been a very boring and tedious time for you gentlemen. It is regrettable however, that perhaps you 

should give some reflection as to why it has taken so long. I think the minister has opened up this 

evening more than he has previously and we are looking forward to the tabling of the estimates 

tomorrow in this House. 

 

I suggest that in the future, Mr. Minister, and to other members as well, that they prepare themselves for 

the estimates like all of the departments and perhaps this type of questioning would not prevail. 

 

However, in closing, Mr. Minister and your advisors, I want to thank you, Mr. Minister, and the advisors 

for the notes that I have taken and other members of my caucus. I am sure that everyone, despite the 

attempts at times of the minister to do his little politicizing, shall we say, that Saskatchewan is very 

proud of its health care system. I think he realizes that at the same time he cannot be immune from 

questioning from the opposition and I think that he has borne up well to those questions. In closing, I 

thank the minister. I wanted to make sure that the Attorney General knew that there were other people 

involved in this, quite extensively and I suspect that he, like some of the others, have become slightly 

disturbed with it . . . was absent from the House and I can assure him that the member for Nipawin (Mr. 

Collver) was certainly not the only one answering the questions . . . (interjections) . . . pardon? No, this 

is not my farewell speech. I just wanted to convey to the minister my thanks and to the members of his 

staff which he 



 

March 30, 1978 
 

871 

 

brought into the House. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, my colleague, the Minister of Finance, was anticipating that the 

Conservatives might let the vote go but we can be assured that the political objectives have not been 

met. Those were very nice words from the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey). I hear the nice 

words but he doesn’t act like he speaks. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 o’clock p.m. 

 


