



















































Hansard: April 21, 1978


1785 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

 

April 21, 1978. 

The Assembly met at 10 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Mr. Edgar Kaeding (Saltcoats) in take 

pleasure in introducing a group of students from the Tantallon public school . . . 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): — I’ve got it here. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you 

and to the Assembly a group of students from the Tantallon Public School in the beautiful Qu’Appelle 

Valley, they are sitting up in the Speaker’s Gallery. They will be meeting with me after they have been 

sitting in the House and they have been visiting around the Legislature. I will be meeting with them at 

1:30. 

 

I am sure that all of you will join with me in welcoming them to the Legislature and wish them a safe 

journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

GASOLINE PRICES AT BORDER 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 

Minister in charge of Revenue. I have asked this question in the House several times, Mr. Minister, and I 

realize that in representing all areas of Saskatchewan that possibly you are having some problems in 

reaching a government policy. That is a policy, Mr. Minister, that you have promised to me on three 

occasions at least in which you would be announcing the government policy in what way the 

government would be taking measures to protect the interests of Saskatchewan businessmen along the 

Alberta-Saskatchewan border due to the difference in the gasoline price. When can we expect the 

announcement and shall we say not within the next few days but I’ll put the question to you, can we 

expect an announcement before this month is up? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): — I think it is fair to say that we should expect an 

announcement before the month is out. I could point out that we expect anything that is done will be 

done retroactively to the 1st of April, when the Alberta tax came off. I might inform the House that we 

have some officials out in that area right now doing some checking with people with respect to getting 

some input from them as well. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The minister realizes this comment has been 

made in this House several times. I wonder with the retroactivity clause which you have promised to the 

people along there as to what provisions you are going to make for those who have since April 1st had to 

close their businesses entirely, is any consideration going to be given to these people at all? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — We haven’t been given any information with respect to any that have closed in that 

interim. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1786 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A supplementary to the Minister of Revenue. You have made the 

commitment that we would be expecting government policy shortly and the promise has been made on 

several occasions. In light of the very intense Cabinet and caucus divisions on your side of the House in 

coming up with a policy, why would you be so certain that you would have it by the end of the month 

and is there not a little wishful thinking there? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, we want our decision to be a reasonable one. The member who just 

spoke was the member of a caucus at one time, head of a government that tried to rush in where fools 

have feared to tread, I suppose, in the Lloydminster area and they had to back off very quickly in terms 

of the decisions that were made at that time. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I would like to direct a question to the minister. 

The minister has indicated that you are now trying to determine a policy retroactive to April 1st in 

relation to actual sales. Can the minister indicate whether or not his government is considering 

retroactively, consideration for lost sales because the real issue in western Saskatchewan today is not 

only the amount of the gasoline gallons that are sold but by far what is more important is the thousands 

and thousands of dollars or lost sales that now these businessmen have lost because of the change in 

price. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — That, Mr. Speaker, is totally impossible to pinpoint. 

 

CABLE TV FILTERS 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney 

General or the Minister in charge of Sask Tel and I return to the matter of filters and converters once 

again. I asked the Attorney General yesterday about the matter of filters to confirm that filters would be 

required on all television sets that are hooked up to Cable TV. 

 

My first question to the Attorney General, have you had any communication with Sask Tel in 

connection with this matter and can you now confirm to the House that filters will be required for every 

television set whether they take the licensees, the private licensees, or CPN or both? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, indeed I have had an opportunity to 

discuss this matter with the officials at Sask Tel and as I am sure all hon. members will realize this is a 

fairly highly technological matter. As I understand the situation, the answer to the question put forward 

by the member is that filters are not required in order to separate the two functions, the two services, as a 

matter of provision of service for the Conventional Cable operators. They may be required upon 

depending whether or not a Conventional Cable customer can uncover technology which will allow him 

to subscribe indirectly to the CPN subscription service which, of course, would be contrary to law, or 

could be contrary to law, and would also involve some expenditure. 

 

But in terms of strict provision of service, a filter is not needed for the Conventional Cable operator 

since CPN will be, and is now, in the area between channel 5 and channel 6, referred to as the mid band 

and you can’t get that on Conventional Cable unless you have a convert which, in effect, plucks this 

signal out. You don’t need the 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1787 

 

filter in order to prevent the Conventional Cable operator for getting the CPN in between 5 and 6. That 

is the advice that I get from the Sask Tel officials. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The advice that I received differs and the 

advice I received comes from Saskatoon Telecable and Cable Regina. 

 

Accepting your proposition for the moment, be that as it may, is it not correct that a converter is readily 

obtainable in most stores in Saskatchewan and can be fairly simply hooked up to a television set that 

already is receiving Cable Regina and the signal that is being sent down the line by CPN just be put on 

the TV set because you have the converter? Is it not a fact that Sask Tel recognizes that this is a problem 

and the only way that you can prevent that from happening, short of prosecutions of course, is to have 

the filter installed? If that is the case, would you please tell me, Mr. Attorney General, how much these 

filters cost. When you are going to get a supply of them for Sask Tel and when they are going to be 

installed? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, I think, it is fair to categorize his remarks as 

partly right. There is a gizmo on the market which is a converter, which may be able to do the thing that 

the Leader of the Liberal Party indicates, namely, take out that signal between channel 5 and channel 6. I 

emphasize the word “may” because these are commercial models and as I gather it is far from being 

absolutely scientifically clear that that is the case. 

 

I would remind the member that there are two deterrents against people, going out and doing this on 

their own. Firstly, there is a financial deterrent, or could be a financial deterrent. The converter — I 

don’t know what it costs at a commercial shop, this particular commercial shop, but using your figures it 

is certainly in the $60 to $100 range. One would argue that it is still cheaper than paying for CPN but 8 

that is a deterrent. 

 

Secondly of course, there is the question of whether or not this is a violation of the law — a violation of 

either a broadcasting law and/or a Sask Tel Act law or even perhaps even a Criminal Code with respect 

to theft because this would definitely be the stealing of a signal on the operation. So . . . 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Doesn’t that apply to CPN today? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Absolutely not! We will come to that at a point but that is another question and I 

don’t want to get too wordy. Those are the two deterrents that are there. The simple question is whether 

or not there will be any widespread use and successful widespread use of the converter for the use of this 

particular gizmo to take out the CPN signal from the mid-band 5 to 6. Sask Tel recognizes that this 

could happen but equally there are strong arguments that it will not happen in sufficient numbers for any 

kind of widespread production and/or purchase of filters in order to trap it out, and we are basing our 

assumptions that the latter will take place. 

 

MR. MALONE: — The only way you can enforce this of course a policeman at every house to make 

sure that the people haven’t attached a converter, if what you say is correct. But to put it mildly there is a 

great deal of uncertainty on both sides of the House as to the situations with filters, converters, 

converter-filters. I am not satisfied with your answers and I’m not saying that to demean you in any way 

and I am not satisfied with all the information that I have received. So bearing this in mind, would the 

Attorney General do one of a number of things? Will he call Sask Tel on estimates 



 

April 21, 1978 

1788 

 

immediately so that we can get Sask Tel officials in here and question them through the minister as to 

the actual situation. If you are not prepared to do that would you recall Sask Tel before Crown 

Corporations giving them instructions to answer questions at this period of time — would you do one of 

those things? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, there may be some confusion and I don’t take away from that point 

because, as I say, this is technological, but if I may, I am advised by Sask Tel people that there are — if 

I can be permitted the very brief indulgence of this House, three ways that we can get the service. If a 

person gets conventional cable only and he does not want the CPN he does not need anything else to get 

that cable because the CPN will be on the mid-band and you can’t get it unless you get the converter 

from Radio Shack or somewhere else. We were confident about that in question period. It is not a 

primary to separating the service. Whether it happens, the widespread abuse of converters, time will tell. 

 

If however, he gets both CPN and conventional cable then he needs the filter converter — approximate 

cost, $68 in all. This is Sask Tel information and I pass this along to the House. If he gets CPN only, he 

needs the filter converter — same gizmo, same cost, recaptured by the rates that Sask Tel charges the 

CPN. 

 

To answer the question specifically, as House Leader, I have no objection to calling Sask 

Telecommunications’ vote in estimates here early or to Crown Corporations, but there is a problem and I 

tell you candidly there is a problem. Many of the Sask Tel people are tied up right now in Ottawa with a 

very important issue before the Canadian Radio and Television Commission involving an application by 

CN . . . 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Just given us reason No. 6. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, that is fine. You can politic all you want and I know that is your game 

now until the federal election is called, or whatever. I am telling you, the facts are, that the people who 

are involved primarily with cable and Sask Tel, including our legal counsel and including the top rates 

man, are in Ottawa and have been there for weeks and are going to be there for some time, on a very 

important application by CN/CP which directly affects Sask Tel. That is the simple fact of the matter — 

you can accept it or reject it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order, order, order! I will take the member for Qu’Appelle first. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, by supplementary. You have admitted that an individual who, supposedly 

wishes to break the law (if that is a question) and is prepared to make the economic commitment of 

buying a converter, can in fact get CPN for no charge. Will Sask Tel be prepared to supply converters to 

any person who has cable TV? Will he be able to get the converters from Sask Tel without hooking up 

to CPN? Are you prepared to give them that right to have converters from Sask Tel? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, Sask Tel is not in the commercial retail business in the sense of 

Radio Shack in the sale of these converters. We are in the provision of . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — He never said it was. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — You are never here to know what he says so just don’t tell me what he says. Just 

go out there and do your politicking out in rural Saskatchewan and believe me you need to do a lot in 

order to get some operation I am telling the hon. member for 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1789 

 

Qu’Appelle that is not our game. We are in the business of providing services to customers, to clients 

who enter into contract, of which CPN is one — and if a gizmo, a box is required in order to facilitate a 

particular function and if we can do it, keeping in mind the economics of the operation, that’s the 

obligation we are involved in. That is the answer to the question from the hon. member for Qu’Appelle. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

IKOY CONTRIBUTIONS 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the PC Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in the light of the Attorney 

General’s aside, I would like to be addressing my question to him, but instead I will address the question 

to the Premier. The Premier is no doubt aware of the questioning that has gone on in this assembly in the 

last number of days, of the Minister of Finance pertaining to IKOY design out of Manitoba, and MBS, 

the contracting company out of Manitoba, that have been building senior citizens housing around in 

various locations in Saskatchewan. I would ask the Premier. In the light of the substantial contributions 

that were brought to the attention of this Assembly sometime ago to the NDP by IKOY and that 

organization, and since IKOY the designers, and MBS seem to be the same principals, one designing 

and one building, and since the Minister of Finance suggested the other day, the minister responsible for 

Sask Housing suggested the other day that the local authorities who are appointed by the Cabinet are 

making the decisions, and the architects making decisions — will the Premier now promise this 

Assembly that he will conduct an investigation of this entire matter of the questionable construction 

practices of MBS, IKOY and others in Sask Housing out of his office? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have not had made available to me evidence 

which would suggest that there were questionable practices requiring a major investigation. If the hon. 

member wishes to pass along something more than allegations, rather carefully worded, to supply 

innuendo and not facts, I would be happy to have the matter looked into, but I would ask him to supply 

the facts which he alleges, in writing, so we will all know what is supplied. Then we will have an 

opportunity to know whether or not a further investigation is warranted. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Premier. I think that the Premier would agree that 

the facts outlined in the first question are certainly correct. They have been presented to this Assembly 

in writing. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — What facts? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — The fact that IKOY . . . The Minister of Finance suggests that IKOY have made 

contributions to the NDP. That fact has been presented to this Assembly. The fact that IKOY and MBS 

are the — well, we have the lists from the — and tabled the document in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my supplementary question to the Premier is this. Since a Saskatchewan organization, the 

organization in Moose Jaw producing kitchen cabinets, was ruled out as a supplier of cabinets for the 

MBS senior citizens’ projects because of design specification that specified American manufactured 

cabinets by the designed specifications by the architects in Saskatoon and the contract given to a 

Manitoba firm, 



 

April 21, 1978 

1790 

 

would the Premier not agree that that was sufficient fact in itself to investigate the rather questionable 

practices of Sask Housing? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, once again the hon. member gives what he alleges to be facts. I 

would very much like to ask him to put those alleged facts down on a piece of paper so we could all 

examine them one by one. May I just instance one of those alleged facts, that we appoint the local 

housing authorities. Now, in a very, very technical sense, that is accurate, in the sense that they are 

appointed by order in council. But to the knowledge, and the full knowledge, of the Leader of the 

Opposition, that is done pursuant to an agreement whereby our government nominates one, the federal 

government nominates one, and the local authority nominates one, and we confirm those by order in 

council. 

 

His suggestion that they are our appointees and not the appointees of the federal government, the local 

authority and ourselves one, one, and one, that suggestion is false and yet he, by innuendo, suggests that 

they are our appointments when he well knows they are joint appointments by federal, provincial and 

municipal governments. 

 

GASOLINE PRICES AT BORDER 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Revenue. While I appreciated 

the fact that you announced this morning at least some retroactivity with regard to anything that is 

governing the gas price, I would just like to read a paragraph which I think refers to some problems that 

go above and beyond anything that a retroactive payment might help, and this is from a person in the 

Maple Creek area. It says: 

 

We have just settled in Saskatchewan and purchased a small tourist supply store and gas pumps. 

Up until April 1, we had a fair gas trade. Now it has dropped to almost nothing. The tourists are 

only getting the minimum of gas to get them to Alberta and we are only 15 miles from the 

Alberta border, that isn’t very little. In the last few days we are only selling $2 to $5 worth. 

 

The person who runs the service station on the 121 tells me the average fill is now six gallons instead of 

10 and that doesn’t’ measure the number of people who drive by the service station. 

 

Now, the Alberta budget was brought down on March 17, this is April 21. I would like to suggest that 

any further delay on this simply will not recover this lost business. It may do something about the 

gasoline that is . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Does the member have a question? 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Would the minister indicate whether or not it is possible to hurry up this 

decision? I understand a few days ago you said it would be in three days. 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — I am sure I did not state any specific time. The decision will be made as soon as we 

can come to a decision. 

 

STAR WEST 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, in 

light of your answer to the member for Nipawin’s question, I would like to ask 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1791 

 

the Premier, that upon checking yesterday’s Hansard where the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) 

suggested and, in fact, I believe stated although I have not see the record, that a local firm in Moose Jaw 

had misled me into presenting incorrect facts regarding tendering practices of MBS and an architectural 

firm in Saskatoon. In light of the Minister of Finance’s and the Minister in charge of Sask Housing 

Corporation’s charges there, regarding what I think are very reputable people in Moose Jaw, would the 

Premier, therefore, undertake in his office to either substantiate the Minister of Finance’s charges of the 

allegations that have been made the Star West people in Moose Jaw via myself. In other words, confirm 

it one way or the other and let’s get the facts in the open, through your office. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, no doubt if the business firm in Moose Jaw, Star West is the name 

I believe you mentioned, has anything they would like the government to investigate, they will get in 

touch with our office or with the Minister in charge of the Housing Corporation — they may well have 

done so — with respect to . . . But for my part, if we cannot have a more reliable source of information 

than the verbal comments of the members of the Conservative Opposition, then I think that is a rather 

unstable base on which to launch an investigation. I would prefer them, I would prefer Star West or 

anyone else, if they allege that improper charges have been made, to state what they wish investigated 

and we will be more than happy to consider whether or not that merits investigation. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I would like to ask you if your office 

maintains any records of phone calls? I would like to ask you if there is any record of the numerous 

times that Star West attempted to contact you personally in your office? I would like to ask you if there 

is any record of the numerous times that Star West worked through Sask Housing Corporation? 

 

Again, Mr. Premier, may I ask you, when a minister of the Crown makes a serious charge on a private 

individual within this Assembly such as occurred yesterday, would the Premier not agree with me that 

certainly those charges should either be substantiated or they should be repudiated, one way or the other, 

certainly by your office. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I was here yesterday and I heard no charges. This is my difficulty 

with the member for Thunder Creek. I heard the minister say and I speak now from memory that the 

people who were running that contract on some sort of an invitational basis suggested that other people 

might get in touch and this particular firm you refer to did not get in touch. That’s my recollection. I 

don’t have the transcript here and I suspect nobody else does because yesterday’s transcript is not out. 

So the difficulty really stems from operating from those very, very vague general comments. I will 

check my office records to see whether calls were made by Star West but I would have thought that if, 

as alleged by the hon. member Star West was attempting to get in touch with me and failed, they would 

have resorted to one of the other means of communication, a letter or telex or something to get their 

message through. I am not here to suggest that what the hon. member says is not accurate but I am just 

saying that if in fact they have not been able to reach I suspect they might have done that. I am not 

aware of them having done so. I accordingly ascribe to the comments of the hon. member that level of 

importance which would follow from that level of concern shown by the company that he represents. I 

am not saying it isn’t a matter that should be investigated, I want to be very clear on that, I’m just saying 

that I would like from someone at first hand a statement of what they believe ought to be investigated 

and if Star West wishes to send it no doubt they will know where to send it. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1792 

 

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SASK TEL AND GOVERNMENT 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — To the Minister in charge of Sask Tel. I want to ask the 

minister if what we are hearing about the deteriorating relationship between Sask Tel and the 

government is, in fact, so? Is it a fact that at the moment the government feels that it’s being misled in 

respect to some of the issues that have been raised in the House in the last few days by Sask Tel and is 

Sask Tel on the other hand not currently of a strong feeling that the government is interfering in its 

operations? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — The answer to question one is No, and the 

answer to question two is, No. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Is it not a fact by way of supplementary, that the government ordered Sask Tel 

not to abide its earlier commitments by way of letter which is filed in the House? Is it not a fact that was 

a decision of the government and not Sask Tel? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — No. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Are you saying that is, No? Can I ask you then, why is it, why may I ask by way 

of supplementary to the Minister in charge of Telephones, is the government’s lawyer, George Taylor, 

appearing in respect of the court case rather than the lawyers within Sask Tel? Can we draw any or make 

any assumption from that of any kind? I ask the Minister in charge of Telephones. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Minister, I just finished telling the member earlier in question period that 

Mr. Tom Howe has been engaged for weeks in Ottawa at a CRTC hearing involving an application by 

CN-CP which would ‘clean skin’ much of Sask Tel’s very profitable businesses, and also impair the 

service that Sask Tel provides to rural Saskatchewan. We are one of four or five telephone companies 

appearing before the CRTC. I said that once, I said that again. The reason, therefore, is there has to be a 

counsel engaged by Sask Tel. Mr. George Taylor is that counsel engaged by Sask Tel. And that is the 

simple fact of the matter and that is the answer to the situation. 

 

IKOY CONTRIBUTIONS 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I would address my question to the Premier, in the light of his apparent 

acquiescence to the fact that an investigation may be necessary, and I believe he said he is not going to 

rule out an investigation, with reference to the IKOY and MBS situation where Manitoba companies are 

taking over Saskatchewan organizations’ work in the province of Saskatchewan, I wonder if I might 

table in the Legislature today again, Mr. Speaker, and then ask; oh, you can’t, well that’s fine. I’ll table 

it later then. I would ask the Premier is he aware of the donation of some $4,240 by IKOY to the NDP in 

the last year and of the donation of $480 to the NDP of MBS Construction Ltd. in the last year. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the facts nor would there be any reason why I 

would be aware of the facts since I have had no dealings with either company and so far as I am aware, I 

have never met any of the principals or had any dealing with them. Let me put at rest one of the 

comments earlier made by the hon. member and it illustrates the difficulties which we have. I have said 

that we do not rule out an investigation if someone sends some facts. We have had no facts, only 

innuendoes and a wild innuendo, and on the basis of that innuendo, I most assuredly do rule out 

investigation. When somebody puts some hard facts that suggests that 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1793 

 

there ought to be an investigation, when someone suggests this, other than by innuendo, then I think we 

will know whether or not some action ought to be taken; but up to now member officers have been 

careful, and understandably careful not to make any statements of fact in writing which could be the 

basis of an investigation since they prefer to go down the trail of innuendoes rather than the trail of hard 

facts. They are understandably pursuing that route. They are understandably pursing that route since 

they have no other route to pursue. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

POINTS OF ORDER ON THE QUESTION PERIOD 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would like to raise a question with you. 

 

Yesterday, you brought to the attention of the Assembly the fact that an individual member had 

reprinted a picture that had been taken of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, raised this on his own motion. I 

would like to ask, on behalf of all members, that we get to the bottom of it and we clear it up. 

 

I would like to put three questions to the Speaker, that he might consider them and reply. 

 

The first one, Mr. Speaker, is, can a private citizen bring a question of privilege in this House, through 

the Speaker, and what are the limits? In other words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know who made the 

phone call, when it was made and can a private citizen bring, through you, something about privilege in 

the House? 

 

Secondly, why, Mr. Speaker, on the date that the Budget was made, when the galleries were filled with 

photographers taking pictures and we all saw the flash bulbs, did the Speaker do nothing about it. 

Where, Mr. Speaker, are the other pictures. . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think it is quite commonly understood and known to members, at least it should 

be, that questions cannot be directed to the Speaker with regard to any subjects, because this puts the 

Speaker in the position of being in the middle of debate. 

 

Now, this issue will be dealt with and I am sure the members will take every opportunity to clear it up 

when it arises next Tuesday, if it arises on adjourned debates since that is where it is on the agenda and 

the members will get an opportunity at that time to deal with it. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — On a point of order on your ruling. First of all, Mr. Speaker, there is a motion 

by Mr. Allen, before the House, or the member for Rosemont. We can speak, but no way, Mr. Speaker, 

can we derive any information. You are the man who brought the charge before the House. We want the 

facts. Where are the other pictures? What use is being made of all the pictures there? Who took the 

pictures? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will take the next point of order. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to table in this Assembly, 

two documents. One of them is a document that came from the NDP federal 



 

April 21, 1978 

1794 

 

party headquarters (came from the Chief Electoral Office of Canada, I’m sorry) based on the filing by 

the NDP as to the contributions which outlines a $4,240 contributed by IKOY Limited and another 

document from the same set of documents from the Chief Electoral Officer in which MBS Construction 

Limited made a contribution of $480. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the matter raised by my 

colleague, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, we will have a motion coming for debate on Tuesday 

with respect to the subject matter raised by my colleague. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how will we get to the facts of that matter to argue it? The point I put to Mr. 

Speaker, is this. Isn’t this the problem, with Mr. Speaker raising an issue on his own motion when 

members who are affected by it cannot question the Speaker about it, or reply. Now Mr. Speaker can’t 

get into the debate; we can’t put Mr. Speaker under questioning, yet it was an issue raised by Mr. 

Speaker on his motion and we can’t get out the facts. Don’t you see that as a problem? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It is quite often that a Speaker raises issues which he feels should be raised. I think 

I stated quite clearly in the statement I made as to why I raised the reason — because it was an 

embarrassment to the Speaker’s office because this happened and I don’t want to be put in the position 

of having it happen again — a member coming to me and saying, I want to take picture in the Chamber, 

and I would say, no, you can’t, and the member would say to me, well what about the member for 

Wascana, apparently he can. I don’t want to have the Chair put in that position, therefore it was 

incumbent upon the Speaker to take action to protect the position of the Chair, quite clearly. So therefore 

I think that deals with the matter of why the Speaker raised the issue. Now as far as discussing the issue, 

investigating the issue the members are quite at liberty to do that as they see fit within the rules of the 

House when the issue arises next Tuesday, if it arises then. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Could Mr. Speaker, give us a precedent? What single precedent, when Mr. 

Speaker raised an issue of that kind on his own motion? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. You are privy to information that nobody else 

in this Assembly has, Mr. Speaker. Somebody gave you some information that you felt necessary to 

bring to the attention of this Assembly which was political insinuation against an individual member and 

you refuse to make that information available to us. 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay on the table, the 

document being alluded to by all members of the House. It shows clearly the member for Regina 

Wascana in the House, picture being taken, clearly against the rules of the Legislature and I am sure I 

don’t know why the Liberals are arguing about this because I know he is dead wrong. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! It is a long standing tradition that the purpose of the Speaker being here, in 

part, is to enforce the rules and practices of this Assembly and to bring attention to . . . Order, order! . . . 

to bring to the attention of the members, for the protection . . . has the member for Regina South finished 

speaking from his seat? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Good, good. I’m glad you have finished because then I can take over 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1795 

 

according to the rules which say, when I am on my feet I have the floor and when you are on your feet 

I’ll let you have the floor. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — That’s fair. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Right. As I was saying, it is the responsibility of the Speaker to bring to the 

attention of the member breaches of the rules or practices of this House as he sees fit. That is what the 

Speaker has done in this case and it is for the protection of the members and it is quite clear, in the 

statement I made to the House, the reasons why it is for the protection of the members. There are all 

kinds of precedents which can be cited if need arise to support that case. 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, one more question. Would Mr. Speaker inform 

me, when the Assembly gave permission for any cameras to be brought into this House, and as I 

understand it is must be by motion of this Assembly. You do not have the authority as the Speaker? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think that’s quite right that the Speaker acts within the rules, the wishes of the 

Assembly (and it has been traditional for some time) to allow cameras in the Chamber at a certain 

time… 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Then why . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Has the member for Indian Head-Wolseley finished? 

 

It is traditional on certain ceremonial occasions that the Speaker, on behalf of the members of the 

Assembly, allow television cameras into the Chamber. But they are not allowed in unless they have the 

permission of the Speaker. And I submit that my record and previous Speaker’s records have been quite 

clear and above reproach, that cameras are only to be allowed in this Chamber on certain occasions and 

members have been well aware of that, that there are ceremonial occasions and they are under the 

control of the Speaker. Now if the members are upset and concerned about that, then I am sure they can 

refer it to the Rules Committee. The Rules Committee will look at it on behalf of the members and make 

a decision for a new recommendation about how this should be dealt with. I think that would be the 

practical way to handle it if the members are upset about that. 

 

MR. ANDERSON: — Did you, to control, because you do have control of the cameras, give passes to 

the people who are allowed cameras that they were allowed to bring cameras in so that no other cameras 

would be brought? How did you police it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well the usual tradition is for members or someone who wishes to take pictures to 

come to the Speaker and ask permission. The Speaker considers the case and I have considered the case 

with regard to television cameras and I have said, yes, you may televise and I have considered the 

question (as I mentioned the other day) about a person from another caucus who came to me and asked 

me if he might take a picture of a member sitting in his seat working. I said no. But I cannot consider the 

case that arises where a member does not come to me, but surreptitiously takes pictures in this Chamber. 

And then, furthermore, produces them in a political bulletin. Now I can’t do anything about that. It is up 

to the members and it is in their hands now by the very fact that this motion is before them and can be 

dealt with at a later time, at an appropriate time. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1796 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What’s the point of order? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — The point of order, Mr. Speaker, I rose before he did. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What’s your point of order? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — My point of order is, is it not a fact that on Budget day there were several 

cameras in the galleries. Mr. Speaker did not prohibit the flashbulbs that were going on up there and 

elsewhere. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! If the member, on Budget day, noticed a lot of cameras in the 

galleries he should have risen in his place and said . . . order . . . said, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I 

see someone in the gallery taking pictures and I would have dealt with it immediately. Now maybe the 

member, on opening day, didn’t have much to do. I had certain things on my mind which I had to take 

care of. My staff are watching for people in the galleries and in fact they noticed someone in the 

galleries taking pictures and I am informed that my staff took some action with regard to that. However, 

that’s beside the point. If a member notices that someone is breaching the practice of the House then he 

should have stood up and noticed it and said to the Speaker, somebody is taking pictures. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I have two points of order. 

 

First, with respect to some documents which the member for Nipawin tabled this morning, I have gotten 

a copy of this, a photocopy of the documents which were tabled and as a member, Mr. Speaker, there is 

nothing on the document to indicate precisely what the document is, other than what the member says 

and I would ask that the member table the entire document which he had before him so that I may 

assess, as a member, exactly what the document says. I invite the members to look at it. 

 

The second point of order, Mr. Speaker, deals with points of order. My observations here, Mr. Speaker, 

is that we are getting into the habit, after Mr. Speaker has made a ruling, rightly or wrongly, acceptable 

or unacceptable that this is the end of the issue, that we are getting into the mechanisms where members 

are continually debating with Mr. Speaker the facts and the issues on the points of order. I would ask 

Mr. Speaker, and I know it is a difficult task that you have, but that once you have made a ruling, take 

for example, on the picture situation today that that is it. Let us move on to the government business. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I think the Attorney General’s point of order is well taken on both 

points. The fact that I should not be abusing the time of the House by debating points of order. I think 

that is a point that we’ve generally observed in the past. I’m sorry I was debating points of order today 

and should not be. I think we should move on to the next order of business. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. When a member tables a document in the 

Assembly and states that the document came from a certain source, the House must believe that member 

that it came from that source or prove otherwise. Mr. 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1797 

 

Speaker . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order, order! I think the members of the House should use some discretion 

when they are tabling things in the House and it is not unusual for members to want to know what the 

source of the document is. The members shouldn’t be tabling everything that comes into their hands in 

the House. They should table things that are recognized as coming from some source so that it is of 

some value to the members. Because it is just a waste of time of the House to table documents that 

aren’t identified. 

 

Now I agree that the member for Nipawin stated in his view where the document came from. The 

Attorney General, I think, is probably justified in saying that he wants to see it on the document where it 

came from We don’t want to get into a long wrangle about tabling this. The member has said that they 

will table the document and I think the matter is closed. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, if I may . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The member for Lakeview. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, a moment ago in referring to a matter raised by my colleague the 

member for Regina South, you indicated that at opening day when pictures were being taken nobody 

drew it to your attention. My point to you, Mr. Speaker, is, and I can sit here without making this point 

at this time. Is it not a fact that I spoke to you after that day; drew to your attention that photographs 

were being taken? You advised me at the time that there was nothing you could do about it at that 

particular time and you weren’t very embarrassed about it. I’m wondering how you are now 

embarrassed by the situation that I drew to your attention at the very time it happened. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Is the member on the same point of order as the member for Lakeview? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — No, I have a different point of order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — O.K. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to beg leave of the Assembly to set aside 15 minutes to 

put Mr. Speaker under some questioning with respect of this matter. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have leave? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! There are no questions put by members — Government Motions. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1798 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Is it on the same issue? 

 

MR. MALONE: — No. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — O.K. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave of the House to move first and second reading 

immediately of an act to prohibit Saskatchewan Telecommunications from interfering with the delivery 

of programming by Cablecaster. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — No, no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — You have heard the request of the member for Regina Lakeview. Is there leave? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Faris that Bill No. 

22 An Act respecting Elementary and Secondary Education in Saskatchewan be now read a second 

time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to speak at much length with respect to Bill 22, The 

Education Act, but I do want to make a couple of points. In fact, I have three points I want to make in 

the course of my remarks today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a very important issue. I believe that this is an issue which affects, not 

only the perspective on the quality and direction of education from the point of view of the trustees and 

the teachers and perhaps the parents, as represented by the trustees, but also reflects the importance of 

the quality of education as it affects the student. After all, when all the rhetoric is over, from all sides of 

the House, it is going to be the quality of education that the student receives as the end result, which will 

be the test whether or not this bill and this government’s actions are good or bad. Because it is an 

important issue, Mr. Speaker, it requires a full and proper debate. It requires a debate with as minimum 

amount of emotionalism as is possible. I am not one however who says emotionalism in debate is bad. I 

am not one who says that you can’t advocate and argue unemotionally, if that is the only way you should 

do it! Indeed, I think in some areas, such as areas of this nature where there is a great degree of 

importance there should be high degree of emotion But the important thing, Mr. Speaker, is that there 

should be a full and proper airing of all of the issues which are before the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been watching this debate over the last few weeks in my capacity as House 

Leader, and outside as a citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. I am asking myself whether or not this 

province has seen the kind of free and open discussion about the bill, as I think the subject matter 

deserves. And quite candidly, Mr. Speaker, in some areas I am very disappointed. I am very 

disappointed for example, about the quality and calibre of public reporting with respect to the issues 

surrounding Bill 22. 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1799 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I have been watching the press reports in the daily newspapers primarily the 

Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix over the last couple of weeks, trying to determine whether or not this 

Legislature has received the kind of coverage on this important issue of all sides of the points of view, 

that the issue deserves. And I am the first to say, Mr. Minister’s that this is a very highly subjective 

judgment that individuals have to make. But in my judgment regretfully, I have to conclude that there 

has not been that kind of an airing of the issues. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, in my view the press has either 

deliberately or unconsciously, tried to represent one point of view generally espoused by the members of 

the PC Party. It is a view which, in my judgment as I move to the second point in a few moments, a view 

on the general issue of education which is contradictory, a view of the PC Party. It is a view which, in 

my judgment as I move to the second point in a few moments, a view on the general issue of education 

which is contradictory, a view of the PC Party which is confusing, one which I think will leave any 

responsible thinking organization, be it the SSTA or the STF, very uncertain as to the position taken by 

that party if it should ever form a government, on this important issue of education and the education 

bill. And yet, Mr. Speaker, one sees through a reading of the popular press, no indication of this kind of 

serious division. One sees by the reading of the popular press a total representation of the particular 

speeches of the day given by a particular MLA of the day on the issues involved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I suppose I am the last person in this House to complain about coverage in the press, 

because I have a gotten my share of it (I think most of it probably unfavourable) but I certainly have 

gotten my portion of coverage in the press. But I am going to do that, Mr. Speaker, today, I am going to 

do it because I see here in the Leader Post of the other night, from page 8, a headline surrounding a 

speech of the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose: ‘Binding arbitration proposal opposed by 

Superintendent.’ The story goes on to quote at length the hon. Mr. Roy Bailey, the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose and goes on to quote, not quite at length but in some detail, the leader of the PC Party. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it may not have dawned on the press but I think there was also another speaker that 

day — it certainly dawned on me, I happened to be the speaker — and I realize that, in the judgment of 

the press and, perhaps, in the judgement of the House, what I have to say, after all I am only the 

Attorney General and Deputy Premier, didn’t’ really indicate much value or much importance. But I say, 

Mr. Speaker, that this kind of coverage which has, in effect, blanked out not only my speech, but 

minimized the speeches given by the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, the former Minister of 

Education (Mr. MacMurchy), the kind of variations of the coverage from the Minister of Continuing 

Education on this important bill, is a deliberate attempt by certain segments of the press of the province 

of Saskatchewan to play a very partisan point of view with respect to Bill 22. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am of the view that this does not serve democracy or serve the debate on this particular 

bill, very well. I think that all of us as members of this Legislative Assembly can say that the quality and 

the calibre of the reporting which has ultimately ended in the press, (I don’t now single out the 

individual members but somewhere down the line it has happened this way on this bill) has left a very 

partisan one-sided point of view, a one-sided view to reflect the view of the editorialist in the press, the 

Leader Post press, the view that somehow we should keep politics out of education, that very general 

point of view which everybody agrees to, but no one can particularize with any detail as to how that can 

be achieved. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1800 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to make a speech at length on the press because, I suppose, we as politicians 

ought not to be concerned. We are here to debate in the forum, but the sad fact of the matter is that 

whatever we do or say, for its merit or demerit, can only be translated to the SSTA membership and the 

STF membership and the public, the students and the parents concerned, though the media. I personally, 

decry what I believe has been a purposeful attempt to represent the bill in an unfavourable light. End of 

point number one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second point that I would like to make is the question of the position of the two opposition parties 

on Bill 22. Mr. Speaker, I say that both of the opposition parties, the Liberals and the PCs, have 

characterized their comments on this. The member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron), the Liberal 

member for Regina South, takes a virtually contradictory position from the member for Maple Creek 

(Mr. Stodalka)on the important issues of the day. There is no doubt about that! 

 

The member for Regina Wascana (Mr. Merchant) in a letter, which he distributed to the members of the 

teaching profession within his proposed federal riding, yet takes a different tack. I don’t think there is 

anything that can be a different tack, yes, similar to the member for Regina south, but different from the 

member for Maple Creek, the education critic, and certainly variations of difference from both positions. 

I think there is no doubt about that and I am not going to get into the details of those operations. That is 

a fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come to the PC caucus Party position. I say, Mr. Minister, that here the divisions are even 

more deep. The position taken by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) on a couple of issues, at 

least, if not more, are fundamentally at variance, fundamentally at variance, with the position taken by 

the Leader of the PC Party, who is officially spokesman. 

 

I think it is about time that the organizations that are interested in this area start asking the Leader of the 

Liberal Party and the Leader of the PC Party precisely where their caucuses stand on this particular bill. 

I would like to know of the Leader of the PCs, for example, who is not in his seat today, or not now, I 

would like to know which view he supports with respect to Bill 22. 

 

The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) of the PC caucus, when he spoke on this bill, said that 

he wanted more areas of collective bargaining at the local level. There should be more there. The 

member for Rosetown-Elrose says that he adamantly opposes that. I want to know where the Leader of 

the PC Party stands on that area and I, for the life of me, don’t know why the SSTA and STF don’t ask 

the Leader of the PC Party exactly what the PC party position is in this area. I would like to know what 

the Leader of the Liberal Party says when he sees a speech made by the member for Regina South (Mr. 

Cameron) as compared to the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka) on the areas that are at issue here 

on the binding boards of reference, the arbitration. I think that the organizations involved should be 

asking the Leader of the Liberal Party what would he be doing if he were Premier in 1979 on those key 

issues. Mr. Speaker, so far as I know no one in the press is asking that question and so far as I know 

neither the SSTA or the STF is asking that question or at least if they are, I stand to be corrected, if they 

are asking that question then certainly the divisions are not being resolved. 

 

The simple fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is just take the PC caucus point of view, and I have here in 

front of me the Hansard of April 6, 1978 when the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) was 

addressing the main critique of Bill 22 on behalf of the PC 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1801 

 

caucus. I could go into the quotations on the various pages, 1121, I have them marked in yellow on the 

various issues. I’m not going to take the time of the House to do that But the member for 

Saskatoon-Sutherland said that government should not be involved but that trustees and teachers should 

get together to discuss terms of employment, etc., to get more areas of bargaining at the local level. 

 

The member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey,) I also happen to have his answer to what he spoke the 

other day and he says he is opposed to that. I want to know here the Leader of the PC caucus, the 

member for Nipawin stands on that issue. I think the people of Saskatchewan want to know as well. The 

member for Rosetown-Elrose in his remarks the other day said that principals should be given more 

protection; teachers are given too much. The member for Rosetown says that I am in error there. I say to 

the member that that is not the case if you will look at the quotation of the words that are said, that’s a 

paraphrase, a slight paraphrase but not much of paraphrase because you indicated that there was no 

security there, that there should have been more. The member of Saskatoon-Sutherland said teachers 

need more protection, in fact they need a professional organization and he compared it to the Law 

Society of the province of Saskatchewan, and those are the exact words here again on page 1123 of the 

speech that the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland indicated. 

 

The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland talked about binding arbitration. He said this idea was perhaps 

not quite the one that he would tailor but there is some form of protection needed for the teachers along 

those lines. The member for Rosetown-Elrose says on binding arbitration and here’s a direct quote, 

‘We’re not dealing with welders of front end motors but teachers of our children’, and boards of 

reference are not needed; that’s the position taken there. That is a direct quotation, Mr. Speaker, a direct 

quotation from the member fro Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, forgive me if I say I’m slightly confused as to where the PC and the Liberal caucuses 

stand on those issues. Binding arbitration is surely one of the most important issues, whether you are for 

it or against it or modifying it one way of the other, of this Bill 22. Everybody agrees with that. Now 

here’s a party which proposes to the people of the province of Saskatchewan that it is fit to govern in 

educational matters where the two leading spokesmen take two different positions. I want to know 

where the Leader of the PC Party and the PC caucus stands on that particular issue. 

 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, we all heard how eloquent the member for Rosetown-Elrose was the other day 

about boards of reference, how they were a disaster or whatever word that was, it wasn’t disaster but is 

was of that nature. They have been, it was repeated here from his seated position today. I think that that 

is a fair representation, he’ll agree with me on that quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just happen to have had a and perhaps I’m in error here because I’m not the Minister of 

Education, I just had somebody on my staff do a quick check, I could be wrong in the numbers. I stand 

to be corrected here. But I have a record of what is purported to me to be a record of the actual boards of 

reference. In 1973 there were no appeals; in 1974, Mr. Speaker, there was one appeal, the Gull Lake 

School Unit and there the dismissal which was the subject of the appeal was upheld but there was some 

compensation awarded for the teacher. That’s in 1974 — one. In 1975, Mr. Speaker, two, a Govan 

dismissal, the Govan dismissal confirmed. In 1975 a second one, Radville, the teacher reinstated. Fifty 

per cent for the teachers, fifty per cent of the trustees; that was in 1975. In 1976, the northern school 

board brought an appeal, the school board did, against two teachers. The board won the appeal. In 1977, 

no 



 

April 21, 1978 

1802 

 

appeals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the situation with respect to the record of the boards of reference. That’s the 

terrible record of unmitigated disaster that the member for Rosetown-Elrose says the boards of reference 

have, the same boards of reference the member of Saskatoon-Sutherland says he thinks is a good idea, 

with a few changes here or there. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not picking on the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose because I say this again, if there is any member in that PC caucus who knows 

something about education law and who strongly believes in what he says about education law and does 

it with, what I think, conviction, he is the member for Rosetown-Elrose. He’s not the issue. The issue is, 

given that record, given those statements, I want to know where the Leader of the PC Party stands on 

that particular issue. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — And that’s the same situation with respect to the Liberals and their critics, 

identically the same situation. I say to the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka) and I’m not trying to 

curry equal favor on Liberals and PCs, but I say again, sincerely, I think it is generally thought of on this 

side of the House by all of us that the member for Maple Creek is a man who is also very knowledgeable 

and sincere particularly in this area. I want to know where the Leader of the Liberal Party stands as 

between him and the member for Regina South. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Do you think we get that in the press? Well we did, a little bit on the Regina 

South speech. I think there was a headline in the Regina South speech that was guarded but we don’t get 

it right here Mr. Speaker, not here. We don’t get in on the coverage and we don’t get it resolved in this 

House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how do the PCs try to resolve this fundamental difference? They say they are going 

to vote against this bill. That’s what the press will, of course, cover. But you know why they are going to 

vote against this bill? Not on the fundamental issue upon which they agree, because as I have indicated 

already, they don’t agree on fundamental issues. No, they are going to vote against this bill because the 

member for Rosetown-Elrose will be able to say, I did what I could do on my fundamental opposition, 

therefore, I am opposed to the bill. How does the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland justify his 

differences from the member for Rosetown? Well he says, I am voting against the bill because it is 

sloppily drafted. That’s the bottom line on the speech made by the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. 

 

You recall in detail and I invite you again to take a look at it, because I have it marked in detail. I was in 

the House at the time and there are all sorts of interjections here from Mr. Romanow (that must have 

been an unusually sensitive microphone that day because I normally don’t give such interjections) but 

this day it was a sensitive microphone, an unusual day, and all of these things are saying, yes, Mr. 

Attorney General, you should look at section that and section this; it is sloppily drafted and my goodness 

. . . and then he started again at how terrible an Attorney General I was . . . and I’m glad to see the 

House unanimously rejected that proposition and we got him back onto Bill 22. But he says that he is 

against it because of the drafting. Well that’s how the PCs are going to do it. That’s how the various 

groups will say to themselves, you see here is the position taken on this bill by way of policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is simply not the fact of the situation. I say again, what comments I 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1803 

 

make are not directed to the member for Rosetown-Elrose, whom I think has at least got the guts and 

principle to deviate from his own caucus. I don’t criticize him. I criticize the party leader and the caucus 

for not having the clear, precision of thought as to where they stand on this education law. I criticize the 

Liberal Party for doing exactly the same thing, indicating their opposition to the bill and then trying to 

shilly-shally around, embroider the edges of it. I condemn the Leader of the Liberal Party for not telling 

the people of Saskatchewan precisely where they stand on this important area of education law, and they 

don’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the simple fact of the matter. They have points of view on various issues. They may 

be . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I am having trouble hearing the comments of the member who has the floor at this 

time. I wonder I the members could preserve some amount of decorum for the House? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much, because I do believe that what the 

members of the Liberal caucus are doing in response to my reaction, to my statement, is proving the 

very validity of my remarks about their indecision and indecisiveness and their division in this area. End 

of point number two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact is that there is serious division within both of these parties on this bill and the people of 

Saskatchewan, on this bill deserve something more. They deserve a clear-cut statement of policy as to 

where they stand on these particular issues of the day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the third point that I would like to make before I take my chair, is, 

if you will, the point that I touched on briefly yesterday, the last day that I spoke. I have never been a 

Minister of Education or Continuing Education and maybe I am never likely to be, although sometimes I 

have had fantasies about how challenging a job that would be and how exciting a prospect that would 

be. I think all of you would be interested in that and whether I would or not, that’s not here nor there, but 

that is the kind of feeling that I have had toward education and the Department of Education and the 

education bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anybody who is fair-minded at all in this Legislative Assembly will know that historically 

with Woodrow Lloyd, 1944, the CCF has set a tradition of about the quality of education which was bar 

none, head and shoulders over any province in the Dominion of Canada at that particular time. Not 

overnight, not overnight in 1944 but as it developed and as it evolved. 

 

I think everybody will agree that from 1944 to 1963 there were upsets in Education, but the relative 

tranquillity of that period compared to 1964-1971 is as different as night is to day. In 1964 to 1971 we 

saw the introduction, I say, for the first time of a form of politics in the educational law with the former 

Thatcher administration. 

 

The Thatcher caucus, the Liberal Party then, had politics injected into education. I won’t say that the 

Thatcher caucus of today, on the opposition side is injecting politics on our bill today, but that was the 

politics of the day. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1804 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say this and in a self-serving way I admit, that I think that the NDP and the CCF, in the 

area of education, can take that as one of the stars in its constellation together with some social reforms 

such as health and medicare and the like that we are noted for. But I think any fair-minded person would 

indicate that. But there is no doubt about it, no doubt about it, education law is a touchy area. We have 

all kinds of motivations running from the STF side and the SSTA side. How to resolve those two 

competing views is a difficult task, Mr. Speaker. It is difficult especially given the period of disruption 

from 1964 to 1971 that the Liberals wrought in the province of Saskatchewan and which some, darkly, 

suspect the PCs wherever they are, are continuing to promote and to sow the seeds of discontent with 

respect to Bill 22. 
 

My point number three, Mr. Minister, is this. The Minister of Education in Bill 22 may not have brought 

down the perfect education law; may not have brought down the law which will make everybody happy. 

I think he is going to be proposing some changes when he gets to close up the debate. But he has done a 

very good job given the climate that exists today in the province of Saskatchewan and the issues that are 

before us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — It is simply not good enough for opposition parties, without a clear voice, to 

single out particular areas upon which they can find a common ground for themselves collectively to 

attack this bill on that basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education deserves the commendation of those who are 

interested in education in the province of Saskatchewan and not the condemnation that the various 

despairing voices of the members opposite would cast on him in this particular area. 
 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education has continued the tradition of Woodrow Lloyd in the 

quality of education in this province. I say this bill is a continuation of that tradition, which places key 

emphasis on the student himself or herself; that places key emphasis on the quality of education; that 

tries to resolve the competing interests — and difficult it is, not easily glibly dismissed by editorials in 

the Leader Post or Star Phoenix or blind-eye coverages in those areas; not easily dismissed by 

contradictory policy positions by the members opposite, but by actually writing the law, Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Education has done a tremendous job and he deserves the support of this House in 

respect with Bill 22. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I know that has been ongoing consultation with the SSTA and the 

STF and there will be changes. I know that the Minister of Education will want to elaborate in the House 

some time today or in the next few days when the debate winds up, an ongoing continuing process of 

consultation, which indicates the good faith that we, as a government, have toward both of the major 

organizations involved in this area and toward the parents and the students that are involved in this 

matter. 
 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support in principle Bill 22. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to rise to speak in this debate 

because of the great concern that I feel for the whole education system. Also, I, 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1805 

 

both as a teacher and a member of this Legislature, would like to congratulate the government for the 

work that they have done over the past years starting with the first Minister of Education, Mr. 

MacMurchy, that we have had in the Blakeney government and continuing on through to the Hon. Dr. 

Faris, who is the present the Minister of Education. I would like to congratulate the government for the 

concern it has shown by the fact that it has taken so much care and caution in developing this Education 

Act. First, through the discussions that were held throughout the province by the then Minister of 

Education, Mr. MacMurchy. That continued through in the form of the White Paper and the constant 

discussions that were held throughout the province on that, the constant hearings, in a concerted attempt, 

Mr. Speaker, to attempt to develop an Education Act that would be second to none in this country. And 

while I would not say that it has gone a long way to developing an act that can truly serve the people that 

it is intended to serve and that is the young people of this country, the students. I hear constant attacks, 

Mr. Speaker, from the Liberal Opposition about the style, the form of the Education Act and yet they 

themselves did not in any way follow this style of development for any acts or any of the things that they 

did. I think terms of the Moore Commission that was paid for and held under the former Thatcher 

administration, the Moore Commission that was supposed to come out with a style of teacher 

negotiation, and it was completely ignored by that Liberal Opposition. I say that this government has 

shown concerns that were certainly not shown by other, by the previous government. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to speak a great deal more on this act but I would like at this time to beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Chairman, and members of the Legislature, this morning it 

gives me great pleasure to welcome to this Legislature, 24 high school students from the Kinistino High 

School. They are going to visit the Legislature this afternoon and have dinner down in the cafeteria. 

 

I hope the Legislature will be able to demonstrate what parliament really is and that they can bring home 

some very good impressions of the Legislature. I am sure that members will join me in welcoming them 

here and I hope that their stay here will be an educational one and one that they can bring home very 

fond memories. I also want to wish them a very safe journey home. They are accompanied by their 

teacher, Mr. Richard Friesen. Thank you. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION — VOTE 16 

 

ITEM 13 con’t 

 

MR. D M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, under subvote 12, Mr. Minister, can you indicate 

which three communities in the Swift Current district were involved with ‘Operation Mainstreet’ and 

Urban Assistance? 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — I would be glad to make a note of 

that and move on. The details seems to be a little . . . It’s there; we will give it to you if it is of any 

interest. Would you be satisfied with a note sent across? All right fine. Go ahead then. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1806 

 

MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, these are not under subvote 13 but you indicated last night that we could 

deviate if we found a question within our notes here that was important. 

 

This is regarding a gravel shortage. Do you feel that your department is concerned or is there an 

apparent shortage of gravel in the province? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, well, depending where you are at in Saskatchewan. There are some areas in 

the southern area where we are short but in the North, the Prince Albert area and the mid-band area — 

strangely enough when you get further north into some of the far north construction, we find it difficult 

at times to find good gravel supplies. I would say that if you took the park belt in the southern forest 

region, there is no shortage but when you get into the prairie area it becomes very costly at times 

because of the long hauls. 

 

MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, does that mean then you could foresee the day — the day may be coming 

when you have to haul gravel from the North to the South or do you have adequate supplies to last some 

years? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Not in the immediate, foreseeable future in any case. 

 

MR. HAM: — The second question, Mr. Minister, is not on subvote 13 but I note that in other 

provinces in Canada that there is a substantial use of cement in highways. Is there any reason why we 

are not using cement in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, the economics of cement versus asphalt is in our favor, that is the asphalt is 

less expensive. We do use soil cement in some cases where it is advantageous, but that again goes back 

to your earlier question of the availability of gravel and so on, as well. But, we have found in the main 

that cement really, concrete is too expensive. 

 

MR. HAM: — I note that, in reviewing your annual report there is a reference to B type pavement. 

Could you tell me what is different about B type pavement over normal pavement? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, I thought I had answered that question last night. It is the first stage of a 

heavier pavement which suffices for years and as I say, saves money. A B pavement is about a two inch 

lift of asphalt on top of something. 

 

MR. HAM: — Is your department carrying on a present liaison or testing with neighbouring provinces, 

Alberta and Manitoba, with respect to pavement testing, roadbed testing and the like? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I didn’t . . . that mike is still a bit of trouble but I think you were asking do we 

liase. . . was the question do we liase with other provinces in comparing testing and so on? We have a 

number of conferences. In fact, there is a conference of western highway officials in Victoria next week. 

Various papers are given as to procedures being used by the various jurisdictions, and anything that is 

useful that we think we may be able to use, the information is available to us, likewise ours to other 

jurisdictions. This information, new ideas are always presented at the annual convention for Roads and 

Transportation Canada (RTAC) and they have an annual meeting and several district meetings as well. 

Actually, commercial development is included in this but any innovations that come up in the road 

building industry, by the contactors or by government, are brought forward and shared. 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1807 

 

MR. HAM: — On that same note, Mr. Minister, could you give the House any indication of the results 

of the test pattern? Just this side of Moose Jaw on the Trans-Canada Highway there was series I think it 

was rubber applications applied to the highway for testing. I am wondering if there are any results on 

that yet. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We have nothing conclusive yet because a proper length of time has not elapsed on 

that. 

 

MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I note on your annual report you refer to a project 18-4 

involving lagoon waste ash. I am wondering if there has been any positive reports on that testing? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We are using it in the Estevan area because that’s where it is at, the lagoon ash, and 

thus far we are satisfied with the use on No. 18, west of Estevan. We will be using it on No. 47 north of 

Estevan and as long as it is within an economic haul distance and so on. It does take the place of gravel 

and so far it is pretty hopeful that it is going to make a good substitute. 

 

MR. HAM: — I perhaps maybe missed this under one of the subvotes, but I note that your department 

administers southern airport assistance program and provided $86,180 in financial assistance. If you 

could just explain quickly how your department does administrate the airport assistance program and 

secondly, is the money to construct the airports a combination through the Department of Highways and 

local money and is there any federal money and who maintains the airports? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We have a policy on that and I think the simplest way, I would be very happy to 

send this across and other copies are available of the policy. It depends on the grading quality of the 

airport and when they get to a certain category they are also eligible for some federal assistance. I think 

the book will explain the policy to you. I think it would be useful to you. 

 

MR. HAM: — One final question, Mr. Minister. In a news release in 1977 you indicated that there was 

a federal cutback of a substantial amount of money to do with the Trans-Canada Highway construction 

and repairs. I am wondering how much cutback from the federal government in 1977-78, versus the 

previous year. Is it as great? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I don’t recollect a cutback. They can’t very well cut anything back because we are 

not getting any assistance at all on the building of Trans-Canada. That ceased when the first 

Trans-Canada was completed in Saskatchewan about 20 some years ago. The only assistance, as I 

mentioned last night, is the strengthening program which is an extra lift on existing surface, but that 

does nothing whatever for grading or constructing new roads. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I first would like to commend the member for Swift Current for 

the manner in which he has presented his questions and in which he has adhered to the rules as closely 

as possible. I will admit that we have been fairly lenient and let them go from one subvote to another, 

which was agreed last night. But I would like to state now that as close as possible I would like to 

continue on with the subvotes as they are here and I think with the co-operation of both sides of the 

House we can certainly gain much from it. 

 

MR. HAM: — Since we are being so nice, Mr. Chairman, thank you and thank you, Mr. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1808 

 

Minister, and your officials. 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Well, Mr. Chairman, there were some questions asked under 

this item with regard to gravel pits, is it all right if I ask question in that regard? Is that O.K., Mr. 

Speaker? You could revert back? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I will recommend that it be asked under ‘Capital’ because I think that’s where it 

would come in, under Capital Expenditures. That’s what I would like to adhere to as close as possible. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I would suggest if it is concerning gravel in his district, why, ask under Regina 

district, the Regina management district, that would be item . . . 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — My area is Yorkton. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — All right. Yorkton district, item 15, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, in that Swift Current . . . the four-lane 

highway of Trans-Canada comes to an abrupt end just slightly west of Swift Current. Would the minister 

agree that it’s rather, at certain times of the year in heavy traffic times on the Trans Canada Highway, 

that it’s a very dangerous situation where people who may be travelling through the province and they 

get on a four-lane well east of Regina and travel it straight on through until Swift Current and all of a 

sudden it narrows. 

 

I think the Minister would probably conceded that on a four-lane highway the traffic may look very thin, 

when all of a sudden it narrows down to two-lanes. All of a sudden, you wonder where all the cars came 

from. 

 

I would like to ask the minister what plans he may have, and I am speaking specifically west of Swift 

Current to the Alberta border, what plans the Minister in the Department of Highways may have in the 

very near future towards making the Trans-Canada Highway four-lane right to the Alberta border; 

conversely, if you care to answer, what plans you may have going to the Manitoba border. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, at the present time the traffic counts, even though the problem that the 

member suggests is a valid one, when you come off four lanes into a narrow-gauge road fortunately the 

traffic count tapers off pretty rapidly as you go west of Swift Current. It is much less than it is east 

through the Indian Head area. The first priority actually, that many years ago, should have been 

four-laning east rather than west but that is water under the bridge. That is where the heavier traffic 

count is. 

 

Now, we have no plans immediately unless there is a national policy which is being requested by all 

provinces in Canada for a national Trans-Canada Highway system shared by the federal government. 

This would only approach what our neighbors to the south are doing, where all interstate highways, as 

most members know I hope, are built entirely, 90 to 95 per cent of the cost is borne entirely by federal 

jurisdiction; so to go back to Swift Current west, we are going to continue to improve and possibly 

improve sidelines but the traffic counts, according to Canadian standards, is still way less than 5 to 

6,000. I think Canadian standards start to demand four-laning when the traffic count, the ADT, goes up 

to 5-6,000 vehicles a day. You will note that our neighbors across the border have done very little 

between our border and Calgary. They have not given a great deal of priority there so we feel that we are 

going to improve 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1809 

 

 the safety, improve the sideline on the two lanes. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — In that district west of Swift Current — I do not like going into scare statistics 

and I will not, but I am sure the minister is aware that one of the most dangerous spots in the entire 

province where probably the greatest number of people have been killed over a period of years, or very 

close to it, is at Gull Lake, shortly after you come off that four-lane highway, about 25 to 30 miles. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to recite statistics because I am sure you are aware of it. It is a dangerous 

situation at Gull Lake. But, Mr. Minister, I respectfully suggest to you that part of the reason that it is 

dangerous is because of people coming off the four-lane highway. Granted it is maybe 25 miles down 

the road from where that happens but, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that has to be some factor because 

it is not the sort of location where you have had one big one; for instance we have had one north of 

Moose Jaw where we had that terrible one four or five years ago and we all refer to that as a killer 

intersection, but really we have just had a couple of real big ones there, to get that terminology. 

 

On this one at Gull Lake there have been numerous ones. There has been a constant number over the 

years, a steady number. Mr. Minister, I respectfully suggest to you that part of it because of the four-lane 

highway being reduced down to two lane. Again, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to reconsider, and 

seriously consider in the foreseeable future, the four-laning of the Trans-Canada highway from one end 

of the province to the other because it is a main arterial road and it should be done. As well, Mr. 

Minister, there should be four-lane up in your country, right through to Edmonton as well as between 

Regina and Saskatoon. It should have been done years ago, Mr. Minister, but particularly on this one 

because of that Gull Lake situation, and I am not going to belabor it but I would ask the minister to 

familiarize himself with that particular location and perhaps reconsider your attitude toward four-lane 

highways. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — It is not my attitude. It is simply based on economic fact. The fact that we cannot 

afford to build two-lanes of road in one portion of Saskatchewan where the traffic is relatively light and 

leave thousands of miles of road that are used entirely by Saskatchewan people to leave to go to potholes 

and one thing or another. Our first responsibility is inside Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan taxpayers. Our 

responsibility is to provide a good or better road than other province, which we have right now. I think 

that when we see our neighbors, both west and east going very slowly on four-lane, except that which 

they have in Alberta where they have assistance federally in the park areas. I think that we have to make 

those priorities. As minister, I say that to spend $300,000 a mile — that’s what the four-lane costs now, 

$300,000 a mile, grading from the ground up — when there are a lot of $100,000 and $125,000 mile 

highways that are needed. I see that No. 13 Highway was asked for last night and extensions to it. I 

would give priority to service to the rural areas, the small urban areas before I would contemplate taking 

budget away from those areas and putting them into the four-lane at this time, until I see some action on 

the part of our neighbors to the west and east. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, do I understand you correctly? In essence what you just said, are 

you in effect agreeing with a comment that was made about a year, a year and a half ago by your deputy 

minister, Mr. Gentles who I understand is on leave, where he made the comment, ‘Potholes are good for 

the economy because they employ people to repair them.’ In effect are you saying, Mr. Minister, that 

people’s lives are not worth as much as repairing potholes, because that's about what it adds up to mean, 

what you just said. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1810 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I won’t even bother replying to that question, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. Gentles 

never made that he was quoted as having said that. He certainly was misquoted and I think he corrected 

that later. We have never said that at any time. I would suggest to the member that Saskatchewan’s 

safety programs are second to none. We are leading in safety programs and concern for people. I think 

that that comment is not worth a reply. 

 

Item 13 agreed. 

 

ITEM 14 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you and I have had the debate for some 

years and I think you know my stand on the Ring Road as being, in my opinion, poor planning and poor 

policy. I think from the point of view of the city of Regina, which is a decision of their own, that 

improved the traffic flow to the downtown area instead of around town would have been a much more 

sound approach. The decision has been made and the engineering and construction is well advanced on 

the Ring Road. The Ring Road though has caused some social problems to say the least, problems in 

subdivisions such as the Glen Cairn subdivision which has very, very limited access to other parts of 

Regina by reason of the Ring Road. Of course your officials had taken time to attend a University Park 

Community Association meeting where the concerns in that area were raised with you. My first series of 

questions deal with the Ring Road. The Ring Road as a result of being built in Glen Cairn has caused the 

truck diversion to go down Fleet Street over to Dewdney Avenue and right through a residential 

community. Of course that practice should be stopped and there has been some difficulty on that. I will 

ask you what the department officials are doing first of all to reduce departmental traffic along that route 

and secondly what activities the department can take to stop such truck-traffic diversion. What 

provisions will you make to allow the University Park subdivision a much more reasonable access to 

downtown or into the city of Regina? It has basically only got Highway 33 now with the second outlet 

on Highway 33. I think they haven’t been dealt with fairly in my opinion in either subdivision. I would 

appreciate your comments. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, two items, number one the University fund. Those questions 

are actually questions that should be directed at the city. Yes, the city. I told the member about the 42nd 

Street bridge, the same thing is true. We helped the city of Regina pay for a transportation study as well. 

Now, for instance, if they want a flyover, if the city planners decided that’s what they want they will 

come to us and ask for it and we will consider it. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s off Assiniboia, 

that’s right. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — . . . Wascana Centre Authority . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That it is not my problem. I’m saying what the policy is. The policy is that the city 

is the initiator. Similarly on Fleet Street, this is even more of a city responsibility. We are there with 

advice and assistance if it falls within policy. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to this Chamber a group of 15 Grade Nine and Ten students from Matthew School at 

LaFleche, accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Nobert and Mr. and Mrs. Emile Martineau in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. I will look forward to meeting them in a few minutes in the rotunda for pictures. We 

hope you enjoy the proceedings and 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1811 

 

have a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to introduce to 

you and through you to the other members of this Assembly approximately 27 Grade Eight students 

from the public school at Wymark. They are accompanied today by their principal, Mr. John Wall and I 

understand by another teacher, Miss Thompson. 

 

I might say that I had the privilege shortly after the new year to spend about one hour and a half’s time 

with the Grade Eight class in Wymark, talking about the responsibilities of an MLA and the procedures 

which take place in these Chambers. I found that hour and one-half to be very interesting and very 

exciting. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Grade Eight students on their excellent 

knowledge of the Legislature and what takes place in government; it was certainly evident in many of 

the questions which they asked. I look forward to meeting with them briefly at 12:30 and I hope that 

they enjoy the mornings proceedings. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — TRANSPORTATION CON’T. 

 

ITEM 14 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — On the problems with access to the University Park subdivisions, we’ll discuss 

the flyover. Has the department considered the impact of such a flyover and if such a flyover was 

requested by the city or allowed by the Wascana Centre Authority, would the department agree with 

such a flyover? Secondly, at the University Park Drive where it connects at the intersection with 

Highway 33, that is going to become an increasing bottle neck in the future. You know, it’s a main road 

into the subdivision and it connects with No. 33 Highway. What proposals do you have for modifying 

that intersection so that the traffic slow down into the subdivision can get off the highway safely and 

onto the road back into town in a more safe manner than just stopping and waiting for highway traffic to 

go through? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I already said that we would consider sharing the cost of an overpass if the city 

made application. That is an internal problem, that decision, and if they approach us our policy is such 

that we would accommodate it. It is the city’s jurisdiction and the answer is the same once again, this is 

city traffic and it is a city jurisdiction on the 33 junction and once again the answer is the same. There is 

an ongoing study, our engineers assist the city engineers wherever possible, liase with them, provide 

traffic advice. Our traffic Safety Engineering Branch is continually working with other urbans as well as 

Regina, but the initiation of any of these actions must come from the governing jurisdiction. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — With regard to the matters I raised with truck traffic on Fleet Street and then 

going down Dewdney east, could you give your departmental undertaking that departmental vehicles or 

trucks will not take that route and will use the ring road to wherever they are going or at least not drive 

through that subdivision. It is causing problems, I think we can all accept that heavy truck traffic 

through a residential area is something certainly not a desirable situation and would you give us the 

assurance that at least the Department of Highways vehicles heavy truck traffic will not be following 

that route of Fleet Street and then Dewdney. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1812 

 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I think it would be wise for the member and the people in that area to wait until the 

project has been completed because we have been, the planners certainly anticipated that once 

completed this traffic would move. Certainly anything we can do in the department to avoid congestion 

will be done, but right now I think there are a few too many instant experts around as to what will 

happen, what may happen and I think we will find that once the ring road and all the various adjuncts to 

it are completed, that things will certainly improve and many of the imagined hazards will not actually 

take place and become a problem; and if they do, certainly ongoing studies will correct them. I’m 

certainly not going to anticipate problems before the work is done. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — The problem exists today; it is not an anticipated problem. The fact is there are 

departmental heavy trucks and other heavy trucks avoiding the service road access and are, in fact, using 

Fleet Street and going down Dewdney east by the school and highly populated residential area and I am 

asking you that that practice be stopped. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We will certainly take a look at it, but I would say that any traffic that is going 

there is necessary traffic and I don’t think there is a great deal can be done about it at the moment but if 

there is a way of routing it to other ways, we will certainly have our officials look at it, people in charge 

of that division and see if it is a problem that it can be alleviated and that is about the only answer that I 

could give today. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — But you will have your department take a look at it and see if it can be 

alleviated. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would your department supply me and I am prepared to continue 

questioning or to wait if you are prepared to give me the assurance the amounts paid to anyone that 

receives compensation for work along the ring road, No. 1 east, and anywhere through there. There were 

various stores, business establishments and whatnot that were affected by the ring road or the by-pass 

and would you supply me with the amounts of compensation paid to the various individuals or 

companies. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I think we could do that but the normal procedure and the best procedure again, I 

would like to suggest would simply be to list in either a question or an order for return, it would then be 

a researched, answered, completely researched answer. Now, if the member wants, and I’m not trying to 

be difficult but I think that that is the proper procedure, Mr. Chairman, and we would be happy to 

provide the answer, I think either way. I hope the house is winding up, I think we can get you the 

information. I will ask for it but please list either through the blue or directly, but give me a shopping 

list. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I am aware of the procedure also, and I think the Minister will agree I have the 

right to ask the questions at this estimate and if you simply will, all I asked for was your undertaking to 

supply the information. The letter is fine. If that is given that is acceptable to me. 

 

I have a particular matter as an MLA that I would like to raise with the Regina district. I have tended to 

follow the practice if a constituency matter, which would be irrelatively minor one, that I have written 

directly to the head of the Chief Engineer of the district. I have had some difficulty in getting replies. 

Some have been several months before I have been getting replies. I will assume, unless you advise me 

differently, that it is the workload of district engineer. For example, in one matter that I raised early last 

year and am still waiting for a reply, is the possibility of a stop sign on 364, on the grid road. I believe it 

is about four miles north of 364, there is a valley on the way up to Edenwold 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1813 

 

and Edgeley and the visibility is not good at that particular junction of the highway and the grid road. I 

have received no reply. Would you have your officials check that our for me and see if they can reply? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, and regarding other inquiries I don’t know what the answer is. Mr. Kocur is 

the district engineer. I would like you to possibly send me a copy of the letters and we can probably 

check it out and see that you get the answers. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I follow the practice and I think your officials will agree in that past that if Mr. 

Kocur and his officials deserve credit, I have given it in the Assembly and I haven’t been getting replies 

and so I raise that as well. 

 

Now, there is another aspect and I think it has special concern in my constituency and I am sure in any 

constituencies that surrounds one of the major urban centres. 

 

The communities are limited, I believe, to two small arrow signs showing how to get to a particular 

community and the mileage or the kilometres. I believe it just two that they are allowed. For example, if 

you come down No. 1 and you want to know where Avonhurst is there is one sign. There is not a sign 

going east, I believe, for Avonhurst and there is none on No. 10 as a result. So that with the number of 

highways there is inadequate signing of these small arrow-directional signs that you have, convenient 

signs. Would the minister, first of all, give me the policy on that and, secondly, be prepared to consider 

reviewing that policy in light of the limitations, given the number of highways surrounding a major 

urban centre? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The Avonhurst problem is something that seems to be . . . no it is not according to 

policy as near as I understand your question. We will get back to you on that. 

 

Now, in the matter of broadening our signing policies and so on, which I hope have been reasonably 

adequate, it is party of a study that we are undertaking in signing, safety and the whole bit. This is under 

study now to see if there are any areas we can improve. 

 

Now, a few years ago, you will remember on all the main highways we put a pre-warning sign — access 

one mile — and this is one of the reasons that our accident rate in tailending on highways has dropped 

considerably. People, before that advance warning sign was up, they would be right on top of it, put on 

the brakes and bang and could be two or three. This has been tremendously valuable and that was as a 

result of signing study that we did back more than five or six years ago. There is another study being 

undertaken now on these particular things that you mentioned. Regarding Avonhurst itself, we will get 

in touch with you. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I would like to make the following suggestion, that when you finalize your 

policy in that regard that . . . I am sympathetic with the departmental position that you can’t have these 

signs all over and there can’t be an unlimited number, but one of the criteria that should be taken into 

account, I suggest to you is the number of main highways in a particular area. If there happens to be one 

region where there are a lot of main highways then each one should be designated rather than the blanket 

limit which we have had in the past. I would suggest that for the minister’s consideration. 

 

The other matter I would like to raise is a particular matter in the Balgonie area and that is, going west 

on No. 1 to Balgonie the signing is more than adequate but coming east, it is not the same type of 

signing and the signing for Edenwold and in that direction up 



 

April 21, 1978 

1814 

 

to there it is not the same going west, and will your officials take a look at that particular area so that 

east bound traffic on No. 1 towards Balgonie and Regina would have the same signing considerations as 

those going west? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We will take a look at it. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — My final area is, has the department made its final arrangements and will it 

give consideration to the Balgonie ‘bed derby’ again this year, and its use of No. 1 Highway. The 

departmental co-operation last year was excellent and the townspeople were very, very pleased with the 

departmental consideration. I think the event however, is going to get considerably bigger this year by 

the looks of the entries that are coming in. Would your officials again — I’m sure they will show the 

same consideration but have they made any plans as to blocking off one lane and how that is going to be 

handled this year given the increased volumes of beds? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, there will be no change from last year’s policy to accommodate the race. I 

think if you get too many it may have to be run in relays. Anything is open for discussion. I’m sure that 

the people will be in touch with us. Thus far we have not been contacted unless they have recently 

contacted Mr. Kocur, but certainly I think it is a great idea. I don’t think there was any hazard. 

 

MR. LANE(Qu’Ap): — There were no accidents but there was, (obviously being the first time that it 

was run) some confusion and some concern about . . . but again this year I suggest that the department 

be put on notice that with the indications that the townspeople have already on the number of entries, it 

could be dramatically higher than last year and that lane may somehow have to be blocked off with a 

flashing sign in position. I gather it is going to be quite a bit bigger. 

 

Item 14 agreed. 

 

ITEM 15 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, how many gravel pits do you have in this district 

and how many do you have under provincial jurisdiction in the province? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We will research that and provide with a written answer. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What security or protection measures do you have — 

do you have any policy with regard to protecting the general public at large from the gravel pits in 

particular, the water they contain therein, especially during heavy rainfall, or if they happen to be in a 

high water table area? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Our policy is at the present time, and has been from some time, that we back slope 

any dangerous ledges. We fence wherever possible. There are some pits that may be municipal and are 

old abandoned ones and if the old abandoned pits that are under our jurisdiction we are gradually trying 

to landscape those to bring them into a more attractive position. 

 

The study that we are undertaking, we are going to undertake a study now of pits that are adjacent to 

small and larger urbans that probably might be useful for garbage disposal and we can kill two birds 

with one stone that way by using it for landfill and cleaning it up at the same time. 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1815 

 

This is about the only assurance I could give. If you know of a pit that is a hazard, please get on the 

phone, call us collect any time, or if you see anything that is a hazard, I would appreciate a collect call 

either to the department, to the district office, because they are interested as well. I never get out on the 

road but that I spot a hazard somewhere and we try to correct those. If everyone would kindly keep his 

eyes open we would clean up a few more hazardous places that may be overlooked by the engineering 

department. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, thank you for your comments. I brought the matter 

to your attention and I think that it does deserve some recognition, in particular because a young lady, 

and possibly there could have been two more (but in particular one lost her life about a year and one-half 

ago roughly) and I would like to see that where these pits are under your jurisdiction, where it is your 

responsibility, we can’t protect people from every danger in the province I am sure, but in this regard, 

the provincial gravel pits, that may be fenced, that there be ‘no admittance’ signs well displayed so that 

people are entering at their own risk and this would clear the department and you will have done all that 

you can. Where they may be filled, I believe that that is a good approach to take as well, or as you say, 

they could be used for garbage disposal and at the same time I think we have to recognize that some of 

them are a very valuable source of water to the rural area so in those cases we would want to maintain 

those bodies of water and yet I am sure that the public is protected as best as can be. 

 

So I just want to bring that matter to your attention and I appreciate your comments and I think that we 

can work successfully on that regard. 

 

I would like to know with regard to Highway 16, if your plans are to complete that highway to the 

Manitoba border this summer, or do you have a target date as to when Highway 16 will be finished? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That road will become No. 48 because of the western Canada signing using a 

common number on the Yellowhead. It was 16 in Alberta and 16 most of the way through British 

Columbia and we have agreed with the suggestion with the Yellowhead people that a common number 

be chosen. So that number will . . . but that’s only by the way . . . the construction of that road is part of 

our long-term planning and it’s fairly high priority. There is no program on it this year, but budgets 

permitting, we may be able to let a contract on that again another year. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I just wonder, we are talking about the same road, are we? I am 

talking about Highway 16 which runs through Kipling. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K. you mentioned Yellowhead, so I kind of thought maybe you weren’t I am 

not sure that I understand completely why the change is required in the numbering of the highway. I 

think you mentioned that you wanted some uniformity throughout the system, interprovincially. O.K. 

One more question with regards to the present Highway No. 16. Was there any difficulty settling on the 

contractor that was hired for the job? Were there any delays in that regard, to your knowledge? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Which section are you talking about? I don’t recollect any problems in any case, 

but . . . 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K. Wawota, Mr. Minister. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1816 

 

MR. KRAMER: — No, there were no problems there. I think probably . . . Well, you can enlarge on 

your question if you wish but, there were no problems to our knowledge and as I mentioned, we are 

paving on that section of road this year. So when I said there was no program at all, that is not quite 

correct — there is. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, that was the question I wanted to get in — that 

there was work being done there and it was a question I asked you about in the Estimates last year. I am 

glad to see that those improvements are taking place and I am just anxious to see it proceed and get its 

way through to the Manitoba border. There is one more question I would like to ask. I would like to ask 

why some $13,000 were appropriated from your department for the Land Bank Commission? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Please, if I could indulge on the House once more. There has been another 

group of students who entered and with your permission, I will give the member for Yorkton the 

privilege of introducing them. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the House, a group of 47 charming young ladies in the west gallery. These are 47 

Brownies who are from Yorkton and they are accompanied by Mrs. Janet Bell and Mrs. Lynn 

Thompson. I would like to wish them an interesting stay in the House and look forward to seeing you a 

little bit later to have hot chocolate discussion about the proceedings there. I wish them an interesting 

stay and a good journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION — VOTE 16 (Con’t) 

 

ITEM 15 (Con’t) 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The only way we could have paid any money to the Land Bank Commission would 

be for the purchase of right-of-way for land that was owned by the Land Bank. That would be the 

answer. I don’t know of any other way that money would change hands between the Department of 

Highways and the Land Bank Commission. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I am sorry I am not clear in just what your answer is to my 

question. Are you suggesting just right-of-ways to the Land Bank Plan? That would only be approaches 

would it not? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I wish you would. I think the thing I would like the member to do would be to 

specify and just give me a note so that we can research it. I don’t know what you are referring to. I am 

saying that the Department of Highways does not pay out money. I presume it must be for land. It does 

not pay out money except for right-of-way or other damages, shelter belts and other damages due to 

land. That seems to me to be the most logical reasons fro the Department of Highways and 

Transportation to be paying any money out to the Land Bank Commission. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am only referring to the figures that are clearly 

outlined in F-235 of the Public Accounts, in 1977, and it is quite a substantial sum of money, 

$13,0101.10 (for what that is worth). I can’t really believe that it would just be 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1817 

 

for approaches. It surely must be for something and I would like it know what it is. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I was saying, first of all, the place to ask the question will be in Public Accounts 

when the question comes up. That is that. Now, I will research it in any case. Now, if you are saying that 

$13,000 is an unusually large sum — if we are cutting through a piece of land with a full grade and there 

are large numbers of acres, there could be seven or eight acres, it doesn’t take long to get into 

(depending on the length) it and then if there is damage to or movement of buildings and damage to 

trees and so on, enter into it, you are going to run into bills—and we do — considerably larger with 

some farmers, considerably larger — $13,000. I do not accept the premise that this is an unusual amount 

to pay to a landowner. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I am sorry that the minister possibly misunderstood me. I was not 

saying that it was a terrible sum of money. After all, when your government is budgeting $1.7 billion. I 

do not think that $13,000 is that great a sum of money in those terms, but I say it is substantial enough to 

ask a question about why it is being submitted, and I accept your suggestion that we shall proceed and 

pursue that particular matter in Public Accounts when we get into that. 

 

If I might then just proceed to ask another question, and to give you a specific example. In the town of 

Rocanville where the Highway No 8 goes right through the town, there is also another highway which 

goes around the two, which is on the square. Highway No. 8 goes through on a double curve type 

approach. 

 

Now, when you are coming out of the town of Rocanville and you are on No. 8, you have to stop and 

yield right of way to another highway which is not a main highway. It just seems logical to me that you 

would, as a department, designate No. 8 around the town of Rocanville and have the one that is going in, 

and you can call it anything you like, but surely it does not make much sense to me to be driving along 

No. 8 and have to stop and yield to another road. Are you familiar with that particular section? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — No, I am not, but we will ask our traffic safety engineer to check into the situation 

and provide you with whatever assessment they make of the situation. You could be right. I cannot 

debate it one way or another. If you are satisfied to have an assessment from the engineers, we will be 

glad to get it for you. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Minister, the comments attributed to the Deputy 

Minister, Tom Gentles, were allegedly made at a meeting in Kenosee last June when he was being 

questioned on the condition of No. 8 Highway. No. 8 Highway, since I have moved to this province, has 

been an utter disgrace. Admittedly, some work was done on it last year but it is still an utter disgrace and 

it has been an utter disgrace, according to the people who have lived there a lot longer than I, since 

almost forever. 

 

Looking at Public Accounts, I see a couple of expenditures which would be made in the year ending 

1977, one for $3.85, another one for $9.35. For 12 miles of highway there is an expenditure for $102.18. 

How can you possibly expect to maintain a highway with these meagre expenditures, or is that a $3.85 

pothole and a $9.35 pothole, etc. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Once again you are looking at Public Accounts. Certainly I can tell you, without 

consulting, it has nothing to do with the maintenance costs of the road. There is no way I can comment 

on items you are taking out of public accounts, Mr. Chairman. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1818 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, I notice on the little layout distributed a week or two ago of your 

proposed program for highway construction or repair for this coming year, that No. 8 Highways was 

omitted again. I wonder if we can ever expect to see some upgrading to the No. 8 Highway. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I am sure you can. It is in the planning. It is under study but we have to make 

selections. Now we are trying to work on several north-south arteries. No. 47 is certainly one of them, 

No. 235 is another, No. 2 is another; they are carrying a great deal more traffic than No. 8. No. 9 carries 

most of the north-south traffic down through that area and it is a matter of priority. The average 

maintenance cost on that area — I would say our average maintenance cost on all those roads will run 

$1,200 to $1,300 per mile per year. That’s a fair bit of maintenance but let’s remember this as well that 

you can do a fair bit of that and we still have got 150,000. Those are the least expensive highways we 

can build today. That’s not the 300,000 miles Trans-Canada and they’ll run from 150,000 to 200,000 

miles. Now you look even at a $90 million to $85 million capital budget scattered over 13,000 miles of 

highway in this province. I sympathize with the fact that that highway certainly needs upgrading but it 

isn’t, I would say, any better or any worse than approximately 5,000 miles that we have and some of 

those with higher traffic on them. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t question your logic. I question your priorities and as it 

relates to the traffic on No. 9 Highway being high, there is no question about that. But one of the reasons 

for the traffic volume on No. 9 Highway is quite simply because people are quite prepared to drive that 

60 miles out of their way to avoid No. 8, it’s such a terrible disgrace. 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, last spring I had occasion 

for a month to visit the Pelly area and during that time there was a . . . 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — You took your vacation there? 

 

MR. WIPF: — I took my vacation there and watched the surveying of the highway between Kamsack 

and Pelly going on, a lot of surveying and a new highway was going to be built, it would just about 

make you believe there was an election coming up or an election down there. I was over there just 

recently and the stakes are down and there is no new highway in there. Can you tell me what happened? 

What is the disposition of that 210 miles . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I can. We had to get the right-of-way through the Indian Reserve and the Cote 

people were not prepared to sell us that right-of-way almost at any price. The price was too high. We 

had to redesign and stay within the narrower perimeters, either that or pay fantastic sums of money and 

other things for damaging. So we are proceeding, we have redesigned it. We are probably going to move 

in dirt from distances, narrow the gauge and narrow the ditches but we will be proceeding with it. There 

was no way we could proceed because we did not have the right of way. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, what would be the action of the government if you were going to build a 

highway in another area of this province and you had a couple of farmers alongside the highway who 

wouldn’t sell you their land? Would you expropriate their land or what would you do? Would you have 

to leave the highway narrow for them? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, but in this case we can’t do it because it’s a federal jurisdiction and we have 

no expropriate rights with the Indians. 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1819 

 

MR. WIPF: — In the federal jurisdiction then you just deal directly with the band and not the federal 

Department of Indian Affairs, is that right? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — I would like to just ask a question regarding the building of roads through 

reservations. Then, in fact, if that is the case this land is the property of the Indians, then do the Indians 

have to have a driver’s licence to drive on that stretch of highway which is within the reservations? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — That’s not within my area of authority, I really don’t know. I’m sure the Highway 

Traffic Board could provide you with that answer. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman — just in reply to some of your comments to the 

member for Souris-Cannington regarding the flow of traffic on Highway No. 9. I think it is 

understandable for three reasons that the traffic would be higher on Highway No. 9. The first reason 

being it’s a lot better road than any of the others running north and south in there. Secondly because 

there is a great amount of tourist travel on that particular stretch — and I might add it is mostly 

Saskatchewan and maybe more so this year than ever. The other reason is that it is a main link from the 

south to the north to get on the Yellowhead Route, if that’s the route you want to travel to get going east 

and west again. In light of that I think we still have to take a look at Highway No. 8. The member for 

Souris-Cannington raises a good point. Highway No. 8 is just not what it should be, there is no question 

about that. I understand that it is being worked on from the north end and working down south. How far 

south are you going to get? Do you have any idea at this point in time just how far south you are going 

to get in the next year? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We have improved a long stretch in the Kamsack south area. The next priority is 

from No. 1 north on No. 8. I don’t know how soon we’ll be moving south. As I say, it’s a matter of 

priorities. There is a continuing effort to upgrade there. This is a fairly important arterial road, I won’t 

argue that. I am simply saying that some are more heavier travelled and more important than others. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, are you saying then that in the next year you are 

going to be working on Highway No. 8 between the Trans-Canada north to Kamsack? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Not on this year’s program. I am saying that will be the first priority and it could 

well be that we might be moving in that area. That certainly is open for question and study. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Will it be open in the next year, then? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I am not prepared to answer that until my Budget is in place. We ask for a certain 

amount of Budget every year. Sometimes we don’t get everything we ask for and we have to cut back in 

those areas and repriorize. I just will not make a commitment to anyone as to what next year’s program 

will be unless it is absolutely in place and irrevocable as, for instance, No. 1 was between Swift Current 

and Moose Jaw. That four-laning had to be completed so much every year because it had become a 

hazard with the braking, as the member for Thunder Creek said. We had to clear up that situation and 

that was an expensive one. That priority now had been dealt with and we can move into other areas. 

That was an expensive one. That was a $300,000 mile 



 

April 21, 1978 

1820 

 

priority. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, really in essence what you have just said is that you 

don’t have any long term policy with regards to some of our, I suppose you could consider secondary 

highways, in the province of Saskatchewan. You said that No. 8 is of concern to yourself and I am sure 

it should be. But surely, you must have some long-range policies. You must have some idea what your 

priorities should be. You give an example of a highway that is doing considerable cracking up and 

breaking up and that is the one that you are going to direct your attention to. Well, Mr. Minister, I might 

bring it to your attention that No. 8 is doing that right through clean to the United States border and has 

been for quite sometime. We have had a lot of complaints about it along that border line, right along the 

Manitoba border, right from the States right through. We know that it is being worked on in the North 

and our people, in the Souris-Cannington constituency and the Moosomin constituency, are wanting to 

know just when it is going to get upgraded. They see surveyors out there every summer, staking it out 

and they have little flags and stakes and the whole bit and everybody is getting excited, oh, boy, they are 

going to build this road up. Now you are telling me they are not going to, not this year, not next year. I 

would like to know, so that I can go back and tell my people well, the Minister of Highways says, no, 

we are not going to be touching this road for two yeas and never mind getting excited about the little 

stakes with red flags on them. It isn’t going to happen; the government doesn’t have a long-term policy 

with regard to secondary highways. We are going to leave it up the main roads where there is some 

tourism or some other people, but the people that live here and are stationary people, well we are not 

going to be concerned about them. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, surely if you haven’t got a long-term policy well then fine, I just want you to stand 

up and tell me you don’t have one and then I can go back and tell my people that the minister and this 

government doesn’t have a long-term policy with regard to roads in this province. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well you will probably tell them what you please anyway. But I am saying, Mr. 

Chairman, we do have a long-range policy and within that policy we priorize. 

 

I would just like to point out that this year $53 million will be spent on secondary highways. That’s the 

secondary highways, the kinds of roads that the member is talking about. That’s a 20 per cent increase 

over the 1978-78 budget. 

 

Now I will not make a commitment. I’m saying that there are a large number of roads that are similar to 

that one that have a similar priority and our engineers will look at these roads and priorize them 

according to what seems to be the greatest need at that particular time when we are finalizing our budget 

next fall. That’s all I can tell you. That is all within a long-term budget on priority. 

 

As far as staking is concerned, I think people in Saskatchewan ought to know that simply seeing stakes 

go up is no indication that a road is going to be built immediately. Stakes have been put up for various 

reasons by various governments over the years, but when you see staking going on it is doing advance 

work to provide right of way in set-backs to avoid future confrontations when people are going to be 

building too close to the right of way and so on. So the staking that’s being done is to simply enter rights 

of way on to title and certainly I don’t want anyone to run off with the idea that when they see staking 

and right of way being purchased that that is an indication there is immediately going to be a highway. 

We are setting right of way aside now that certainly probably in some places the road won’t be built for 

six or seven years, but it is being 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1821 

 

dedicated so that in future we won’t have to do the rush job and pay through the nose or have to move 

farm buildings. That’s the policy and that’s all I have to say about it. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, thank you for your statement. This is what I wanted 

to hear you say and I think that is very well understood that the section of No. 8 Highway through the 

constituencies of Moosomin and Souris-Cannington do not rate high enough in priorities (in the 

government’s priorities) to deserve any recognition in terms of upgrading or general maintenance in that 

regard. 

 

If I might just move to one other area of concern and that is not a secondary highway and that is with 

regard to the Trans-Canada and the proposed by-pass around the town of Moosomin. Now then, do you 

have any policy or long-term planning in that regard? Can you give this Assembly and the people of that 

area, the people that have to travel the Trans-Canada, any information whatsoever as when that by-pass 

will be built? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Here again, as far as construction goes, immediate construction, there are no 

immediate plans for that. The work that is going on, however, in Moosomin is, again, one of dedicating 

the road so that business people and development people will know where that road is going to be even 

if it is five years from now; that that land can be dedicated and people can plan their residences or 

businesses in accordance with what is going to happen. Now it might happen in one or two years, it may 

be longer, I don’t know. But the work that is being undertaken to secure agreements and dedications, I 

think, is necessary and proper, that we do that now rather than later and probably it would be far more 

upsetting and certainly may be upsetting to business. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I think just one more question depending on the minister’s answer 

in this regard. I can concur with what you say that you have to do some long-range planning once you 

decide that you are going to put a by-pass in that area. What I would like to know, is have you made any 

settlements for any of the property which will have to utilized, the private property at this point in time, 

for the highway itself? Have you made any settlement at all? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Yes, we have. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell me which property that is, that you have 

made settlement? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — I wouldn’t have a list here, immediately, but I don’t know whether that is private or 

not. You simply want to know from whom the land has been purchased? We can give you the names of 

the people who have settled, who have had their land sold and dedicated, but I think it is privy to give 

you the prices. I don’t think you were asking for that. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve heard you mention that two or three times now, sold or 

dedicated. So, the previous owner gets compensated, dedicated he does not. All right that’s one question 

that you will reply to. Secondly, in that particular area, I’m just using this as an example, I am sure you 

must have cases like this all over the province. I would like to see you take a definite position as to what 

your plans are in that particular area, either to purchase the land in the whole new stretch that goes 

around the town of Moosomin and lease it back, buy it outright or whatever you are going to do but do it 

consistently and uniformly right through and not just to hit and miss as you go through that highway 

section. You are going through farmlands there as well. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1822 

 

I know that the Moosomin Chamber of Commerce would like to see you make some decision in regard 

to their sports ground area relocation. They want to have settlement in order that they may purchase 

another parcel of land to create a new sports ground, so it’s creating some difficulties in that area. Now 

then, if in fact you settle with the town in regard to their sports ground, then what about the farmer? Are 

you going to settle with him and lease the land back to him so that he knows if a guy comes and wants to 

buy that farm of his he is going to say O.K. but there is so much of this that belongs to the government 

whenever they decide to utilize it to build the highway? The same applies to an auto body shop out 

there, there’s an auction mart that you are going to be slicing in pretty close to. There’s a number of 

places, you are right through the CCIL depot. I just want to know if there is going to be the same policy 

applied to all or is it going to be a different one as you go through? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — The same policy will apply to everyone. We’ll still have to depend on individual 

negotiation and individual people. There is no other way that you can secure land. When every avenue is 

being explored, if we feel that unreasonable demands are made, then in the public interest it is not only 

the right but the duty of the department to expropriate because we simply can’t pay out any large amount 

of money if it is in the opinion of our negotiators. We have experienced negotiators working continually. 

As far as that sports ground and so on, my officials say they think that one has already been settled. I 

don’t think that I can here in this House give you individual items. We can give you the names of those 

people who have settled and the process will just simply go on. I can’t comment on individual cases. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, just one question just for my own clarification. When you were talking 

you said on these long term plans for highway construction and secondary road construction in the 

province here, that you actually set your priorities on a year to year basis according to your budget, or do 

you have a long-term plan? You mentioned one thing there that it could happen, the ring road or by-pass 

could happen two years, three years, five years, you know. Have you got a long-term plan beyond one 

year or does everything work within the one year. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — We have a broad overall plan and when you are talking about five or six thousand 

miles of secondary highway, there are a lot of unpredictables as to what the condition of those are going 

to be. For instance, things happen, like I can give the Yellow Creek example where the bridge went out. 

All the grain was hauled over oil road. The whole ruddy thing went to pieces because of a truck haul that 

was necessary to get the grain off because the railroad bridge was washed out. Those are only small 

items. There are other situations that develop and I have the situation of rain fall. Sometimes certain 

parts of the province get a tremendous amount of rain fall compared to others and roads that were 

expected to stand up, don’t. Those priorities then have to be changed. We may have had intentions to go 

with a No. 8 or some other number and if you have, we have to have the mobility to move in on those 

roads that require immediate action. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I don’t want to interfere with the minister’s 

grand plan, but there is one little highway I’d like to enquire on an information that has been under 

construction for a long period of time but only we see about 40 miles or less than that. I understand that 

now you are going to continue construction or reconstruction of No. 16, the other side of Wawota. Why 

would you leave that major gap between Montmartre and Wawota. I am sure that the members of your 

staff would inform you about the condition of the road. It’s narrow, it’s very 



 

April 21, 1978 

 

1823 

 

dangerous and why would you skip 40, 50 miles and why would you not continue from Montmartre east 

and finish that 16 Highway through to the border? I can’t understand it. It has been under construction 

since about 1970. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Certainly the long-term planning again, well, possibly you can’t please, you’ve 

proved my point, you can’t please everybody. The member over there is very happy that we moved into 

the Wawota area, which was, in our opinion, needed it greater at that particular time. Our intention is to 

continue to develop 16 and I think the member will realise that it is only a few short years ago, very few, 

that the first construction was initiated on that road when I was the minister, and I haven’t been around 

that long. We are consistently moving, as you move further east the traffic count is less, you know that, 

and that road the traffic count is less. You know, and that road is not all that bad because I was on it 

recently. It is not that bad because I went over to Kenosee twice and I took that road deliberately. My 

cruise control was sitting at 62.5 miles per hour all the way over there and it never kicked it off except 

when I got behind a slow moving vehicle. Now do not tell me that road is so bad. 

 

Item 15 agreed. 

 

Items 16 and 17 agreed. 

 

ITEM 18 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there is a highway running east of Prince Albert going east 

of Prince Albert out to the Steep Creek area. The number just slips my mind right now, but you are 

going to be widening that and doing some work on it this year. Just leaving the city, for the first two or 

three miles there are a fair amount of small lots there and I have had some concern expressed to me 

about the highway going through and the widening of that and cutting into some of these people’s 

properties. Is there a plan to widen that? How much property are they going to be using off of each side 

of the road? One of the other questions they asked me is, is it possible that this highway can stay within 

the outside boundaries now for that couple of miles that run out before you have to widen it to finish that 

road? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Now, the member is asking about the first portion of No. 302 leaving east from 

Prince Albert. That is a fairly heavy traffic count on the first distance. I remember something like 600 or 

700 vehicles per day. The survey is going on now. We are studying that but I think I have to say that our 

people are going to be very surprised if we do not need a wider right of way to provide the kind of width 

that is necessary for safety on that first stretch where the road carries a lot of traffic. I’m sure there 

would be concern on the part of people who are living along that road and that I suppose, is the price of 

progress. We just have to satisfy the majority of the people and sometimes the minority have to suffer a 

bit by giving it but they will be well compensated whatever happens. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, one final compliment to your department in that area. I want to thank you 

for the co-operation that your people in that area have given with the Chamber of Commerce and for 

some of the projects that are planned for the future. 

 

Item 18, 19 and 20 agreed. 

 

Vote 16 agreed. 



 

April 21, 1978 

1824 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:03 o’clock p.m. 


