


























































Hansard: May 18, 1978


**Note: Pages 3009 through to the top of page 3015 were repeated as pages 3015 to 2021. These 
repeated pages have been retained in order to keep correct numbering with the printed copy. The font on 
the affected pages has been altered to identify the error. 

2983 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 
May 18, 1978. 

 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

MOTION 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I move that the second report of the Select 
Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers be now concurred in. Seconded by the 
member for Prince Albert - Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf). 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE ON BLAIR MEMORIAL 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the apparent inconsistency of the government yesterday 
in the denial to bring this matter before the House yesterday, I give notice that on Tuesday, next, I shall 
move: 
 

That this Legislature pursuant to section 25 of the Legislative Assembly Act command and 
compel the attendance before this Legislature, the Chairman of the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Commission, Dr. D.R. Amies, to assist this Legislature in determining whether a serious 
health problem exists as a direct result of the many resignations from the Blair Memorial 
Clinic and to answer other questions pertinent to the quality of cancer treatment in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to 
members of this Legislature, a group of 30 Grade Eight students from St. Michael School, located in 
Regina North East constituency. I would hope that these students have a pleasant visit to the Legislature, 
I understand that they will be in the Chamber for about one-half hour and they will later on be touring 
the Legislative Building. It is my hope to be able to meet with the students at the member’s dining room 
about 3:00 o’clock and to have a chat with them. I hope that their visit to the Legislative Assembly is a 
pleasant experience, a useful experience and one that will be memorable and will assist them in their 
social studies. Again, I welcome the students and their teacher, Mr. Peter Bersciani, to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce to the Assembly 
some 44 Grade Eleven and Grade Twelve students from Lumsden High School, Lumsden of course 
being the famous flood fighter of Saskatchewan and also one of the prettiest communities in 
Saskatchewan. I think on behalf of the students, I would like to urge any of the members who happen to 
be in town on the Victoria Day 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2984 
 

weekend to attend the annual ball tournament which is also becoming famous and which well be held 
over the weekend in Lumsden. They are accompanied by Mr. Ken Langford, Gordon Bonokowski, and 
their driver, Mrs. Irene Koch. I wish them an interesting day. I will be meeting with them later for 
pictures and soft drinks. We hope they have an enjoyable afternoon and an interesting afternoon, and we 
welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would like the members of the Legislative 
Assembly to welcome here a group of students from Allen School. There are 18 of them and they are 
sitting up in the Speaker’s Gallery. I am certain we wall welcome them and I hope they have a good day. 
I will be chatting with them later. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome the group 
of students from Allen School, 18 Grade Twelve students accompanied by Mrs. Singer, their teacher. I 
have occasion to teach at Allen a portion of the year. I don’t know if that accounts for it or not, probably 
not, but that particular group is of an exceptionally high calibre. I understand that when they came into 
Regina this morning they got a little lost and I said to them, well that’s easily done in this city. They did 
visit the Conservation House, and I believe that after spending some time here they will be visiting the 
RCMP Depot and the Museum of Natural History. It is my hope that they enjoy themselves and learn 
something of value in this House and in Regina, and that they have a safe and pleasant journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SEDCO LOAN TO CLOVERLEAF TRAILERS LTD. 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): —Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister in charge of 
SEDCO. I gave him notice yesterday of my intention to ask these questions. 
 
I understand that SEDCO loaned Cloverleaf Trailers Ltd. some $500,000 to construct a trailer court just 
south of the by-pass in Regina. Would the minister confirm that that loan is in default and that there is 
now owing some $558,000 and that foreclosure proceedings have been taken with respect to it. 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): —Mr. Speaker, firstly I would like to 
thank the hon. Member for giving me the opportunity to get the information for him. 
 
At the outset, the original loan was not $500,000, it was $400,000 dated back in 1973. SEDCO did 
recover from the sale of the assets, $200,000 and there was a write-off of $354,000 last year. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Would the minister confirm that on February 28, 1977, SEDCO took out a final 
order for foreclosure to take the property and I would like to know whether or not SEDCO instructed its 
solicitors to take out that order or whether its solicitors did it on their own? Because the taking out of 
that final order for foreclosure precludes going after the guarantor, Mr. Herman, on his guarantees. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed as well that SEDCO is still attempting to 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2985 
 

recover on the guarantors. They are still working on it. It is taking a little time and it looks like it might 
end up in the courts from the information I am getting and it could be as long as 1979. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Well, if for the reasons I have indicated, because you took out the final order or 
your solicitors did, and that precludes you from collecting from the guarantor, would you consider 
taking action to collect the loss in consequence, against your solicitor notwithstanding? My 
understanding is, your solicitor in this case is a former NDP Cabinet minister. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware who the solicitor is in this particular case but I am sure 
that he is acting on behalf of SEDCO and in due course, he will have everything solved, I hope. 
 

APPEAL OF ACQUITTAL – WALTER CHESTER 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle ): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Attorney 
General. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Anything you want, Gary. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well, the truth is all I ask, Roy. The Attorney General’s department has asked 
for leave to appeal the acquittal of Walter Chester. Mr. Chester to date, by one judge, was given an 
absolute discharge: by a second judge, was acquitted. Would you not admit that this action by your 
department can really only be viewed as a harassment by the government of an employee who disagreed 
with government policy? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with this construction or this conclusion. It is correct 
to say that there was a conviction in the first instance at the Magistrate’s level, I think it was Judge 
Andreychuk, then an absolute discharge as to the sentencing. The conviction was appealed and was 
overturned by Judge Dielschneider of the District Court. When that decision was take, it was referred 
(presumably by the prosecutor in charge of the case before Judge Dielschneider), to the officials in my 
department. A committee of five officials (it didn’t work out as a committee), but five of them at one 
time or other looked at this matter, starting with the Associate Deputy Minister of Criminal Law, Mr. 
Serge Kujawa and the Director of Criminal Justice and they concluded that the learned judge of the 
District Court, Judge Dielschneider, committed an error in overturning the conviction, an error in law on 
the basis of the proceedings which are before him and the decision was taken accordingly to launch the 
appeal on that basis. That is the fact of the matter. 
 
Now I realize that the Chester case has received a lot of publicity and some construction in this House 
but I assure the hon. Member that the decision was made strictly on a consideration of what the 
department believes to be a legal consideration. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well, the Moore Report criticised the Department of Social Services officials 
for being overly aggressive or overly zealous in talking to the judge and the prosecutors in attempting to 
get the charges proceeded with or laid. 
 
Will you advise this Assembly whether or not your departmental officials were in contact with the 
Department of Social Services with a view to discussing aspects of this particular appeal? 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2986 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for asking me that question. I have a note 
from Mr. Kujawa, dated May 18, 1978 to myself in anticipation that this might come up in question 
period and the quote I shall read is as follows. 
 

The decision to appeal was made by five of us in this office with each of use being of the 
opinion that Judge Dielschneider was entirely wrong in what he did. None of us received any 
word directly or indirectly from the Department of Social Services concerning this matter, 
and although we are aware of their interest, the appeal decision in all other respects is purely 
routine and is like the many other decisions we make to launch appeals where we feel the 
court is wrong and his error sets an unacceptable precedent for the future. 

 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I am sure that the Attorney General will table the document that he just 
quoted from. I’m assuming that the nod of the head would indicate that he is going to. 
 
The action, of course, of the appeal further delays the grievance procedure and so if it is Chester who is 
being dragged through the courts and also to be reinstated, would you not think it in the interests of 
justice and fairness that action be taken by the government, pending the appeal that Walter Chester 
should be reinstated, that all of his back pay be returned to him and that he be placed back in the employ 
of the Correctional Centre and by that way, showing to the people of Saskatchewan that it is not really a 
political harassment and they you are in fact, following a legal procedure? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that anybody has alleged that this is a matter of 
political harassment and I would challenge any of the members in this House to make that allegation of 
me and my department now, on the record, because I say to the hon. Members that indeed, that is not the 
situation. 
 
I see no objection to tabling this document. I would like to peruse it carefully again to make sure that 
there are no statements made there that could prejudice either the case of the Crown or prejudice any 
defence that Mr. Chester may have. I think that has to be in the interests of all of the people who are 
concerned here. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the situation is quite clear; that the Department of the Attorney General has 
made a decision based on what it perceives to be an error in law. That is for the Court of Appeal to 
decide whether the Department of the Attorney General is right or wrong in this matter. I think that the 
hon. Member for Qu’Appelle would agree with me that the law is meant to apply to everyone, whether 
we fare in this Legislative Assembly or outside this Legislative Assembly, and that the judicial process 
in its fair and normal course ought to be run so that the courts can decide the proper interpretation which 
is based here. 
 
I conclude by saying that Mr. Serge Kujawa who has been a member of senior standing in the 
Department of the Attorney General through years, together with the Director of Criminal Justice, Mr. 
Del Perras, through years of the department, are men of the highest reputation in this situation. To 
suggest or insinuate that there would be an instruction –because that is the only way they would act on 
your insinuation – by anyone to launch the appeal by a politician for political purposes, I think, 
obviously nobody is making that insinuation or that comment. I am very defensive about this because 
my department has got an impeccable record in this kind of fan operation with respect to appeals. 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2987 
 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to 
the Attorney General, if he would listen. I wonder if the Attorney General would tell this House how 
long it has been the practice of your department to have five senior prosecutors review acquittals at the 
appeal level and determine whether or not further appeals should be taken? Would you agree with me, 
Mr. Attorney General, that it hasn’t been the practice in the past? If this is a first time it has happened in 
this way in a minor criminal case, the member’s comments of political harassment are well taken. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Leader of the Liberal Party may view a charge of 
assault under the Criminal Code as a minor case. Frankly, I don’t view a charge of assault, whether the 
allegation is made against Mr. Chester or anybody else as something which is minor. I don’t buy that 
kind of cavalier attitude of the law. The answer is that the practice of the department is not to have cases 
reviewed by five people. But also the fact of the matter is that the opposition primarily through the PC 
Party, now unfortunately aided and abetted by the Leader of the Liberal Party, has chosen to make a 
political issue out of this. It would be unwise and imprudent for the Department of the Attorney General 
not to have had its best lawyers look at this matter so that the decision could be made with as much 
uniformity and unanimity as possible as the law that is involved in this operation. And to suggest that in 
that process there is something devious, stretches credulity even beyond the point that the Liberal Leader 
himself has sunk to impasse. 
 

LAND BANK LAND 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Since January 1, approximately 
440 Land Bank tenants have been eligible to purchase Land Bank land: of that amount, between 60 and 
80 have applied to purchase their home quarter or other acreages of land. Could the minister at this time 
advise this House as to how many parcels of Land Bank have been sold to the applicants that have 
applied thus far to date? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, there are no sales been made to the 
present time. There are a number of agreements which have been entered into and which have now been 
agreed to. It is anticipated that the first sales will be made very shortly. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, It has now been just about five months since 
some of these agreements were entered into. Is part of the reason why there has not been any land sold 
because of the fact that Land Bank rental rates have been extremely excessive over the past five years, 
and farmers have not been able to save enough money to even afford the down payment to purchase the 
home quarter of land? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, the exact opposite is true. Our staff has been around to talk to these 
people who have the opportunity to purchase land, they have indicated to our staff in many cases that 
they feel that they are quite satisfied with the rental arrangement they have and have no desire to 
purchase. Those who desire to purchase, we have made them offers. Some of them are pending now. 
There are some assessments being made as to price and so on, but we have a number now which have 
been agreed to. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I am not particularly interested in specific 
agreements which have been entered into by the Minister of Agriculture, but 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2988 
 

could he furnish this House with a rough sample or copy of the type of agreement that the Land Bank 
Commission is entering into in regard to individually who have applied for and processed along the way 
for purchase of Land Bank land? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I could probably provide you with a copy of the agreement. I 
don’t have one here but I can have one sent over to you. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you not agree now, that then, as I suggested to you when you made your policy 
announcement, regarding the Land Bank, that your proposals were not sufficient – the $5,000 was not 
sufficient – to encourage people to buy the Land Bank land. Would you now change your policy in order 
that you may encourage those Land Bank tenants to purchase that land? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think, again, I go back to the statement made by many of our 
councillors who have been discussing this with the farmers in the field. Most of them are quite happy 
with the rental agreements which they have, as we predicted they would be. 
 
One of the reasons that no one has been in a particular hurry to buy is because we have given them the 
option of saying, O.K. if you buy some time this year we will make the purchase retroactive to the 1st of 
January so that you can either make the purchase from the 1st of January and your payment will be from 
that date, or we will accept the lease rate for this year and you can start your purchase at the 1st of 
January of next year. So they have the option to do that and many of them are weighing that up. 
 

ABSOLUTE DISCHARGES 
 
MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I have a general series of questions. I 
don’t know if the Attorney General has been in active practice since the advent of the absolute discharge 
as a method of disposing of sentencing, but he will know through his position that the absolute discharge 
is only used in very rare cases. And what it is, is where the judge says, well, technically you may be 
guilty of an offence but we will discharge you and you have no criminal record. Now, I ask the Attorney 
General this, it is a practice of his department whether written or not, especially in minor matters, to get 
one or two kicks at the kitty and if you don’t get the guy then you let him go. Now, in this particular 
situation, I direct my question to this matter that Walter Chester had an absolute discharge and was 
acquitted. Of course, you can take it to the Supreme Court but why, in those circumstances, if he could 
believe anything else or the people of Saskatchewan to believe anything else and if you were harassing 
him and using your authority in the Department of the Attorney General and the abuse of the process of 
the courts to get him. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again, I don’t know if the hon. Member is alleging that there is an 
abuse of criminal process in this matter. I would be pleased to know if he is making that allegation that 
there is an abuse of criminal process. I can’t answer what existed in Mr. Chester’s mind. I don’t know 
what existed in the minds of the public for that matter. All that I know is that the lawyers in the 
Department of the Attorney General, the prosecutors, acting independently of any direction from myself 
or any other politician in this case and this matter, decided that there should be an appeal based on a 
principle of law, based because of their judgment, there was an error in law by the learned judge. Now, 
that’s the situation, that’s the memorandum that I have read to you 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2989 
 

by Mr. Kujawa. Now those are the facts. What one wants to construct of the facts for political or other 
purpose, how can I answer that? I don’t think I can answer that but I can say that the department has, 
indeed, acted with absolute integrity with respect to this matter, I am convinced. 
 
MR. LANE (Sa-Su): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am wondering what the significant point of law is that 
will be established. Secondly, I am if the Attorney General would be prepared to table the number of, 
not assault occasioning bodily harm but pure assault cases that have been taken to the court of appeal 
and lost at first instance. Now, my next question is this, the timing of this thing is very interesting 
because you have a minister that got up and told this House that he had other evidence for dismissing 
Walter Chester; it wasn’t just the assault charge. Yet, when the assault charge was set aside, in 
Estimates, he came forward with nothing new; he brought forward the same things that were dismissed 
by Moore. Now, I say to you that in order to get your Minister of Social Services out of a political crack 
you have to keep this man, Walter Chester, before the criminal courts. Now, I ask you, when will you 
stop this harassment of police officers and businessmen in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order! 
 

SEDCO – CLOVERLEAF LOAN 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister 
in charge of SEDCO. Would the minister confirm that the Premier’s former law practice, Griffin, Beke 
and Thorson and specifically Mr. Kim Thorson, has been acting on SEDCO’s behalf in taking out the 
final order for foreclosure in the cloverleaf loan situation? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry & Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned previously, 
I really don’t know who the solicitors are that are acting in this case. I can’t answer that question. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I have indicated to the minister that the loss to SEDCO is about $350,000. Now, 
in consequence of taking out that final order which precludes action against the guarantor, who 
incidentally is a gold-plated guarantor, except that he is now off the hook because the final order was 
taken out in February, who do you intend to proceed against with respect to this bit of incompetence and 
negligence that cost $350,000? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, true, my people at SEDCO tell me that the guarantor is not off the 
hook and they are dealing with him in particular. 
 

CANADIAN WHEAT BOARD EXPORT SHIPMENTS 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, at 
the start of this month, it has been revealed that shipments of the Canadian Wheat Board for export are 
$21 million behind the target. We have a situation where stocks in our terminals are very low and yet 
there is real congestion in the country elevator points which is very unusual for this time of year. As 
well, as I am sure the Premier is aware, there is a flotilla of ships waiting to load at both Vancouver and 
now at Thunder Bay. My question to the Premier is simply this. You and the federal government or your 
government and the federal government have been engaged in a verbal barrage 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2990 
 

for some three to four years now on our grain handling system. Now that our system is almost 
completely broken down, will the Premier tell us exactly what action his government plans and what 
future consultations you have in mind with the federal government? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. Member knows that it is likely 
that we will export a record amount of grain. It is likely that accordingly, the movement of grain from 
the Prairies will be at a very high level. This is not to suggest that we are satisfied with it. We are 
dissatisfied particularly with the number of box-cars made available by both of the railway companies, 
but more particularly the Canadian Pacific Railway company. We are dissatisfied with the fact that both 
railway companies are withdrawing from active use each year, significant numbers of box-cars which 
were previously used to transport grain and are not replacing them with any other rolling stock. We are 
dissatisfied with that and we do not think it is a sufficient answer for the railway companies to ask the 
government of Canada to provide more hopper cars—much as we would like to see more hopper cars 
provided. So our position is, that the railway companies are not performing as they are required to 
perform by the mandate they are given and by the rights they have been given in the past. We are raising 
this matter with the government of Canada. I am not aware of what recent communications have been 
made between either the minister in charge of the transportation agency or the Minister of Agriculture. I 
know that a meeting is being arranged for about four weeks from now, between the Minister in charge of 
the Canadian Wheat Board and representatives of the western provinces, to deal with or to discuss the 
longer term implications of the grain handling system and the operations of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
I expect therefore, that this topic of transportation will arise. We are, as I have indicated, dissatisfied 
with the system which now moves grain from the country elevators to the terminal elevators. We are 
raising that with the government of Canada. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question. Mr. Premier, basically we are at a situation now 
where one of our largest customers, China, was to have had all its wheat by July but if everything were 
to go 1000 per cent they could not have it before the end of October, at this point in time. I am sure the 
Premier is aware that no future orders have been placed by the Chinese past July 31. I am sure the 
Premier is also aware that China has already negotiated one grain deal with the United States and is 
negotiating for more. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question is, this grain transportation problem is not new: it is as old, probably, as 
Saskatchewan itself. Are you still, in light of the situation in which prairie farmers are losing hundreds 
of millions of dollars through this system – if the best answer you can come up with is to blame the 
CPR, that is hardly an original assertion from any government. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I am sure it was not an original assertion when it was made by the 
government which preceded us, the Liberal government of Mr. W. Ross Thatcher, but he made it. It was 
highly original when, I am sure, it was made by the Liberal caucus, when the member for Thunder 
Creek was a member of that caucus, but it was made. There is nothing new with this problem and it is 
not going to be solved by rhetoric indicating that some new statement will solve the problem. The only 
thing that will solve the problem is cars, hopper cars or freight cars, and the cars are not there. I don’t 
know whether the hon. member is suggesting that the government of Saskatchewan should provide the 
cars. It is not our policy so to do. It is our policy to continue to make representations to the federal 
government that has the responsibility which is fundamentally theirs. 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2991 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. I wonder if the Attorney General 
would be prepared to advise this House at this time what the important and significant point of law is in 
the Chester case, that has taken the time of five of your senior officials to decide whether or not it was 
such a serious matter that it would be taken to a further appeal to the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan, 
costing us several thousands of dollars as taxpayers? What is the important point of law that is so vital 
that you are conducting this appeal and having so many of your departmental officials working on it? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am advised by the associate deputy minister that the learned 
judge of the district court, in coming to his conclusion, considered facts which were not a part of the 
judgment at the trial level. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to the House, 45 elementary students from Yorkton. They are from two schools in 
Yorkton, Fairview and Angus Place and they are accompanied by Mrs. Helen Trafanko and Mr. Len 
Bode. They are in the Speaker’s Gallery. 
 
I have met with them, briefly, this morning and am looking forward to meeting with them again in a few 
moments to ask questions of them and, of course, we certainly must have a picture of such a fine group 
of students. They have toured the RCMP Barracks. They have done this building and the museum. I am 
sure all of you will join with me in wishing them a warm welcome to this building and a safe journey 
home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, before the Order of the Day I want to inquire why, in view of the 
fact that the introductions took seven minutes. The introductions took from 2:00 to 2:07 o’clock, today, 
and we cut off the question period at 2:30, Mr. Speaker. That is contracting it by some 20 per cent. Is it 
Mr. Speaker’s habit to cut it off promptly at 2:30 irrespective of how much time we spend on the 
introductions? The reason that I ask, that if in fact that is so and Mr. Speaker feels he has to do that, I 
think we should seek some amendment of the rules to give some additional flexibility to the period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No, I am sorry. Perhaps I read the time different than the member, but I read it as 
starting at 2:05 and it ran till after 2:30. Maybe I was wrong in reading the time, maybe I was out a 
minute or so, but usually I go over a half a minute or so on the question period. 
 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE – DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN – Vote 26 
 
ITEM 1 (cont’d) 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to direct some 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2992 
 

questions to the minister about the winter road to Uranium City. I wonder firstly, if the minister has seen 
Return No. 20 which came down very recently from his department? You are familiar with that return. 
I’ll give some of the information to the minister. Return No. 70 indicates the costs of maintaining the 
winter road to Uranium City ranges from $300,000 at the low side to $900,000 at the tip side. If 
instance, in the year when $899,000 was spent, 269 vehicles used the road to Uranium City, a price of 
about $3,400 to $3,500 per vehicle using the road to Uranium City. I am prepared to concede that it may 
be useful in some circumstances to maintain roads which one might ordinarily consider to be 
uneconomic. But I really wonder of the minister what the justification is for a road, which in one year 
costs about $6,500 per vehicle using the road – in its best year costs about $1,000 per vehicle using the 
road. I wonder if the minister wouldn’t agree with me that it may well be cheaper to fly, as they do in 
many northern points. Where the winter road to Uranium City may have looked like a good political 
gambit, when you introduced the idea shortly after coming into power, would you not now consider 
whether it is useful to maintain it or whether you might not be just as far off to have some form of 
subsidy to the people in the area. I say to the minister that it may well be that the residents of Uranium 
City would have preferred to have had the $900,000 that was spent on the road in 1975-76, spent on 
them, rather than spend at the rate of $3,000 a vehicle to provide a road that many of them may never 
have even used. 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Chairman, I would very 
much like to debate the point which the member raises. I think if you look at the return, it is not a return 
from my department but a return from the Department of Highways. The Cluff Lake road is a project 
that is operated and maintained by the Department of Highways, not the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Well, I don’t intend to pursue it indefinitely, Mr. Chairman. I ask then for the 
minister’s view – you may have some inkling of my view, but I ask for the minister’s view whether it is 
not almost to the level of scandalous that in some years we have spent as much as $6,000 per vehicle 
using the road to Uranium City. How expensive, how worthwhile is it to have that form of transportation 
available? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Again, I don’t really want to try or presume to answer the question on behalf of 
the Minister of Highway. But if the member is asking my opinion with respect to the road and the nature 
of service that it provides to Uranium City, it is my belief from the understanding that I have from 
talking with the Minister of Highways, that the road, even though the number of vehicles is rather small 
. . . but don’t forget that the type of vehicles which are going over the Uranium City road are usually 
transport units. And as to the freight haul, the freight per unit or the freight per mile or the freight over 
that road, it is my understanding that in terms of freight economics, it is considerably better than some 
of the highways in other parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
I can’t verify that but in my opinion, the road has provided a very good service to the community and in 
fact, an invaluable service to the community. When you consider that a community such as Uranium 
City can only receive its supplies, fresh fruits, vegetables, store supply services and so on, by a 
transportation service which is unrelated to air freight only during three or four months of the summer, 
that this 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2993 
 

provides another opportunity for the people of Uranium City, about 3,000 population or more, to receive 
contact regularly during the season. It provides therefore, winter freights over the road in the winter 
time; there is water transportation in the summer and of course there is year round air transportation in 
and out of Uranium City. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Well, let’s put it then in terms of the residents of Uranium City. In order to have 
year round access rather than just having summer access, in order to have year round access, we are 
spending as a province, in our best years, something in the neighbourhood of $2,000 per man, woman 
and child which would be $6,000 or $7,000 per family. That’s in our best years and in our worst year (I 
don’t know why the cost was $899,000 in 1975-76, it may be because there was an election), in the 
worst year, if there are 3,000 people in Uranium City, we pay $3,000 per resident of Uranium City. That 
would be $9,000 or $10,000 per family to provide a winter road so that they can have year round access. 
 
I ask the minister whether you wouldn’t be happier campaigning in Uranium City saying we’re going to 
give you $5,000 a year per family, but I’m sorry, we’re taking away the winter road? And if that is not 
in fact true that everybody—you would have to be a pretty sick resident of Uranium City to prefer a 
winter road to the $5,000 per family per year and the province would be ahead. Now, if that’ the case 
that every resident of Uranium City would make the choice to have the money opportunity rather than 
have that year round access for freight, surely it just isn’t profitable or useful for the province of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that we have fresh fruit in Uranium City at that kind of cost. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, again, Mr. Chairman, the member should have raised this with the 
Minister of Highways, but there is an implication in so far as the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
is concerned because of our interest in the community of Uranium City and our relationship to the social 
and economic development of that community. I think that this has been a matter has been around for a 
long, long time. The first overland units that went in, went in in about 1956 when they left Buffalo 
Narrows. I, fortunately, happened to be one of the ones aboard on that occasion, using winter equipment. 
But one of the things which Uranium city has constantly said and one of the things which I think we 
should have planned much better in the days when Uranium City was established and that is the 
relationship of that community to Saskatchewan. If you go to Uranium City, and I invite the hon. 
Member to do so, he will find that the people of Uranium City are, in fact, pressuring their political 
people, you can ask the member for Athabasca who represents that area, to belong to Saskatchewan, to 
receive the goods and services from Saskatchewan and not Alberta. There is an economic drain from our 
province as a result of the fact that Eldorado now services Uranium City from Edmonton, basically from 
Edmonton. There was, when we came in in 1971, the potential for Cluff Lake, AMOK at that time were 
doing exploratory work in the Cluff Lake area. They had their head offices in Edmonton and were to 
build a road, Alberta would have built a road, from Fort McMurray to Cluff Lake. Had that happened, 
then we would have likely had, if there was in the future to be any development at Cluff Lake, we would 
have had two major mining development potentials in our province where the economic benefits were 
basically siphoned off into Albert. I, for one, including the people of Uranium “City, were opposed to 
that venture. That’s why the winter road was constructed or commenced in 1971-72 as it was. On that 
basis AMOK moved its head office out of Edmonton into Saskatoon which I think was a benefit to 
Saskatchewan. 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2994 
 

Not only do the costs, associated with what you refer to, are costs of a winter road. It has been a constant 
upstaging of that road to become a year around overland route in northern Saskatchewan. It will serve, 
as many of the northern roads will serve, and I think at this point in time you couldn’t justify them on 
straight economics. Absolutely no way could you justify. I think, any of the roads that we are building 
there on a straight economic basis, but I do believe it provides for the concept of development of the 
North or opening the North for a development potential. And that applies to the road to Cluff Lake. It 
provides that kind of fan opportunity for the future and much of the money which is going into the Cluff 
Lake road is an upstaging of the quality of that road as an overland route for the future. So the costs, 
which are strictly related to a winter road, which, obviously, goes out when the ice goes out. But you 
would have to break down those costs and I make no defence or attempt to answer the question in any 
detail relative to the Minister of Highway’s responsibility. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — How long is this so-called winter road? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — You would have to go from Portage La Loche and I would suppose you have 
250 miles or 300 miles. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — How much similar mileage is there in the North or is this the showcase road, at 
a showcase price? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, I think if the member is wanting to be a bit facetious, maybe we should get 
the cost of the road which was built to Gulf, which was constructed to Gulf, and whether or not that road 
has economically paid for itself. I want the hon. Member to recognize that it was the former government 
of the province of Saskatchewan that decided that they should build a road to Gulf. Not only that, but 
then there was this one, you know that you hear in this Chamber a number of times, the Primrose Path. 
The Minister Highways refers to that one fairly frequently. The other one that is referred to quite 
frequently is the road which was built, connecting No. 2 over to Flin Flon, No. 106, where the former 
Premier made a road for what was called, Anglo-Rouyn Mines and I think it was a $3 million road and I 
think they hauled $90,000 worth of ore over that road. So if the member is wanting to get into an area 
which is really not related to the Estimates before us, Mr. Chairman, he should have enough wit about 
him to have drawn to those matters to the attention of the appropriate minister and the appropriate 
Estimates. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Chairman, of course I was in high school when all that happened and I used 
to take it up with my mother and complain about it, but I am sure that Mr. Chairman will find the 
minister’s remarks very germane. 
 
I ask the minister, however, whether there are other similar roads in the North? All I said was, this is the 
showcase road, but are there other similar roads? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I don’t know what the member might be referring to when he says 
similar roads, Mr. Chairman. There are a number of roads being constructed in northern Saskatchewan, 
some of which may be similar; some of which would, at some point in time, maybe relative, related to 
the kind of roads that we are building now. 
 
If you are asking, winter roads, the only other winter road that I can think of is the one which serves the 
community of Wollaston Lake. There is snowplowing and winter road construction from the Gulf Lake 
mine to the Wollaston Lake settlement. 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2995 
 

MR. MERCHANT: — How long is that? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It is about 35 or 40 miles. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — What about the road to Key Lake? What is happening with the road to Key 
Lake? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I don’t know what the member is referring to, Mr. Chairman. There is no road 
to Key Lake that I know. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Would the minister ask his department whether they are aware of construction 
going on in a road to Key Lake? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I don’t need to ask my officials. At this point in time there is no construction 
going on a road to Key Lake. I heard the members hassling the Minister of Mineral Resources about 
that, but there is no construction on a road to Key Lake at this point in time. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Chairman, I am gong to leave this area, but let me just summarize. What 
the minister is saying is that we are maintaining a road at a cost of about $2,000 per mile, per year, in the 
good years and sometimes as much as $3,000 per mile, per year. I suppose, to some extent it depends on 
weather. We are maintaining a road which serves Uranium City at a cost, per family, of $5,000 in the 
good years and up to $9,000 or $10,000 per family, in the bad years. I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that we 
are maintaining the winter road to Uranium City because it was included in the New Deal for People 
1971. It was a campaign promise that turned out to be a little bit more expensive than the government 
anticipated. And it was a campaign promise that the government should not be reconsidering because the 
people of the North would be just as happy to be served by alternate modes of transport and have that 
money spent n some other way. It seem patently obvious to me, Mr. Chairman, and I am sure to other 
members of this committee, that a cost of $5,000 or $6,000 per family and anywhere from $1,000 to 
$6,000 per vehicle using the roads, is an unreasonably large cost for the Saskatchewan taxpayer to 
maintain. It is a part of the piece that we see all the time with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
that it is a very high, let’s be charitable, a very high spending department. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, that is a nice subtle comment Mr. Chairman, for the member to make. 
 
He starts off on a subject which is not related to this department at all. It’s not in the Estimates before 
him, Mr. Chairman. It has no relevance to what this department has done but he brings it in. The other 
think that is interesting to me is he talks about having been in high school. He talks about having been in 
high school. I wonder, I really have to wonder whether the member was in high school or whether he 
wasn’t. He talks about $3,000, $3,000 per capita. For whom is the member talking about $3,000 per 
capita? I think if you take your pencil and paper and give it to somebody else in your caucus, you will 
find out that it is $300. It’s $300, not $3,000. So maybe you should go back to high school and go over 
your mathematics and really decide what the point is you are trying to make, hon. Member. You know, 
you should be embarrassed. You should be embarrassed and your face should be red. 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2996 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — A few general remarks before I get into some of my 
questions. I really didn’t get started yesterday but Mr. Minister, since last year the DNS, in my opinion, 
has not improved that much and there is still a great deal of what we class as mismanagement or 
inefficiency within that department. In fact, during the last year since the last Budget, I have made 
several contracts, several more contacts in the northern part of the province and I get the odd phone call, 
the odd letter from up there. I recognize, as you introduced your officials the other day, I recognized 
some of them by signatures but I have never met them in person before. 
 
I find, Mr. Minister, that most of the complaints that have come down or that I have asked about or 
talked about is the question, what is the DNS doing? What is it really doing in the North? It seems that 
we are spending a lot of money they say. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . . Well, Mr. Member for 
Athabasca, we are hoping to get some of those questions answered and probably you will be capable of 
answering some of them a lot better than the minister will be, according to some of my information. 
 
We are spending money like crazy in the North and putting up a lot of buildings and building houses. 
We heard in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation that they build homes for $40 a square foot. We 
heard you say yesterday $52 a square foot and it seems like it costs the DNS just a little more to do 
something than even the other agencies of the government – the Saskatchewan Housing or the 
individuals who are building their own homes in the North. 
 
In the last year we have see, it seems intentionally, — the DNS go out to raise the hackles of the 
northern people, more so since last June when you took on the Northern Municipal Council and in a 
planned way, whittled it down to a small body of people in the North. There has been quite a bit of 
controversy over that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have heard of many items that have come to light about the RRAP program in the 
North, the Residential Rehabilitation Program and some of the things that have happened there could 
almost be construed I suppose as fraud, probably. I believe in this session in these Estimates, we will dig 
into a little bit of that, Mr. Minister, I hope you will answer the questions that pertain to the DNS and not 
hide behind or go behind the Attorney General’s investigation into the RRAP program. 
 
We have listened to you over the last three or four months actually blaming – you couldn’t give answers 
because the Attorney General was or his department was involved in this. I was wondering at that time if 
the problem is so wide spread and so enormous that it is impossible to correct or get to the bottom of – 
or is there a possible cover up by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, probably to protect people 
you do not want exposed, maybe political friends of the NDP. In the last session and in the last 
Estimates, we also spoke and asked questions about Delta Holdings. We have asked questions in the 
Legislature about Delta Holdings and I believe we will ask a few more this time. 
 
As you recall, last fall I questioned you about the negotiations that were going on between Delta and the 
DNS where, as I understood it, Delta was trying to get out of a long-term fixed contract that had been 
signed five or six years before. 
 
I know the minister is going to come back and say those were discussions that were 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2997 
 

being held between Delta and the DNS but the, I believe, are negotiations and I think the only thread 
that you are gong to hang on there is making the distinction between discussions and these negotiations, 
and to say that there is a difference between these serious discussions which were held between the DNS 
and that they were not negotiations. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is also my understanding that these discussions or negotiations, or whatever you want to 
call them, did lead to a type of agreement called a quick claim, a contract which was, as I understand it, 
turned down by the cabinet. At the present time I understand it is you who has to draw up the next 
contract or next agreement for Delta. 
 
The question of the Delta people in the La Ronge Housing Project, who enter a part in some houses of 
the DNS, Mr. Minister, I believe could have been solved very easily and very quickly because I, as 
everyone else in this Assembly and in Saskatchewan here know that this government and the federal 
government have driven up the cost of living and the cost of housing at a rate which was unforeseen 
when this Delta arrangement was made. 
 
I believe that negotiations could have taken place with Delta and an increase in the rent would have been 
acceptable by all members of this Legislature but, Mr. Minister, by your own choice you put this in a 
political area and have caused problems for the Delta people, and the housing problems that are in the 
North at the present time have been magnified by your making this a political issue. 
 
There are a couple of questions I want to ask on that, Mr. Minister, and maybe you can get them now. I 
would like to know – I will go along but I would like to know if you have a lawyer employed at the 
present time, an independent lawyer looking into the Delta contract to see how you can get out of it. 
 
My understanding is that there are also several suites and houses, or had been a while back, owned by 
Delta Holdings in La Ronge, which were empty. I would like to know when you get up to answer, also 
who is paying the rent on these suites and homes that were empty in La Ronge, which were rented from 
the Delta Holding Property, being that DNS is the tenant of the Properties. 
 
I believe we will get to ask some questions on the new apartments that were built up there, also. It is my 
understanding that these apartments came in at a very high construction cost and we will talk, as I said, 
about these a little later. 
 
Mr. Minister, the DNS, I must say, under into original concept was set up for northern people with the 
help of the northern people, but it failed and has strayed away from that original concept of helping the 
northerner and the people in the north part of our province. It was to help them to get more stabilized as 
far as job opportunities were concerned and to improve the lot of the citizens of northern Saskatchewan 
and to allow them to participate in the decision making and the development of northern Saskatchewan. 
That was a good concept and that was a good idea. It was endorsed by many people at that time. It was 
endorsed by me, at that time, I will tell you. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No, it wasn’t. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Oh, you better believe it! This went by the wayside in 1973, Mr. Minister, when people 
who had spent most of their time in southern Saskatchewan began working for the DNS, bringing in and 
imposing upon the residents of northern 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

2998 
 

Saskatchewan the southern ideas, at a pace that was disruptive to the normal way of life for the people in 
that part of our province. 
 
Ever since then we have seen the southern bureaucrat going into northern Saskatchewan and becoming a 
specialist in a month or two. I believe yesterday you said that 50 per cent of the employees of the DNS 
are from outside the NAD district and have not been long-term residents in the north. 
 
We have seen the bureaucracy built to a point where we have a civil servant now for every 32 residents 
in the North, or about one civil servant for every six or seven families. As the member for Kindersley 
(Mr. McMillan) said last year, each family has their own little civil servant. You can get a visit, one hour 
a day from you own little bureaucrat or your civil servant. Every day of the week you will be able to see 
your little civil servant there. This in my opinion, Mr. Minister is just a little too much control, a little bit 
too much bureaucracy and too much interference in the daily lives of the individuals. It removes any 
incentives that the people do have for making decisions at the local level when they can be overridden or 
overturned by the civil servants in the DNS. 
 
We know that only on a few isolated projects, as you mentioned in the Legislature not too long ago, that 
the main workers were northern residents, most of them were from the southern part of the province. In 
Prince Albert and district there are many people who work in the North for the DNS and I am sure, Mr. 
Minister, if it is the plan of the DNS to eventually train the northern residents, to take over and run his 
own business, to run his own community, to build the facilities and maintain these facilities with 
government help, that there should be a better working program and a training program than has been 
arranged so far in the DNS. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is interesting to note that a department of Northern Saskatchewan, which just six or 
seven short years ago had a very small Budget is now one of the major departments in this government. 
One of the main complaints I get from the people in the North is that you can’t contact any other part of 
Saskatchewan as far a government is concerned from the North, everything must be funnelled through 
four or five people in La Ronge. The one agency concept is probably not working for the people in the 
North, Mr. Minister. 
 
I believe that this is a problem that will only create a two province situation – we will have the Northern 
Administration District and the rest of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Minister, this had come to light this 
spring when I was talking to a teacher and he told me he had been teaching Grade One and Grade Two – 
he’s not up there now, so you don’t have to go looking for him, it was on the west side. He asked the 
youngsters where they were from. They named the town Ile-a-la-Crosse, DNS. It wasn’t Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
Saskatchewan. Another one, the city is Ile-a-la-Crosse, the Northern Administration District. That is an 
isolated and it is a small example. There are two isolated examples. It makes me wonder really what is 
happening in our system in the North and what is really happening with the young people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Is it the intention of the DNS or some of its employees to create a separate province, to start at this very 
early age with the young people to educate them, to maybe manipulate their thinking to believe that they 
are in a separate part of Saskatchewan, or separate state or whatever you want to call it and that it is not 
part of Saskatchewan as a whole? I can see this leading to some very fearful and probably tragic results 
down the road in a few years when these young people are old enough to vote. The idea that they don’t 
belong to the rest of Saskatchewan, that they belong to DNS or the Northern 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

2999 
 

Administration District, Mr. Minister, I liken this to (you say bogeyman) the Quebec situation where 15 
or 20 years ago the separatist talk started in the schools. Today we see a separatist government there 
which your Premier and your government applauds as a separatist movement. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are some of the concerns that have been voiced by the people of northern 
Saskatchewan to me. The overriding one that I hear from the people is, what is DNS really supposed to 
be doing in the North? Why are they spending so much money wastefully? 
 
I talked to some people who live in the small villages and many of them are pleased, and I am pleased, 
that they have the opportunity to move into new housing. I have never in this Legislature and I have 
never publicly gone out and criticized the building of housing, the building of schools or the building of 
roads but I do criticize your vast expenditures and the waste and mismanagement and inefficiency in it 
and I shall continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the ladies that I talked to was a little concerned about some of the people who are 
moving her and I believe it was in the Buffalo Narrows Area – that came and told her that she would 
have to move out and they quoted it as a shack and move into what the DNS was building or the 
government was building, a new home for her. It was bothering this lady because these people do not 
look at their homes as shacks and they look at them as homes. I think it is one of the problems that we 
have with some of the people from the South going into the North and because they were raised in a 
home that had three or four bedrooms, a rug and electricity and everything that goes with it, and when 
they went up there and saw some of the living conditions of some of the people who had lived there for 
several generations probably, they considered these as shacks and they told them they would be moving 
out of their shacks. I believe it is just one of the little things, Mr. Minister, that has caused some of the 
disharmony amongst some of the people in the North with your department. It is a bad attitude on their 
part of some of the civil servants and I believe that this can be corrected. Once they are up there long 
enough they will understand the way of life of the people in the North. 
 
Another area, Mr. Minister, is in the area of child raising that I’ve had some concerns. I have discussed 
some of these with you and your deputy and we’ll leave those where we discussed them. I’ve talked to 
people in the North and they say that employees coming from the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan come into their homes, the child care workers or whatever they have, and decide that the 
children should be taken out of that type of an environment. They should be taken out of that 
environment because when they looked around they didn’t find enough food in the home or they didn’t 
find the cupboards full of food, or that it was too cold in that home or, you know, the conditions just 
weren’t up to the standards that the individual who was doing the investigating thought they should be. 
Again, Mr. Minister, I believe it is a lack of understanding on the part of some employees on the part of 
the DNS in not understanding the ways the people of the North have lived for many years. There are 
many there who don’t stock up for a month at a time. They don’t have a fridge; they don’t have the 
things that we have in the South or that you have in the South and they just can’t accept that concept or 
that way of living. The people there have lived that way for 300 or 400 years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that the concept in the start of the DNS was a good idea, trying to get people to 
help themselves. However, I feel that at the present time you are overstaffed with the bureaucracy of 
people who do not understand and some of the examples I cited are some of the problems that have been 
given to me. I am not saying 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3000 
 

that every worker in the DNS is like that but you do have workers in the field who have no idea of the 
living conditions or the working conditions, as I said, or any other conditions in the North. Many of 
them have gone up there to further their education only or to get some further experience and, I believe, 
some of them have gone up there in the past just to plain raise hell in the North. I want to thank you at 
this time for cleaning up one of those situations several years back hen some of this was happening. This 
is unfortunate because it has been done on the backs of the people who live in the environment in the 
North which is rather a hard environment. But they have lived that way and have survived for many 
more years than you can count probably and over the last five or six short years they have watched 
changes take place that were beyond anybody’s dream five, six, seven, eight years ago. These changes 
took place with very little concern or very little meaningful consultation with the 25,000 or 30,000 
people in the North. I realize that many, many meetings were held with the people in the North, 
however, the input from the local people was such that it didn’t count for much and the planners or the 
builders of this new concept, move ahead, it moved ahead at a pace that they wanted to move at and 
expected the attitudes to change, the social standards to change and expected the people to change from 
a way of life which had been theirs to a brand new way of life and then just last year you announced in 
Prince Albert that the North could expect more social upheavals in the next ten years than have ever 
been seen in the history of the North, Mr. Minister. 
 
This is rather a frightening statement and I was just wondering what kind of social upheavals you were 
talking about. What are your plans for the North when you are gong to plan for more social upheavals 
than have ever been seen in the history of northern Saskatchewan? You can answer those when I get 
finished here and sit down. 
 
What is the long-term plan for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? What are the plans that you have 
for this, as I said, social upheaval? Maybe that controversial report that came out which was labelled as 
the ‘Grand Report’ wasn’t too far off when it talked about some of the things that are happening in the 
North. It named some of the hard working civil servants and residents in the North and people who work 
for this government in rather a derogatory way; yet you never took a stand to have their names cleared 
or have this guy brought before anybody to prove his allegations. 
 
I believe at that time, Mr. Minister, that you pulled what you normally pull and instead of attacking the 
problem that he explained, you and your government and your people decided to attack the individual. 
That is an old theory from across the ocean, that if you can’t attack the policy, attack the individual and 
destroy the individual. 
 
By your own admission, Mr. Minister, you have said that one of the main problems that you have run 
into in the DNS is that you have had no long term plans from the start in the DNS; that there were no 
proper foundations laid and there was no long term plan. In the meantime you set up a Ministerial 
Advisory Committee. I believe that this was probably a window dressing on your part again because the 
next statement you made in the press was that ‘because of the rapid changes that are gong to be brought 
about in the north half of our province, there is going to be very little time for consultation or debate’. 
 
Once again, Mr. Minister, this means that this is a warning I suppose, to the people of Saskatchewan that 
the government will move ahead at this pace, doing what it wants and making the people keep up with 
it. 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3001 
 

At the present time we see the DNS going throughout the North, meeting with the different communities 
and talking about a formula for revenue sharing. Mr. Minister, I attended one of these meetings in 
Stoney Rapids not too long ago and I can tell you that in was, in my opinion, one of the greatest 
whitewash jobs that I have ever seen done on a community. 
 
Now I am not fully and totally familiar with the type of meetings that you have with the local 
communities but I felt that this was a whitewash that had taken place. Your DNS officials were in there 
explaining the formula. It would be rather interesting, Mr. Minister, to have the formula explained here 
in the Assembly today in the same manner as it was done in Stoney Rapids and let the Assembly witness 
the type of presentation that is made in communities in the north half of our province. 
 
It was all done in a very short period of time with a lot of statistics and a lot of figures and I have seen it 
in the Legislature and we have all seen what statistics can do with the socialist math. It is hard to 
understand; you can use statistics to get anything across. I may be a little naïve when it comes to figures, 
Mr. Minister, and to the plans that you had for the North but I found it difficult to really understand what 
the whole plan was that was being put across. 
 
I don’t criticize the official who was doing this. He was doing his utmost but I believe it was sort of a – 
it was too fast and not enough explanation given to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the funding formula comes at a time when the local communities and the local 
governments of northern Saskatchewan are about to take over their own businesses and administer their 
own budgets and do their own planning. The whole bag all at once and earlier on in this Assembly, Mr. 
Minister, I cautioned and asked for some caution in this regard. I urge that you make sure that each 
community would be ready for this new responsibility that is being given by the amendment of Bill 15. I 
urge this for one reason and one reason only and that is, that it is a feeling of mine that this is a 
movement by the government to be able, in a few years time, to say to the local communities that they 
are not capable of handling their own affairs and the DNS will once again step in and this government 
will have once again, stepped in and taken over the control of the lives of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. That this is just a window dressing thing, Mr. Minister, and I hope as I urged you before 
when we talked about, that there is extreme caution taken so that the people are ready and trained to take 
over these programs that you are planning to bring in under Bill 15. 
 
However, I feel very strongly (and I also believe you also know that after the next general election in 
Saskatchewan, not only the people of the North have problems but all over the province who happen to 
be worrying about the New Democratic government and its philosophy of total control and total 
socialism for everybody concerned), that after the next general election, they won’t have to worry about 
that because you will be going the way of Barrett and Schreyer and the Premier will become the leader 
of the national party in Canada and we will be in power and give the people their freedom the way it 
should be given, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the game that has been played in northern Saskatchewan is a 
game of trying to buy the people. I have seen it and have heard about it as I phoned to the people of the 
North and received letters and the little travelling that I do in the north part. 
 
The last instance when I was up in the Stoney Rapids, I was told of just a minor incident 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3002 
 

when they were fixing the airport – that a 4 x 8 plywood sign that was painted saying who put the 
money forward for the airport. It had been knocked down, run over by a cab and the people in Stoney 
Rapids were trying to be led to believe that is was the DNS, the provincial government, the NDP, that 
was building this airport for them – with no recognition of money coming from the federal government. 
I think that is rather unfair. 
 
I also understand that the very time several people in Stoney Rapids could not understand why so much 
cement was going to waste. They estimated 3,000 bags to 5,000 bags of cement sitting on the end of the 
runway, piled up there for several years and was never used. When it was brought to the attention of, I 
believe it was your assistant or your assistant deputy minister, it was just a matter of a week before all 
these cement bags were moved, probably put into the amusement ground and destroyed. Mr. Minister, I 
believe there are a few pictures floating around of that pile of cement that was just wasted. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is this kind of waste and this kind of extravagance in the north that has turned a lot of the 
people against the concept of the DNS as it is today. Listening to the local citizens again of Stoney 
Rapids, they were talking about the possibility of getting sewer and water into the town; the possibility 
of getting a community well in place and not having to go to the government well where, when they 
went to use it, they felt as if they were imposing on Big Daddy or the government. It may sound small 
but it is a concern of theirs up there and something must be done about that. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are some of the concerns of the people of the North as I have talked to and as they 
have given to me. Concerns about the vast waste and they don’t understand how the government can 
waste so much money like this, on say, a pile of cement by letting it sit and get weathered and then just 
have it dumped. There is no explanation for that and there is really no reason for that to happen. They 
say that this waste has been seen all over the North. 
 
One of the expressions that I believe holds very true and has held true since the start of the DNS is, 
when I was speaking to a man on the phone the other day and he said, well one of the things that gripes 
him is that if there is a meeting called, there are 12 planes and 14 officials arrive. Aircraft flying all over 
the place, very expensive aircraft to haul DNS officials around and then they bicker and argue about 
some very small expense in a community. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I have said, there are some of the concerns. We are going to be talking today once again 
and asking about the DNS, that fine little company that seems to show its head in every estimate. We are 
going to talk to you a little bit about the RRAP program and probably, Mr. Minister, ask you some 
questions about some cost overruns, where I believe there is some inefficiency and mismanagement. The 
Budget this year, $72 million or approximately $2,400 per capita. Last year you were very loud when 
you had equalled the per capita Budget in the North compared to the South, but the problem is that the 
people in the North, the residents of the North are not getting this $2,000 or $2,400 per capita. A lot of it 
is going into subsidized housing: a lot of it is going into areas where the northerner, himself, does not 
really gain any reward or help from it. 
 
Mr. Minister, with that, I will sit down and let you reply and then we will get into some line of 
questioning that will keep you entertained for a little while. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3003 
 

has covered a wide number of subjects, a wide number of subjects which I am sure he doesn’t really 
expect me to answer or attempt to answer, because most of them stem from a basis which has no fact. It 
is a concept that conjured up in the mind of the member himself. 
 
I want to prove that point by just pointing out one little incident. He makes a great issue, took a great 
length of time to say that he had gone in and did an investigation and somebody had come to him and 
talked about some cement that sat on the end of a runway at Stoney Rapids. He went on to use that as an 
example of waste and extravagance and mismanagement and this kind of thing. 
 
If the member would have taken a little bit of time, if he would have gone to any authoritative source, if 
he would have taken some time to think, the cement that was unpacked or left at the end of an airport 
runway might have been left there for a purpose. It might have been left there for a purpose that in the 
limited expectation knowledge of the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, that it was there for a 
purpose to be used to stabilize the soil on that runway. And whether it sat there or didn’t sit there, is not 
a point. The fact was that it was used; it was used for the purpose for which it was sent there. There isn’t 
many who know it, and I don’t think the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake recognizes that the soils 
that are in that country are very difficult soils to manage – very fine and pulverized soil. And where the 
airplane comes to the end of the runway, on a very sandy pulverized soil and makes it turn for takeoff, 
that it will root up the ground and it pulverizes the soil more and there is no stabilization there. 
 
The purpose for the cement being taken there, Mr. Member, and I hope that you will now forget this 
little story, that it was taken there for the purpose, the exact purpose, of putting it on that soil and 
stabilizing the base on the turnaround. I trust the member will not continue to use this as an example of 
mismanagement and waste. It in fact was programmed for a purpose. 
 
I would like to know where the member stands? He goes this side and then he goes that side. He wants 
to make sure that he doesn’t say anything that one could take out of Hansard and take up to the 
constituencies of Athabasca and “Cumberland House and, in fact, say to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan what the Conservative position is. He is very, very careful to not get himself into that 
kind of a bind. He says, well, there is too much money going into northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder, is that your stand? Is the Budget too much? Is it too high? No, he will say, no, but you 
shouldn’t spend it here or you shouldn’t spend it there. But he was very careful not to say that it was too 
high, because if he had said it was too high the, of course, the members of the Legislature who sit in this 
Assembly, would go back and suggest to the people of the North, you really don’t want a Conservative 
member because, in fact, they are already saying that you are getting too much money and that you 
shouldn’t have this type of expenditure in the North. I would like to know where the member stands. I 
would like to know where the Conservative caucus stands with respect to the Budget, in fact where it 
stands. But I think that they will be careful not to identify that. 
 
Now, it was interesting to hear the member raise the point about the Gran Report. We have all heard 
about the Gran Report. It is past now and forgotten about but he says that sort of the conclusion of that 
on the way I approached the situation was that if I cannot attack the program I attack the people or the 
person. 
 
You know, only just a matter of minutes – only a matter of minutes before you got on to 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3004 
 

the Gran Report you were condemning the staff of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan for many 
of the things which you said they were doing or not doing. 
 
Now, if you want to attack the program, attack the program but please leave the staff of the department 
alone. They are doing a job, and I think a very commendable job. But when you cannot attack the 
program you do exactly what you accuse me of doing in terms of the “Gran Report. You attack the 
people. You got around to attacking the staff because you do not have any fundamental concept of what 
they are trying to do in the first place, nor do you attempt to inform yourself of what their job is and 
therefore you attack the individuals. That in fact is what you have done. I think that that is a discredit not 
only to the members of the Conservative caucus but I think it is a low and a cheap shot which I think the 
member should try to keep away from. 
 
With respect to social upheaval and my references to the social upheaval, there has been a great social 
upheaval in Northern Saskatchewan today by the fact that there has been development in the North. I 
would like to know what the member, I’d like to know what the Conservative caucus would say. Would 
they say, stay out? I think that this is what in fact they would do, is stay out. They would not be in the 
North. There would be no and if there was a program of development and if the development was in any 
way relative to the development that has taken place in the last seven years, there is obviously going to 
be some social upheaval. There is going to be a change in the relationships that occur. There is going to 
be a change in the communities. When I said social upheaval, can you imagine a community that lived 
in total isolation before 1971, that lived in total isolation and that had no access by road; the only access 
was by air. They had very little radio communication because they were out of reach of the normal radio 
communication, no telephones, no television, none of the modern conveniences that we have. And in a 
space of four or five or six short years, they have received direct distance dial telephones; they have 
them in their houses and can therefore pick up their telephones and phone anywhere in the world . . . 
 
MR. MALONE: — For taxis. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, and they can phone a taxi and the Leader of the Liberal Party doesn’t 
think that they should be able to phone a taxi, he thinks they should rot up there, That was the approach 
of his government. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I have never said such a thing and I ask the member to withdraw the comment. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — before the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . So I would like to suggest, Mr. 
Chairman . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I never made any such comment about the people in northern Saskatchewan and 
the member knows I didn’t and I ask him to withdraw his remark. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — With regard to the member’s comment from his seat, where he makes most of 
the best comments that he makes in this House, he did indicate that when I was talking about telephones 
and the ability of the persons in one of those 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3005 
 

northern communities to direct distance dial – he made the rather snide remark that yes, they could pick 
up their telephones and dial a taxi. I think that that was an impertinent remark with respect to the – and I 
said, yes, I think they were able to dial taxis, and I think it is fair to suggest that they should be able to. I 
think that they are as entitled to dial a taxi in Patuanak as they are in Regina. I think that is one of the 
benefits of the program development of this government that has provided them with that opportunity to 
be able not only to dial a taxi for their pleasure, but to dial a taxi in the case of an emergency, to take 
them either to the hospital or to any of the facilities which they, on their own self-assurement, should go. 
 
With regard to the matter of the social upheaval mentioned, there is no way, no way that you can put 
into a community a sewer and water system, 50 new houses that have sewer and water installed within 
the houses, telephone systems, radios, television, without having a major effect on the cultural and the 
social implications of that community. That’s true. It will be true in the future because the North 
becomes opened, as the roads and the access become more available to people from the South and to 
people from other parts of the world, it will equally be true that the future will hold for them many of the 
pressures which, we, in our society have overcome or have learned to live with. And so as the age 
progresses, as mining development takes place in the North, and many of the things which we look 
forward to for the North, there obviously will be social upheaval and problems associated with that. 
These are the things that we have concern for. It is one of the long term objectives to meet the issues of 
that. 
 
With respect to child care, the member made quite an issue out of child care. I want to advise the 
member that 35 to 40 per cent of the staff of social workers in the North are persons of northern native 
ancestry. So if there are some decisions being made with respect to the removal of children from certain 
homes, it is likely 50 per cent of the chance is that there has been at least a person of northern native 
ancestry who is making that kind of a recommendation. And so they are involved in the process, Mr. 
Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. I think you should be careful of how you make accusations about 
a child-care program. I know that you know some of the problems involved in that and so I think you 
should go very carefully in how you do that, in fact, no child can be taken away from any home for any 
permanent period of time without gong before a judge for permanent removal. That’s the fact of life; 
that’s the way it is. I think when you make loose and careless accusations of the kind which you make, I 
think you should be careful to understand what the law is respecting that. 
 
With respect to the allocation of housing, he was criticizing the allocation of housing. He was talking 
about moving people out of shacks and he said that people resented being moved out of a shack. Now, 
that is a little peculiar, that is a little peculiar for a member to talk like that …(interjection)….All right 
but just sit and listen a minute. I sat and listened to you; you can listen. That’s the way that housing is 
allocated. The way housing is allocated, there is an agreement. Central Mortgage and Housing has an 
agreement with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and we provide roughly 125 houses a year. 
We go to the Northern Municipal Council. That’s an elected council for your information; that’s a 
council which has been established like a rural municipality. We go to that rural municipality and we say 
to them, where are the communities in your area that have the greatest needs? They then decide out of 
that 125 houses that 30 will go to this community and 25 to that one, 5 to this one and so on. And having 
made that allocation, that allocation then is taken to the local community authority, and for your 
information Mr. Member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, that is another elected council of a community in 
northern Saskatchewan. That 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3006 
 

allocation of housing is taken to them and they are asked, which persons in your community have the 
greatest need? On the basis of their priority those houses are allocated. Now, if what you are saying is, 
that the people who are giving up their shacks in northern Saskatchewan is somehow a decision of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan you are far, far off base, much further off base than I thought you 
were and not as well informed as you might be. Not as well informed as you, in fact, should be with 
respect to housing particularly when you are designated by your caucus to be the critic of the North. 
 
With respect to the NMC. The member raised a point about the NMC. I would like to know where you 
stand with respect to the NMC. I would like to know where your caucus stands with respect to the 
Northern Municipal Council and I would like to know what your stand is with respect to, in fact, the 
allocation of the money. I am going to be interested where you vote when that bill comes before the 
House in the allocating of the money not to the Northern Municipal Councils but to the local councils 
and letting them decide whether they want to support the NMC or not. I am going to be interested to 
know where the member votes on that particular occasion. I would like to know where he stands. I am 
just saying that I will be interested, Mr. Member, to know, in fact where you stand with regard to that 
bill when it comes up. Because there is no way that you can waffle and waffle as you have done in the 
House this afternoon – an attempt to ride all sides of this horse at the same time, so that you can come 
down of the right side of the fence when you get out in election time. 
 
With regard to Delta, I would be happy to talk about Delta; the member is very interested in Delta 
housing. He has continued to ask questions over and over again and he is concerned whether the word is 
‘negotiate’ or ‘discuss’, whether that is important or whether it is not important, or what, in fact, has 
been done. 
 
He does agree, and he has in this House agreed and Hansard will verify that, that he has agreed that the 
government got a good deal in the Delta housing program. Yes, right on, he says. You know we had a 
difficult time establishing that in this Legislature for a long time because when there were no 
Conservatives in this House. When all we had was Liberals in the House, that just had to be the worst 
deal in history. It was an under-the-table deal; it was a giveaway to political patronage. It was all sorts of 
things with respect to Delta housing. 
 
Then we have this member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake who professes to know a great deal about the 
North and he comes in and he says it is just one of the finest deals that this government could have 
made, just a tremendous deal, very good. Well, I appreciate knowing that. And, yes, I suppose that you 
can negotiate or discuss and I am not really concerned whether it is ‘negotiate’ or ‘discuss’. I know that 
you have a member sitting in the balcony, Mr. Meagher, who is my political opposition in the 
Shellbrook constituency. I know he is there to watch over you this afternoon and to see that you perform 
and function in the proper way. 
 
AN HON, MEMBER: — That is the closest he is going to get to this House. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — That’s right. I think it is. Even with the prophecy of the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, who said that he would be in this House the next time around, on this side of the 
House. 
 
With respect to Delta housing, I suppose that the government, because we do have an agreement and as 
the member says, a very good agreement, I suppose that we will, 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3007 
 

from time to time, negotiate – if you want to call it negotiate – and we will probably discuss, or we will 
negotiate, or we will deal, or we will bargain, or we will do whatever seems to be appropriate and 
necessary in order to carry out that agreement or in order to be able to provide for the members of the 
staff of the department in Lac La Ronge and for the public in Lac La Ronge, which in our opinion can be 
the best solution to the problems with respect to staff housing and so on, related thereto. 
 
Yes, it is true that we have a lawyer, the department has a lawyer, with respect to the interpretation of 
the agreement. Yes, Mr. Kenny is the lawyer’s name, in fact, and he is hired to undertake the legal 
interpretations or the assessment of the agreement or whatever you want, or other matters related 
thereto. 
 
I want to move off that subject for one moment and try to get from the member what it is that he 
recommends. He criticizes and that is all right for a member of the opposition. We expect the opposition 
to criticize, but we also expect the opposition to come up with some alternatives. We believe that they 
should have some alternatives in mind if they are going to criticize. 
 
You say that you think the original concept of DNS is all right, but you think somehow it has gone 
astray. I want to read to you about when they set up a commission in Ontario to investigate the Reid 
Paper case. I know, the member likes reference to Tory Ontario. The people of Saskatchewan like us to 
remind them that should there ever be – and I think there will never be – but should there ever be a Tory 
government in Saskatchewan it is likely to be similar to the same kinds of concepts that go on and the 
same types of programs that go on in other Tory provinces of Canada. But nevertheless, many of the 
members of the Legislature will know of the Reid Paper Proposal by the Ontario government where it 
was going to take over most of the forest lands of northern Ontario and operate them on a private basis 
without regard to the people who liked in northern Ontario. 
 
Well, a commissioner whose name is Justice Hartt, it is my information that Justice Hartt appearing 
before a television camera, referred to the single agency approach in Saskatchewan as being the example 
that should be followed in some of the other provinces of Canada in their approach to northern 
development. So not only are we being recognized by people in other parts of Canada for the proposal 
which we have undertaken. 
 
You can do it three ways, Mr. Member. You can go, as we have indicated, like Alberta went. What they 
did was to allocate a bag full of money or a fairly large sum of money; they gave it to a group of people 
out here and they said, go and do your thing. But in two years they withdrew from that kind of proposal. 
 
You can go the way Ontario has gone. Ontario has set up what they call a co-ordinating agency to 
co-ordinate the departments and they gave that co-ordinating agency $124 million to co-ordinate other 
government departments. Now maybe that is the way the member would like to go. I would like to hear 
what he has to say with respect to that; whether he recommends that that is the approach that we should 
take or whether we should take a single agency approach. He says that we have too many bureaucrats 
and he makes a rather remark against staff members of the department in referring to them as 
bureaucrats. 
 
Let me suggest that in the Yukon Territory where they are in a similar situation in 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3008 
 

population and climatic conditions, geography and so on, here with respect to the Yukon Territory, 
24,000 population, they have a Budget of $108 million. He says $72 million is too high. That’s what the 
Conservative caucus has said, that that is too much for the people of northern Saskatchewan and he says 
there are too many bureaucrats up there. In the Yukon with 24,000 population they have 1,300 total 
employees. Now we’re faring not too badly with relation to the Yukon Territory. 
 
You can refer to the Northwest Territories. They have over 8,000 employees in the Northwest 
Territories. I believe you were a former employee of that operation. There are over 8,000 employees 
administering about 40.000 population and let me tell you the size of the Budget. Let me tell you, 
Sonny, the size of the Budget — $50 million in the Northwest Territories, administering a population 
that is not very much greater than northern Saskatchewan while we are administering a program of $72 
million and doing a very fine job in getting it done. 
 
He talks about a comparison of the expenditures in this province, I want to give these figures to the 
House so that they will be on the record. If you were to take total provincial and municipal spending in 
this province, total provincial and local municipal spending, both ordinary and capita, we in the south, 
are spending on ourselves about $2,150 per capita. The spending in northern Saskatchewan on the same 
basis and with the same criteria is $2,450 per capita – roughly $300 more on the people in northern 
Saskatchewan than we are spending on ourselves. Now if you were to remove from that the capital, 
because we are spending a great deal more capital money in the North and the reason is because there 
has been no capital development in the North, spending on housing, roads, spending on schools which 
are all considered with the capital allocation, if we were to remove the capital allocation we would in 
fact still be spending less per capita on the people of northern Saskatchewan than we spend on ourselves. 
Is that what the caucus of the conservatives want? You are the critics for the North for the Conservative 
caucus and you’re saying that we are spending too much, even now. So you want us to spend less. I 
hope that the member for Cumberland and the member for Athabasca will report that to the people of the 
North, what the Conservative critic has said with respect to that. 
 
We could go on, Mr. Chairman, to try and relate to many of the other comments which the member 
made. I think it is necessary for us to try to do more in terms of the broad general approach. I want to 
repeat once again this matter of construction costs. The member would like to leave the impression that 
we are wasting money, that we are extravagant in the North. I want to repeat again the costs per square 
foot of your housing construction program in the North. I am proud, Mr. Chairman, and I think all 
members of this Assembly can be proud of the fact that working in an area as totally isolated, as 
problematic as it is to convey such things as gyproc, doors, windows, glass, nails and all of the things 
that have to go into the construction of a home to convey those things from the Saskatoon’s and the 
Prince Albert’s of the world, take them 200 or 300 miles – sometimes over the ice, sometimes in the air, 
sometimes over winter trails and summer roads which no one else would pass over – that we can go in 
and construct houses on a basis which is comparable on a square foot basis to what you can build a 
house for in the city of Prince Albert. I think that the member is totally misguided when he seeks to 
challenge or he seeks to chip away at that kind of a proposal, with respect 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3009 
 

even to our school construction. 
 
Let me remind the member that even compared with the federal government, the federal government is 
now building an office building in La Ronge. Even though they tendered eight months earlier than did 
we, they are only about $1.75 lower per square foot than ourselves. I just must commend the staff of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, the work in Project Management, for the tremendous job which 
they are doing in this whole area of house construction, road construction and so on. I must commend 
them because they are doing a tremendous job in that area against very difficult kinds of circumstances, 
against very difficult odds. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I believe that the member in his opening remarks, if I chose to give him, many more 
kinds of statistics and facts, I think would change his critical attention. In fact, I think, I should before I 
finish because he wonders what the department is doing. He wonders what it has accomplished by the 
spending of the public dollar. I think the public should know that in fact. I think the public should know 
it. I think that they should know that our operating costs per student are very, very similar now to what 
we spend on ourselves. Isn’t that reasonable? You see for years we didn’t spend anything near to what 
we were spending on ourselves in the South, now we are beginning to get to the point where we are. 
 
One of the benefitting facts that is beginning to show up is with respect to the number of people who are 
on the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. While I read these numbers to the House yesterday afternoon. I 
want to do it again. The dependency rate on public assistance in the North has decreased from 1973 
from 30 per cent to 1977-78 to 16 per cent. I think that that is an indication of the effect that the 
programs of this agency are having in the North. 
 
I want to say as well, with respect to health, the health conditions of the people, the very fact that there is 
a decline of 17.2 per cent in the hospital admissions of northern people is an indication that the clinics, 
the health clinics, the sewer and water systems, and the personal health care programs being undertaken 
by the public health nurses; the additional doctors that are in the North; the dental care program that is 
going on in the North, all of these programs are contributing to what is in fact a very marked decline in 
the number of admissions of persons to hospital in order to be able to prevent disease and so on. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to go on, there are a great many more things that should be said but I know 
that the member will undoubtedly inspire us again and we can add to those. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, Mr. Minister, thank you for your remarks. I bet you ride a bicycle backwards as 
fast as you ride one forward. There are many areas that you covered. Let’s look at some project 
management and some costs. Last year in one area you were building the, referred to as the four log 
homes in La Ronge, Chisholm log. I would like to know at this time, Mr. Minister, what was the final 
cost of those homes that were built in La Ronge? What was the final cost? There is one home of some 
interest up there which I think Mr. Costiuk lived in. I would like to know the cost of the landscaping of 
that area, just to see if it compares favorably to the cost of Prince Albert as you say? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I wouldn’t be able to give to the member the individual costing on any 
particular landscaping. It is done to all the houses. I think it would be taken as a bulk 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3010 
 

figure, would it not? But he started out to mention the cost of four houses. You didn’t carry it out. He 
raised it before; he raised it last year. It is $58 and $59 per square foot for the cost of those houses, 
which you say is tremendously exorbitant. I want to remind the member that these were experimental 
houses. We purchased the logs from a company in Alberta, in order to be able to experiment with log 
homes in northern Saskatchewan. There were not people there who knew how to put them together. The 
costs of putting them together, the cost of insulation, the cost of interior design and decorating obviously 
would be higher – at $58 or $59 a square foot. 
 
MR. WIPF: — How many square feet? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — One house, a two-storey, has 3,000 square feet of space and another 1,290. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, on this one house that I mentioned – the landscaping, that would be 
roughly $90,000 a house then that you are talking about up there, I believe. But on the one house that I 
mentioned and it was drawn to my attention, the one Mr. Costiuk lived in – how many different 
contractors did you have in or how many different times we that yard landscaped? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — As I tried to tell the member, we don’t have contractors in that area; we do the 
work ourselves. It is with the Project Management group . . . Sorry? 
 
MR. WIPF: — Is ready mix in there? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, you say ready mix. I don’t know what you mean. You mean cement that 
is already mixed? It doesn’t matter whether it was mixed by our forces or by somebody else. What you 
are saying is that it is mixed cement that is coming to the yard. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Or to the contractor. There is one other building I asked you about last year, Mr. 
Minister, and that was the home, I think it was for unwed mothers, over in the Creighton area. What was 
the final cost on that home? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, it was $72 a square foot. 
 
MR. WIPF: — And the square footage? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — A little over 3,000. 
 
MR. WIPF: — So that is $226,000 then. What is that home being used for now? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It was originally designed for an institution for boys . . . Yes, for an unwed 
mothers’ home as you indicated. It was then considered that we needed the home more for delinquent 
boys I believe it was, for the care of delinquent boys and therefore it was designed for that purpose. The 
town of Creighton rejected the idea of putting into that home delinquent boys and so we now use it for 
an office. We need the office in Creighton. It is hoped that someday we might be able to use it for its 
intended purpose but if we don’t, it is being put to good use now. 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister. I was interested in that cost, due to an article that was, written by I 
think, your secretary in Prince Albert, saying that you haven’t built any homes in that area, last fall, and 
I quoted it as $208,000 and I was supposed to be away 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3011 
 

out. I see I was; I was out. I should have said $226,000 for that place and I would have been right. 
 
Mr. Minister, the DNS has built new apartment blocks in La Ronge. Can you tell me what the cost per 
square foot was for those apartment blocks? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I don’t know which one you are referring to, but I suppose . . . The completion 
of that one is $89 a square foot. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I am interested also in a fourplex built in Ile-a-la-Crosse. I would like to know when 
Project Management set up this project; what was the estimated cost of the construction on that project? 
Seeing that Project Management, I believe, has its own architects and engineers it should have had this 
cost to get started with. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — My officials say that it is not completed. They don’t have the estimated cost 
per square foot on it. What we did . . . 
 
MR. WIPF: — The original amount that you were going to spend to start this complex. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, it was contracted by the Ile-a-la-Crosse Industries., the local . . . Sorry, 
we don’t have it here. We don’t have the cost estimate on that particular unit. I will sent it to you, if you 
want, but we don’t have it here. 
 
The original arrangement, I believe, was to contract Ile-a-la-Crosse Industries, which is a locally 
established company. They did the construction work. They did the framework other than the trades 
work that was in the building. I am sorry we don’t have a price. I can get it for you if you specifically 
want it. 
 
MR. WIPF: — That surprises me. Yes, on Tuesday we could get into that, maybe. Would I be out, if I 
made a guess on this, that this fourplex was designed and was supposed to be built at a cost of 
$240,000? Can your members verify that? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, I don’t know that we would want to verify a figure. We don’t have it here. 
I would say this, that I don’t know why it would cost any more in terms of a square foot cost than some 
of the costs that I have given you. 
 
You ask about the ones which are the high, those that have been high in construction — $89 a square 
foot and another one at $72, or something. I would suppose that if it is one of the ones in the area of 
being an expensive construction project, it is likely to be around that particular cost per square foot. But, 
again, the point needs to be made that even with those high costs our average construction costs on a per 
square foot basis is entirely competitive with the market. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, Mr. Minister, do your members have a cost to date on that, if it is not finished yet? 
Would I be right in saying that the cost to date is $496,000 or close to it? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Sorry, we just don’t have it here. We’ll get it for you. As I indicate we’ll be 
happy to provide it to the member. We can guess, I suppose, or we can estimate but I think we would be 
better advised to bring you what it is. I have no reason not to give it to you, I have no reason not to give 
it to this House. I am perfectly willing and ready to do so but we don’t have it here, I’m sorry. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, on this particular project, can you tell me why there was an 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3012 
 

outside architect hired to do the work on this project when Project Management has their own at the tune 
of some $14,000. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, we hire outside architects for a number of things. We do it, for example, 
for schools and for teacherages, for other public buildings – architects from Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert. We try to do as any other government institution does and that is serve most of the architectural 
industry by getting them into projects of such kinds. Many of them are architectured by people in 
Regina, Saskatoon and PA, as I have said. 
 
MR. WIPF: —Well, I believe your manager of project management is with you there and I believe that 
this fourplex deserved some consideration from your officials at the time. It was built on what I 
understand is called a balloon framing concept and after it was built up to a certain peak it had to be torn 
down again. Can I ask you if you have any idea of the cost of building and then tearing down and 
redesigning the building? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: —Nobody seems to know what a balloon concept is. Maybe you would have to 
refer that to the architect. We saw a balloon going up in the yard out here the other night, maybe that’s 
what you mean. No, no, I’m, not trying to be facetious. I’m just saying I don’t know what a balloon 
concept is. The officials say that it was not torn down. There was some petitions moved in the building. 
There were some petitions that were removed and replaced but the structure itself was not torn down. I 
don’t know what a balloon concept is. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the location of the fourplex, can you tell me the amount of money 
that was spent on bridges for that particular project, and ferries? Bridges on that fourplex. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — What do you mean by bridges? 
 
MR. WIPF: —Well, I don’t know either, but it had in the cost on that, bridges, the cost of bridges, 
$10,000, in that area. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Maybe you’re talking about trusses, roof trusses. I think your source of advice 
– I know it comes out of the department, but I think you should get a better source in the department 
than you’ve got. I would try to help you some day, if you would come to me, I maybe could advise 
somebody. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Minister, by your own replies to the member for 
PA-Duck Lake, are you suggesting the officials in your department are not an accurate source of 
information? 
 
MR. WIPF: — On the bridges, if you look under vote 92, subvote 07, sub-subvote 253, object code 
255, it’s maintenance contract of roads, bridges and ferries $10,324.57. I was wondering what was the 
cost – and my source is pretty good, it’s a computer print out, unless these are wrong, I don’t know. 
What were the bridges that were built, as I understand there were no bridges? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I don’t mean to pass this lightly but roads, bridges and ferries. Now what 
would that normally have to do with a fourplex built for teachers to live in? Roads, bridges and ferries, I 
don’t know really what they would have to do with that. If you would give us the sub-subvote numbers 
or if you would prefer not to, it doesn’t matter, but maybe we could get our material and compare it with 
yours and see 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3013 
 

whether the source is the same. As I said, I think your source in the department needs to be changed. 
You probably need to come and have some consultation so that I can help you with some information 
rather than you trying to get it out of the waste paper basket. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The Ile-a-la-Crosse school fourplex is under vote 92, the subvote is 07 and the 
sub-subvote is 253. That is the Ile-a-la Crosse fourplex. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: —That number has no relevance to the subject that you are talking about. I don’t 
know where your source of information is from but it has no relevance with respect to the subject that 
you are now dealing with. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex – it has in there a maintenance contract for roads, bridges 
and ferries for $10,324.57. I am just wondering where these bridges are that you built. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I can’t answer the member’s question, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, I have some questions I would like to pursue with the minister. I’ll 
try to refrain from shouting and yelling and criticizing the minister, although tempting as it is, it may not 
be very productive. I think it’s apparent, Mr. Minister, that your department, if it is not it should be 
doing some very serious studies on the economic and social impact on northern Saskatchewan that will 
occur when uranium mining proceeds. Now I know you are going to get up and say that Bayda hasn’t 
reported yet and so on but I am assuming for the moment that uranium mining is going ahead and I am 
assuming that your department must be making some study at this particular time as to these things that I 
have mentioned, economic and social impact on northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like you to give us some indication as to what report studies you have available at this time, I 
would like you to also indicate, firstly perhaps, the position of your department and you as Minister 
responsible for Northern Saskatchewan as to how the royalties that will be paid by the uranium industry 
will be spent, that is that certain portions of those royalties be maintained for use in northern 
Saskatchewan either as a direct percentage of the royalties collected or through government policy or 
through your initiatives. How much money will be allocated from the resource of the North for the 
benefit of the North? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The studies which were made were presented to the Bayda Commission, so 
they are a matter of public record. I guess we could get those for you but they would be available to 
yourself, the position which the department presented to the Bayda Commission. In addition to that there 
has been a number of studies with respect to community planning kinds of studies that would be relevant 
to economic and population growth and some of the factors involved with that. There would be other 
matters related to environment, if they were straight environmental kinds of studies most likely to be 
undertaken by the Minister of the Environment but the main studies and the main report of the 
department in this area would be the report that was made to the Bayda Commission. 
 
We have, in the department, the department has been asked to presume some things, some alternatives, 
as to what Bayda might come up with. Might come up go; might come up with no go; might come up 
with go and things have to been done for local people. So the department has been asked to do that and 
provide the government with the alternative depending on what Judge Bayda will say and what the 
reaction, or what the 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3014 
 

response, or what the recommendations of the government would be if that set of circumstances or 
recommendations comes out of the Bayda report. So they have been working on these kinds and 
anticipating these kinds of decisions or recommendations from Bayda. 
 
With respect to the royalty allocation matter. That has been considered and while there is no decision by 
the government as to what, in fact, would be done, it will be my recommendation to the government that 
we follow the same procedure as we do in all other areas. That is, that royalties and mineral tax revenues 
come into the Provincial Treasury and be dispersed from the Provincial Treasury rather than be directly 
allocated to the North, or to the South, or to this group or that group. I use, as an example, the potash 
industry, the RM of Cory which has two or three potash mines. If they were to receive the benefit from 
the mineral and from the royalty there would be a gross disparity between municipalities on that basis 
and I think that that would hold true in the North. If we were to have two or three, let’s say, as you 
postulated, two or three or four uranium mines up there and much of the royalty was going to the 
Northern Municipal Council, rather than to the Provincial Treasury and letting whatever elected 
government is in office, determine the budgeting of that fund, so while it is a kind of a hypothesis about 
what will happen, it is my approach or my recommendation as I indicated it would be. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I can appreciate some difficulty in you answering the sociological-economic plans 
because you don’t know which way Bayda is going to go. I assume you have studies and I will pursue 
that with you a little further. 
 
I think the critical question right now is, the northern people crying and wanting for – and I think 
legitimately – a share in the wealth of the North which is basically now uranium. There may be other 
things in the future but right now we are all looking to uranium. 
 
The Minister of Mineral Resources told us the other day in SMDC Crown Corporation that the mid-80s 
would be the time when these things will start coming on stream. I didn’t try to pin him down to a date 
or year. But when you say the money should be handled in the same way that a potash royalty or an oil 
royalty is handled, I think you are ignoring the basic facts, though. If you put a potash mine in near 
Saskatoon, well you will be the first to concede that Saskatoon has the amenities that we have become 
used to living in southern Saskatchewan. The situation is different in the North. 
 
One of the reasons for your department is to bring northern Saskatchewan up to the same standard as 
southern Saskatchewan. Now, for the first time you are going to have the money in the North to do that. 
The northern factor is going to disappear if uranium comes on and that money is there. Indeed, there is 
so much money conceivably that most people can’t really appreciate the billions of dollars that are going 
to be available. 
 
May I suggest to you that it is not appropriate for you to say that this money should just go through the 
Treasury unless there is some commitment by the government as to certain percentages of that money 
being used for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, I don’t care whether you do it by funnelling it through RMs, or councils, or whatever, even your 
own department, or through the general Budget. But I say to you that it is important at this time, and it is 
important for the future, to assure those people in northern Saskatchewan that while they are going to 
have, perhaps, the mixed blessings . . . The Attorney General seems to be upset that we are daring to talk 
about 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3015 
 

the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I have some of the interests of the people living in northern 
Saskatchewan. I don’t think that you do. 
 
Let me remind the member that even compared with the federal government, the federal government is 
now building an office building in La Ronge. Even though they tendered eight months earlier than did 
we, they are only about $1.75 lower per square foot than ourselves. I just must commend the staff of the 
Department of Northern -s, the work in Project Management, for the tremendous job which they are 
doing in this whole area of house construction, road construction and so on. I must commend them 
because they are doing a tremendous job in that area against very difficult kinds of circumstances, 
against very difficult odds. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I believe that the member in his opening remarks, if I chose to give him, many more 
kinds of statistics and facts, I think would change his critical attention. In fact, I think, I should before I 
finish because he wonders what the department is doing. He wonders what it has accomplished by the 
spending of the public dollars. I think the public should know that in fact. I think the public should know 
it. I think that they should know that our operating costs per student are very, very similar now to what 
we spend on ourselves. Isn’t that reasonable. You see for years we didn’t spend anything near to what 
we were spending on ourselves in the South, now we are beginning to get to the point where we are. 
 
One of the benefitting facts that is beginning to show up is with respect to the number of people who are 
on the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. While I read these numbers to the House yesterday afternoon, I 
want to do it again. The dependency rate on public assistance in the North has decreased from 1973 
from 30 per cent to 1977-78 to 16 per cent. I think that that is an indication of the effect that the 
programs of this agency are having in the North. 
 
I want to say as well, with respect to health, the health conditions of the people, the very fact that there is 
a decline of 17.2 per cent in the hospital admissions of northern people is an indication that the clinics, 
the health clinics, the sewer and water systems, and the personal health care programs being undertaken 
by the public health nurses; the additional doctors that are in the North; the dental care program that is 
going on in the North, all of these programs are contributing to what is in fact a very marked decline in 
the number of admissions of persons to hospital in order to be able to prevent disease and so on. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to go on, there are a great many more things that should be said but I know 
that the member will undoubtedly inspire us again and we can add to those. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, Mr. Minister, thank you for your remarks. I bet you ride a bicycle backwards as 
fast as you ride one forward. There are many areas that you covered. Let’s look at some project 
management and some costs. Last year in one area you were building the, referred to as the four log 
homes in La Ronge, Chisholm log. I would like to know at this time, Mr. Minister, what was the final 
cost of those homes that were built in La Ronge? What was the final cost? There is one home of some 
interest up there which I think Mr. Costiuk lived in. I would like to know the cost of the landscaping of 
that area, just to see if it compares favorably to the cost of Prince Albert as you say? 
 
MR> BOWERMAN: — I wouldn’t be able to give to the member the individual costing on 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3016 
 

any particular landscaping. It is done to all the houses. I think it would be taken as a bulk figure, would 
it not? But he started out to mention the cost of four houses. You didn’t carry it out. He raised it before; 
he raised it last year. It is $58 and $59 per square foot for the cost of those houses, which you say is 
tremendously exorbitant. I want to remind the member that these were experimental houses. We 
purchased the logs from a company in Alberta, in order to be able to experiment with log homes in 
northern Saskatchewan. There were not people there who knew how to put them together. The costs of 
putting them together, the cost of insulation, the cost of interior design and decorating obviously would 
be higher – at $58 or $59 a square foot. 
 
MR. WIPF: — How many square feet? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — One house, a two-storey, has 3,000 square feet of space and another 1,290. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, on this one house that I mentioned – the landscaping, that would be 
roughly $90,000 a house then that you are talking about up there, I believe. But on the one house that I 
mentioned and it was drawn to my attention, the one Mr. Costiuk lived in – how many different 
contractors did you have in or how many different times we that yard landscaped? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — As I tried to tell the member, we don’t have contractors in that area; we do the 
work ourselves. It is with the Project Management group . . . Sorry? 
 
MR. WIPF: — Is ready mix in there? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, you say ready mix. I don’t know what you mean. You mean cement that 
is already mixed? It doesn’t matter whether it was mixed by our forces or by somebody else. What you 
are saying is that it is mixed cement that is coming to the yard. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Or to the contractor. There is one other building I asked you about last year, Mr. 
Minister, and that was the home, I think it was for unwed mothers, over in the Creighton area. What was 
the final cost on that home? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, it was $72 a square foot. 
 
MR. WIPF: — And the square footage? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — A little over 3,000. 
 
MR. WIPF: — So that is $226,000 then. What is that home being used for now? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It was originally designed for an institution for boys…. Yes, for an unwed 
mothers’ home as you indicated. It was then considered that we needed the home more for delinquent 
boys I believe it was, for the care of delinquent boys and therefore it was designed for that purpose. The 
town of Creighton rejected the idea of putting into that home delinquent boys and so we now use it for 
an office. We need the office in Creighton. It is hoped that someday we might be able to use it for its 
intended purpose but if we don’t, it is being put to good use now. 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister. I was interested in that cost, due to an article that was, written by I 
think, your secretary in Prince Albert, saying that you haven’t built any 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3017 
 

homes in that area, last fall, and I quoted it as $208,000 and I was supposed to be away out. I see I was; I 
was out. I should have said $226,000 for that place and I would have been right. 
 
Mr. Minister, the DNS has built new apartment blocks in La Ronge. Can you tell me what the cost per 
square foot was for those apartment blocks? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I don’t know which one you are referring to, but I suppose …. The completion 
of that one is $89 a square foot. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I am interested also in a fourplex built in Ile-a-la-Crosse. I would like to know when 
Project Management set up this project; what was the estimated cost of the construction on that project? 
Seeing that Project Management, I believe, has its own architects and engineers it should have had this 
cost to get started with. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — My officials say that it is not completed. They don’t have the estimated cost 
per square foot on it. What we did . . . 
 
MR. WIPF: — The original amount that you were going to spend to start this complex. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, it was contracted by the Ile-a-la-Crosse Industries., the local . . . Sorry, 
we don’t have it here. We don’t have the cost estimate on that particular unit. I will sent it to you, if you 
want, but we don’t have it here. 
 
The original arrangement, I believe, was to contract Ile-a-la-Crosse Industries, which is a locally 
established company. They did the construction work. They did the framework other than the trades 
work that was in the building. I am sorry we don’t have a price. I can get it for you if you specifically 
want it. 
 
MR. WIPF: — That surprises me. Yes, on Tuesday we could get into that, maybe. Would I be out, if I 
made a guess on this, that this fourplex was designed and was supposed to be built at a cost of 
$240,000? Can your members verify that? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, I don’t know that we would want to verify a figure. We don’t have it here. 
I would say this, that I don’t know why it would cost any more in terms of a square foot cost than some 
of the costs that I have given you. 
 
You ask about the ones which are the high, those that have been high in construction — $89 a square 
foot and another one at $72, or something. I would suppose that if it is one of the ones in the area of 
being an expensive construction project, it is likely to be around that particular cost per square foot. But, 
again, the point needs to be made that even with those high costs our average construction costs on a per 
square foot basis is entirely competitive with the market. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, Mr. Minister, do your members have a cost to date on that, if it is not finished yet? 
Would I be right in saying that the cost to date is $496,000 or close to it? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Sorry, we just don’t have it here. We’ll get it for you. As I indicate we’ll be 
happy to provide it to the member. We can guess, I suppose, or we can estimate but I think we would be 
better advised to bring you what it is. I have no reason not to give it to you, I have no reason not to give 
it to this House. I am perfectly willing and ready to do so but we don’t have it here, I’m sorry. 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3018 
 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, on this particular project, can you tell me why there was an outside 
architect hired to do the work on this project when Project Management has their own at the tune of 
some $14,000. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, we hire outside architects for a number of things. We do it, for example, 
for schools and for teacherages, for other public buildings – architects from Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert. We try to do as any other government institution does and that is serve most of the architectural 
industry by getting them into projects of such kinds. Many of them are architectured by people in 
Regina, Saskatoon and PA, as I have said. 
 
MR. WIPF: —Well, I believe your manager of project management is with you there and I believe that 
this fourplex deserved some consideration from your officials at the time. It was built on what I 
understand is called a balloon framing concept and after it was built up to a certain peak it had to be torn 
down again. Can I ask you if you have any idea of the cost of building and then tearing down and 
redesigning the building? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: —Nobody seems to know what a balloon concept is. Maybe you would have to 
refer that to the architect. We saw a balloon going up in the yard out here the other night, maybe that’s 
what you mean. No, no, I’m, not trying to be facetious. I’m just saying I don’t know what a balloon 
concept is. The officials say that it was not torn down. There was some petitions moved in the building. 
There were some petitions that were removed and replaced but the structure itself was not torn down. I 
don’t know what a balloon concept is. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the location of the fourplex, can you tell me the amount of money 
that was spent on bridges for that particular project, and ferries? Bridges on that fourplex. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — What do you mean by bridges? 
 
MR. WIPF: —Well, I don’t know either, but it had in the cost on that, bridges, the cost of bridges, 
$10,000, in that area. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Maybe you’re talking about trusses, roof trusses. I think your source of advice 
– I know it comes out of the department, but I think you should get a better source in the department 
than you’ve got. I would try to help you some day, if you would come to me, I maybe could advise 
somebody. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Minister, by your own replies to the member for 
PA-Duck Lake, are you suggesting the officials in your department are not an accurate source of 
information? 
 
MR. WIPF: — On the bridges, if you look under vote 92, subvote 07, sub-subvote 253, object code 
255, it’s maintenance contract of roads, bridges and ferries $10,324.57. I was wondering what was the 
cost – and my source is pretty good, it’s a computer print out, unless these are wrong, I don’t know. 
What were the bridges that were built, as I understand there were no bridges? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I don’t mean to pass this lightly but roads, bridges and ferries. Now what 
would that normally have to do with a fourplex built for teachers to live in? Roads, bridges and ferries, I 
don’t know really what they would have to do with that. If you would give us the sub-subvote numbers 
or if you would prefer not to, it 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3019 
 

doesn’t matter, but maybe we could get our material and compare it with yours and see whether the 
source is the same. As I said, I think your source in the department needs to be changed. You probably 
need to come and have some consultation so that I can help you with some information rather than you 
trying to get it out of the waste paper basket. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The Ile-a-la-Crosse school fourplex is under vote 92, the subvote is 07 and the 
sub-subvote is 253. That is the Ile-a-la Crosse fourplex. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: —That number has no relevance to the subject that you are talking about. I don’t 
know where your source of information is from but it has no relevance with respect to the subject that 
you are now dealing with. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex – it has in there a maintenance contract for roads, bridges 
and ferries for $10,324.57. I am just wondering where these bridges are that you built. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I can’t answer the member’s question, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, I have some questions I would like to pursue with the minister. I’ll 
try to refrain from shouting and yelling and criticizing the minister, although tempting as it is, it may not 
be very productive. I think it’s apparent, Mr. Minister, that your department, if it is not it should be 
doing some very serious studies on the economic and social impact on northern Saskatchewan that will 
occur when uranium mining proceeds. Now I know you are going to get up and say that Bayda hasn’t 
reported yet and so on but I am assuming for the moment that uranium mining is going ahead and I am 
assuming that your department must be making some study at this particular time as to these things that I 
have mentioned, economic and social impact on northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like you to give us some indication as to what report studies you have available at this time, I 
would like you to also indicate, firstly perhaps, the position of your department and you as Minister 
responsible for Northern Saskatchewan as to how the royalties that will be paid by the uranium industry 
will be spent, that is that certain portions of those royalties be maintained for use in northern 
Saskatchewan either as a direct percentage of the royalties collected or through government policy or 
through your initiatives. How much money will be allocated from the resource of the North for the 
benefit of the North? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The studies which were made were presented to the Bayda Commission, so 
they are a matter of public record. I guess we could get those for you but they would be available to 
yourself, the position which the department presented to the Bayda Commission. In addition to that there 
has been a number of studies with respect to community planning kinds of studies that would be relevant 
to economic and population growth and some of the factors involved with that. There would be other 
matters related to environment, if they were straight environmental kinds of studies most likely to be 
undertaken by the Minister of the Environment but the main studies and the main report of the 
department in this area would be the report that was made to the Bayda Commission. 
 
We have, in the department, the department has been asked to presume some things, some alternatives, 
as to what Bayda might come up with. Might come up go; might come up with no go; might come up 
with go and things have to been done for local people. So the department has been asked to do that and 
provide the government with the 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3020 
 

alternative depending on what Judge Bayda will say and what the reaction, or what the response, or what 
the recommendations of the government would be if that set of circumstances or recommendations 
comes out of the Bayda report. So they have been working on these kinds and anticipating these kinds of 
decisions or recommendations from Bayda. 
 
With respect to the royalty allocation matter. That has been considered and while there is no decision by 
the government as to what, in fact, would be done, it will be my recommendation to the government that 
we follow the same procedure as we do in all other areas. That is, that royalties and mineral tax revenues 
come into the Provincial Treasury and be dispersed from the Provincial Treasury rather than be directly 
allocated to the North, or to the South, or to this group or that group. I use, as an example, the potash 
industry, the RM of Cory which has two or three potash mines. If they were to receive the benefit from 
the mineral and from the royalty there would be a gross disparity between municipalities on that basis 
and I think that that would hold true in the North. If we were to have two or three, let’s say, as you 
postulated, two or three or four uranium mines up there and much of the royalty was going to the 
Northern Municipal Council, rather than to the Provincial Treasury and letting whatever elected 
government is in office, determine the budgeting of that fund, so while it is a kind of a hypothesis about 
what will happen, it is my approach or my recommendation as I indicated it would be. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I can appreciate some difficulty in you answering the sociological-economic plans 
because you don’t know which way Bayda is going to go. I assume you have studies and I will pursue 
that with you a little further. 
 
I think the critical question right now is, the northern people crying and wanting for – and I think 
legitimately – a share in the wealth of the North which is basically now uranium. There may be other 
things in the future but right now we are all looking to uranium. 
 
The Minister of Mineral Resources told us the other day in SMDC Crown Corporation that the mid-80s 
would be the time when these things will start coming on stream. I didn’t try to pin him down to a date 
or year. But when you say the money should be handled in the same way that a potash royalty or an oil 
royalty is handled, I think you are ignoring the basic facts, though. If you put a potash mine in near 
Saskatoon, well you will be the first to concede that Saskatoon has the amenities that we have become 
used to living in southern Saskatchewan. The situation is different in the North. 
 
One of the reasons for your department is to bring northern Saskatchewan up to the same standard as 
southern Saskatchewan. Now, for the first time you are going to have the money in the North to do that. 
The northern factor is going to disappear if uranium comes on and that money is there. Indeed, there is 
so much money conceivably that most people can’t really appreciate the billions of dollars that are going 
to be available. 
 
May I suggest to you that it is not appropriate for you to say that this money should just go through the 
Treasury unless there is some commitment by the government as to certain percentages of that money 
being used for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, I don’t care whether you do it by funnelling it through RMs, or councils, or whatever, even your 
own department, or through the general Budget. But I say to you that it is important at this time, and it is 
important for the future, to assure those people in northern Saskatchewan that while they are going to 
have, perhaps, the mixed 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3021 
 

blessings . . . The Attorney General seems to be upset that we are daring to talk about the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. I have some of the interests of the people living in northern Saskatchewan. I 
don’t think that you do. 
 
What I say to you, minister, is that I don’t believe that you do have any plans at this time as to the use of 
that royalty money except what you just told us, that it is going to go through the Budget and someday 
you will be able to determine how it is going to be spent. I say that the people of northern Saskatchewan 
are now asking for a commitment from this government that at least some of the money that is going to 
accrue from uranium royalties, will be spent in the North. I don’t think they are saying it has to be 10 per 
cent or it has to be 90 per cent – what they are looking for is the commitment. And I think that you 
today, should be in a position to give that commitment, so the people in La Loche and Uranium City and 
all these other places that we have been trying to bring, kicking and screaming, into the twentieth 
century, will know that that money will be available in due course and that they will know that they can 
start planning how that money should b used, for roads, sewers or whatever their priorities are in that 
area. So, my question to you now is: will you give us the commitment that there will be an allocation of 
funds directly for use and benefit of northern Saskatchewan and the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, Mr. Chairman, I would not give that commitment and I don’t wish to get 
into a sort of resolve or philosophical point of view, if that’s what it is coming to be. It is just that the 
approach has always been in Saskatchewan and in most other provinces, that the revenues accrue to the 
Provincial Treasury and out of the Provincial Treasury are allocated the moneys for the various kinds of 
projects and programs that go on. I would hope that that continues for the North. And in fact then it will 
happen, that the people of the North will be getting moneys that accrue from royalties and benefits 
whatever they might be – royalties and mineral taxes, that will benefit through the Provincial Treasury 
to the northern people. Therefore they will be getting their benefit from that. 
 
I would rather, it’s a personal concept, it is not a position of the government (I couldn’t state the 
government’s position because there isn’t any at this point in time) but it is a matter of, it would be my 
opinion at least, that we should not change that basic concept. Because, now what’s happening? The 
money that’s being budgeted by this Legislature in these Estimates, is money which is coming out of 
potash and oil and agricultural resources in this province and they are being designated up to the north. I 
think it would be wrong, because we happen to have a northern administration district, that we should 
somehow have money that relates up there and money that relates down here and is somehow cast in 
that dye. I would prefer not to see that. I would prefer to see them get their equal apportionment of 
funding in this province on the basis of the per capita allocations, the points we have been trying to 
make here this afternoon. That if the per capita allocations are $2,000 or $3,000 per capita, we are 
spending it on ourselves and it is an equalization thing the same as the municipal sharing or revenue 
sharing in municipal sharing, equalization grants and so on, for hospitals and the rest. I think that will 
come into account. 
 
The north will benefit, in my opinion, from that development by the very fact that when we get the 
Northern Municipal Council to the point that they are taxing their assets, 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3022 
 

they are taxing the assets in their municipalities, as others are, in the quarry, taxing the structure of the 
mine, taxing the assets and so on of the various mines in their municipality. I think that the Northern 
Municipal Council, the northern municipality will in fact, become a very prosperous municipality. They 
are not now doing that. There is no taxation of 30 mills or 40 mills on mines in northern Saskatchewan 
that now exist; Cluff Lake’s operations, Gulf’s operations, tourist operations. There is no tax base there 
and I think when we arrive at the point where they begin to tax or assess their persons within their 
municipality and as the mining development increases, that that northern municipality will in fact, 
become, in my opinion at least, over the long haul a very prosperous municipality. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Well I accept that on a municipal basis and indeed, that will happen but I point out 
to you, Mr. Minister, that that is not good enough. If there is a suspicion among the people of northern 
Saskatchewan – and I see that you have talked to many more than I do – I have been up there a couple of 
times and talked to people on the councils and there is a suspicion there that when the uranium mining 
comes on, that what is going to happen is that the revenues and the profits from that are just going to be 
drained into southern Saskatchewan; they are going to become an economic colony of southern 
Saskatchewan; they are not going to receive the benefit of those mines except in a direct way of 
providing employment but what they are looking for are the things that we are so used to hearing about 
– the roads and the services that we have. 
 
Now you say that the way to do it is to do it through the Budget like everything else. The reason for our 
department is that your government determined that you couldn’t treat the North like everything else. 
That is why you are sitting there as the Minister of DNS. So your government has conceded that 
northern Saskatchewan needs special attention. I disagree with the way you have gone about it but that’s 
the way you have done it, so I say that for the first time in the history of the North, the economic 
foundation to improve the North is consistent with your government’s philosophy and with your 
department to demand as a right, that some of that money be allocated directly to the North. I don’t care 
how you do it, whether it is through your department, through the RM or through the local councils, but 
the important thing for the people of northern Saskatchewan right now is the assurance that when that 
money comes in, a big chunk of it is going to remain right in northern Saskatchewan that; it is not going 
to be drained off into southern Saskatchewan and be used for things for the benefit of the people of the 
South and not for the benefit of the people of the North. 
 
Now I think you are aware of the situation there. I think that you have had contact with people on the 
Northern Municipal Council and others and they have expressed that concern to you. I can see no reason 
why you don’t make the commitment unless it is going to be the intention of the government not to put 
special attention on northern Saskatchewan as money comes in. I have made my statement and you can 
reply if you want. 
 
Let me go back to your other studies. What proprieties do you see if uranium does come on? Are you 
giving priority to education, say, over roads or is your priority services and training facilities for 
northern people to become equipped to work in these mines and so on? Is that secondary and just what 
priorities do you set at this time? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well I just want to sort of sum up our other little comment by this way. We 
have a basic difference of opinion on this but I would hope that we would not change the basic financial 
structure of the province in terms of revenues from resources coming into the Provincial Treasury and so 
on. That is the position of mine 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3023 
 

and I leave it there. 
 
With respect to what we see as the priority, the priority is to get people into the position where . . . they 
can avail themselves of the opportunities that will come forward in the 1980s. Part of the getting them 
ready for that – and while we are getting some flack and some criticism for it, that is fine is the Project 
Management Division that we have, where we have people who are applying for their journeyman’s 
qualification. We have about 27 northern people applying, beginning on their journeyman’s ticket 
carpentry, that kind of thing, heavy duty construction. We take northerners and put them on heavy duty 
equipment and get them used to operating that, because the nature of the mines which will develop, if 
they do develop, will be mines that are open pit. They are open pit mines and, therefore, it is heavy 
construction equipment. It is the operating of heavy trucks, cats, diggers and that kind of thing as well as 
the facilities such as the breaking down of the ore and so on, the yellow cake. 
 
I think the preliminaries, the preliminaries that have been going on are fundamental and while we get 
fairly well criticized for this, and the numbers that we have employed. There are about 2500 that are on 
seasonal kind of work, health construction, school construction, sewer and water kinds of jobs, digging, 
putting in pipes, putting pipes together, laying pipe and being able to operate that unit after it is 
completed, after the dirt has been filled in again. Somebody who has been there through the project then 
takes over for the village, as being the sewer and water maintenance man and he knows it because he has 
been in on all aspects of the project. 
 
So, the idea then is to utilize that process and we are gong through that process now. We are hopeful that 
the Cluff Lake road, the road go through Cluff Lake, the Key Lake road and the road that goes through 
to Key Lake, that much of that work will also lend itself to the development of northern people to get 
into those kinds of jobs. The other thing that we have done, in the Economic Development Area, as I 
said last night, 490 persons have been loaned money to get in. I think we have had some failures. I think 
there are 360 some of those still in business – little businesses, café business, garage and service station 
business. I can’t name all of them but things like that that will provide service industry. We are hoping 
that the experience that we are going through now will help them in the future, if we have a policy and I 
hope that we can develop the kind of policy that will not permit too much encroachment by the South 
into the North, but will allow people even though it is pretty fundamental kind of stuff, in terms of cafes 
and eating establishments and so on, but that they will have the opportunity to build those units and to 
run and manage them and to gain the economic benefit or flow from that type of development process. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I assume from what you say that you that you are putting the emphasis on 
education, I am not talking about Ph.Ds and so on, but practical education as to how to run heavy 
equipment and how to become involved in the mines. 
 
I am somewhat distressed when I hear you say that 27 people – I trust that there are more than 27 
people, who are going to be involved in these educational programs. You may have just been referring 
to one, I don’t know. You said 27 at one time. Hopefully, there are other programs that are having more 
than 27 people involved and I assume there must be. 
 
Let me put this to you. One of the problems I sense you will have is getting the people in northern 
Saskatchewan to appreciate the fact that they must prepare themselves to become involved and take 
advantage of the economic activity that is going to come. I 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3024 
 

suspect that many of them feel that one day they go to work and they don’t need any training whatsoever 
until they get there. I think the minister would concede as well that you don’t wait until the mid – 1980s 
to start these programs, you start them now so that the people are ready when it comes on stream. 
 
My question to you is, what incentives are you putting on those people many of whom are on welfare or 
are on welfare for many months of the year? What incentives are you putting to them to ensure that they 
do take advantage of the training programs that are available? I suggest to you it may be worthy of your 
consideration to say to these people that, yes, you are entitled to your social service benefits for these 
months that you can’t work but, in order to qualify for them, you must start attending some of these 
training schools that are here. They are set up; they are in your community and unless you do so, your 
social service benefits are going to be restricted or indeed withdrawn. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I missed mentioning the fact that for the first time, I guess it will open in a year 
from now or something, we have a technical training school going into La Loche which again is a 
practical approach to some of the jobs that are up there. My officials tell me that we have 375 persons 
enrolled in training programs as of this year. Some of the programs are: training in government program, 
university training, that is 30 persons; northern careers plan, technical institutes, 140 persons; 
administration program, training at university of Regina and Saskatoon, 30 people; educational leave to 
universities, 30 persons; heavy equipment training, 70 persons; vocational training, all trades a total of 
375 persons. We have dental assistant trainees which is 8. Community health workers and adult 
education, various classes, upgrading in basic ed and this type of thing for a total of 1,660 in training 
kinds of programs. As we said last night and I tried to emphasize last night, much of the staff on the 
order in council appointments are really training positions. We are taking them in on that basis in order 
to be able to fulfill – for example, as I said here this afternoon, about 35 or 40 per cent of the social 
workers are persons of northern native ancestry. So they are working into the government programs as 
well. I think we are going about as fast as we can in the area of training. 
 
MR. MALONE: — You didn’t respond to my remarks on social services and using that as a lever to get 
people involved in further training programs. I will give you a chance to respond to that in a moment. 
\ 
Mr. Minister, you talk about 1,600 people involved. I suspect that of that 1,600, the majority is involved 
in some type of government program, whether it is social services or whether it is career officers and so 
on. That is not what I am getting at. What I am getting at is that the 25,000 people in northern 
Saskatchewan – we want to get them out of the government programs and get them into these industries 
when they come along. I suggest to you that you should be looking at your particular priorities right 
now. I don’t think from what you have told me that enough stress is being put on the fact of getting these 
people educated so that they can take advantage of these particular things that are coming along. When I 
say educated, I mean learning how to drive a cat and learning how to become active in a mine and so on. 
Now, I don’t think $1,600 is enough. If this comes out of the mid-1980s, I think that you should be 
setting a goal that everybody who is now on welfare or who is unemployed, is going to be given the 
opportunity to educate himself and prepare himself and if he isn’t prepared to take the opportunity, 
that’s all we can do. I suggest to you that you can be fairly harsh with those people because you have the 
lever of social services, of welfare, to make sure that they do something to improve themselves. 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3025 
 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my officials tell me that most of the programs, the 
training programs, are other than government. They are outside of government kinds of jobs, not related 
to government kinds of jobs as the member indicates. The other thing is, with respect to social services, I 
don’t know that we have used a wrench or applied any sort of a wrench for persons who are on social 
welfare or social assistance and said, now, you must take a course. I don’t know if we do that. It is an 
expectation I suppose, when the social worker goes to them and recognizes that they are destitute, no 
employment or whatever, that they would plug them into a training program of some kind rather than 
just issue social assistance or SAP assistance. I can’t be any more specific than that. If you say we are 
not going fast enough, if we are not going fast enough – that is one of the criticisms which we have had. 
Some say we are not going fast enough; some say we are going too fast and those criticisms are coming 
from both sides at the same time and it is one of the things that we have gone through. But I suggest to 
you that with respect to going any faster than this, any faster than we are, I think that with respect to the 
anticipation of uranium development in northern Saskatchewan, could only frustrate the issue more. 
That is, if we were going out on the basis that yes, there is going to be uranium and there wasn’t, then 
we would have a situation on our hands where the expectations of people would not be fulfilled. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have sent over a copy of the print-out to your officials 
there and I still would like to know the answer to the question I had asked. Where were these bridges 
built for this $10,000? How much money was spent on these bridges and were there actually bridges 
between the main road and the fourplex? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, as I tried to point out to the member, I think that we really need to have a 
little session, you and I and I can get that information for you that you are getting and get it to you more 
accurately so that you are not misled and you don’t mislead people with the information that you get. 
This is a working process account and what it does is it pays so that the cheques and the paper can 
funnel or can go ahead and when the money comes in, it’s then allocated to the project. Your suggestion 
that it has something to do with roads, bridges and ferries really is not necessarily related to the subject 
that you were mentioning. It’s a general subvote, it’s an internal document and I can’t help you anymore 
with respect to the Ile-a-la-Crosse project. It’s the material which we used but the interpretation that 
you’ve got is wrong. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Then the copy there is false. Is that what you’re saying? That there was no money spent 
on these . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It’s your interpretation that’s false. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, I’m just asking you. Are you saying now that there was no money spent, that 
$10,000 was not spent or accounted for or whatever you want? Did you spend that $10,000 on the 
bridges and ferries and the roads going into there? What amount did you spend on the bridges and where 
is that bridge located? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — When the subject came up, Mr. Chairman, we were talking about an 
Ile-a-la-Crosse teacherage or fourplex and you said roads, bridges and so on and what relevance did that 
have to the fourplex? I couldn’t make the connection. Sorry about that, but anyway the bridge, if you are 
asking about a bridge, the statement is correct; it is your interpretation of the statements the 
interpretation that you are putting on the statement that is mistake. I understand from my officials that 
the bridge likely to be in there is a bridge at Uranium City. It couldn’t be a very big bridge but obviously 
it’s a 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3026 
 

work and process. It may not even be the complete bridge because it’s a work and process account. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Actually the sub-subvote on that sheet then does not mean the Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex, 
the sub-subvote of 253, it does not mean the Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex, am I right there? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The 253, the number is 253, if you’ve got your copy before you, relates to the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex but I don’t see anything in there for bridges, roads and ferries. 
 
MR. WIPF: — It’s the Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex and then there’s an object code which reads number 255 
and the total code is 9207. 253 (which is the Ile-a-la-Crosse project) and 255 (which is maintenance 
contracts, roads, bridges and ferries) for $10,324 and if the Ile-a-la-Cross fourplex is 253, these other 15 
or 20 items under that would be charges to that computer number. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I don’t know how I could explain it to the member. I would be happy to take 
the time out of the House to try to explain it to you. If you will turn over to the second page it has there 
VTSVSSVOBJ – the project is the OBJ’s and therefore they are not related to the Ile-a-la-Crosse. They 
are a different number and a different number all the way down. I would prefer to have the officials 
discuss the detail if you wish to have the detail. But with regard to your specific question related to the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex, I think that your assumptions are incorrect that of these dollars which you have 
been adding up, which you have thought to be going into the Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex, in incorrect. 
Don’t forget that this statement goes only as far as it goes; it isn’t a year-end statement. It is just a work 
process account. It is up-to-date the day it was printed but it was out of date thereafter. 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister, that’s a detailed working capital advance statement to March 31, 
1977; that from page 745. I think it is probably a fiscal year-end statement. If you just have that sheet in 
front of you, under Object Code 299, there was $217,400. Whom was that paid to? Was that to the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Industries for building this? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — That has nothing to do with the Ile-a-la-Crosse fourplex. 
 
MR. WIPF: — What has that got to do with then? What is that $217,400? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Contractual services, is that what you are asking about? Could be any 
contractual services. You will have to follow back the invoice. It could be any contractual services that 
we contract for during the year. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I will go to another area then and that is housing. 
 
What percentage of his wages does a DNS employee pay for his home that is subsidized by the 
provincial government, or by DNS? If you ever hire me to go out and work in La Ronge and the DNS 
and I move into one of the homes, I only pay a certain percentage of my wages. Is that right, towards the 
rent of the home? Subsidized housing. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I think we are going to get back into the same thing as what we have been 
through. We will table the policy with respect to rent, if you want. To try to explain it will be very 
detailed and very complex to tell you the truth. You are wanting to 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3027 
 

know what percentage of the rent a person pays from his salary, in relation to his salary and so on? I can 
give this to the member if you want. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, have you any information over there on, and let’s take the La Ronge, the 
trailers in Area IV, staff housing cost, Area IV La Ronge trailers. I will give you numbers again if they 
are any good and that is 90, 34,121, 000, marked revenue of $98,991 from revenue taken in from the 
staff for rent on these trailers. Can you tell me how much the DNS has subsidized that housing, for the 
trailers, with all the other things they do? They pay for the lights, the water and that. What is the dollar 
figure that was subsidized at year end if you have it? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I can give the member what the rents are – bachelor apartment is $1,150; a 
three bedroom apartment is $157.35. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Bachelor apartments $1,150 did you say? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, $1,150. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I want to know by the month. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Bachelor apartments $1,150 per month. I am sorry, $111. I am sorry. Yes, I am 
getting like Tony I have to go back to school and get my mathematics straightened out. For a bachelor 
apartment $111 and I am going to leave the odd cents off. A three bedroom apartment $157; two 
bedroom apartment $142; one bedroom apartment $127; three bedroom trailer $127; two bedroom 
trailer $164; three bedroom house $220 and a two bedroom house $149, as I gather. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Let’s just look at a three bedroom trailer $127 a month. What does it cost the DNS then 
for subsidizing, what is the subsidy each month from the DNS, by the DNS, for somebody living in a 
three bedroom trailer. In 1976, I believe it was $496 we had to subsidize the . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We consider it to be an amortization of an asset. We don’t consider it to be a 
subsidy because if you have the renter in there the rents are set in such a way as they will eventually – 
the rents will not be paying off capital but will be going into assets, in other, accruing to the assets. What 
we do is amortize. You have that in the Estimates book. We have accepted, the government has accepted 
the policy that we were going to build for staff housing, that we own an asset. We have a capital asset. 
We are amortizing that over 30 years on houses, 50 years on apartments, 15 years on trailers. Our total 
amortization in the blue book is $1.2 million. I don’t know how I could answer your question, what do 
we subsidize, because we will be all over the ball park. I can’t give you a figure; I can’t give this 
Legislature a figure that would be appropriate or reasonable or responsible. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, maybe you can answer this one then, Mr. Minister. A three bedroom trailer is 
renting for $127 a month; that is what you quoted me I believe, $127 a month. What are the actual costs 
for that person to live in that three bedroom trailer when you paid for all the things that you paid for? I 
believe you paid for the light and the heat and the maintenance. The $127 is probably not even going to 
pay for the mortgage on the trailer. What is the cost per month for the taxpayer to make up the 
difference on this trailer per month? I have with me here a copy of a letter written on May 25, 1976. 
That was when you were buying trailers from the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. It states in there 
that based on the new rental policy for three bedroom accommodations, 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3028 
 

the revenue per unit is approximately $164 per month. The resultant deficit is $496 a month; that is 
quoted out of your letter. So what we are saying here (and that was last year on these houses) is that it is 
costing the taxpayer for each three bedroom trailer here, $496 a month subsidy for whoever is living in 
that trailer. Is that right? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — What is it costing them next month if I am permitted to ask the member a 
question? I can’t answer your question because what may be this month will not be the same next month 
or a year from this month. It is a non-relevant answer. 
 
We have accepted the position, as a government, that it requires, if we are going to have a Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, if we are going to have a decentralized operation, if we are going to have staff 
people in La Ronge you have got to provide some housing. They will not go there and build houses of 
their own. So the government has accepted the fact, we have to have houses for them to live in – so we 
build houses and we amortize them. We amortize them, over 30 years, over 15 years for trailers, over 50 
years for apartment blocks. We amortize them. It is an asset, it will grow, it will have value at the end of 
the 50 years or 30 years or 15 years, we have an asset value. So you can call it a subsidy if you want, 
you can call it the taxpayers’ money if you want, its (inaudible interjection) Yes it is. It is the taxpayers’ 
money that was invested but it is invested in an asset, just the same as if you buy a house. You amortize 
it over 30 years but when you get to the end of the 30 ears, you have got a house. Now, I don’t know 
whether they subsidize you or not. Are you considered a subsidy? I don’t know how you work out your 
own finances but that is the way we do it. That’s the way it has been done. We build houses, we build 
apartment blocks and we buy trailers and we have an amortization program on the basis of the years 
indicated. While the deficit, (somebody has told you that the deficit is so many dollars this month), it 
will not be the same next month, because obviously, the principal amount will change, the interest 
amount will remain the same, the taxes may change next year, or next month – depending on what the 
situation is. I can’t tell you. I can’t answer the member’s question. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, you said your answer would be irrelevant and it is, Mr. Minister. You buy an 
asset, a trailer, and you amortize it over 20, 30, 40, 50 years you say. You are not going to have much of 
an asset left there and . . . 
 
ME. BOWERMAN: — No, I didn’t say that – 15 years. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Fifteen years on a trailer, O.K. Somebody, the taxpayer today is paying that extra 
money so that $127 and I quote from a letter from yourself . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — You’re crazy. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, maybe the writer is crazy. It is from Ted Bowerman, Minister of the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan, to Mr. G.H. Beatty, Secretary of the Treasury Board, Department of finance, 
and our file number is 1414 and in there, it talks about buying these trailers. Based on 137 leased 
trailers, the average total operation cost per month is $660. Based on the new rental policy for the three 
bedroom accommodation, the revenue per unit is approximately $164 a month. The resultant deficit is 
$496 a month. That $496 in this particular case, must be picked up by somebody, must be paid by 
somebody and it’s probably the taxpayer. And that’s today. You have to pay this every month and you 
say your policy changes every month. You don’t know what it is going to cost next month for a trailer. 
Do you? Do you set different rates every month or do you have a long term policy? If you are 
amortizing something, you probably have a long term policy and I am asking what is it costing the 
taxpayer? I don’t believe the taxpayer today 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3029 
 

is interested in a program 15 years down the road. What is it costing the taxpayer today on that one 
quote you gave me, $127 a month for a three bedroom trailer? What is the extra cost? How much are the 
extra costs that the taxpayer has to pick up? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Our policy is constant and consistent. You ask what it cost…. What would you 
say – I know, you are asking me the question. But it absolutely stems from such a basis of ignorance that 
it is unfortunate that you should ask such a question. What if we sold one of those trailers tomorrow and 
it brought us $5,000 more than we paid for it and it could do such. Then what would you say? Would 
you say the taxpayers benefited, or they lost? Now for goodness sake, the fact of life is that we could sell 
those trailers today for more than we paid for them when we bought them. What would you claim that to 
be? 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I think that would be a miracle! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, that would be a miracle. Well, we’ve got miracles then that are likely to 
happen in DNS; there is no question about it. It is the miracle department. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Member. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, you are not selling those trailers tomorrow. I am asking you on that 
specific quote that you gave me there. I wish you would just answer it instead of going around and 
riding the bicycle backwards and sideways. What is it costing per month to subsidize that trailer? What 
is the taxpayer paying each month for that trailer over the $127 that you collect from the employee? 
Have you got any idea of that? You don’t account for that? How much is it costing? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, it’s in the blue book. it is in the estimates. I don’t know what page it is 
on — $1.2 million on assets. That’s what it is. It is there for you to see. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I will make it really simple for you. What is that per unit for a three bedroom trailer that 
you are paying $127 a month for? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, 100 and some units. Many of them are in different areas, they 
are categorized — $1.2 million. If you say that is what it is costing the taxpayer, then use the figure $1.2 
million. That’s what the figure is in the book and that’s the best that I can give you. I believe when you 
use that figure, as we move down the period of time, that we will come up with an asset which does not 
make the $1.2 million a straight subsidy. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman, $1.2 million. How many trailers do you have, did you say, of the three 
bedroom ones that you are renting out? You are using a general figure there. You must have a cost per 
unit. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll have to go through the inventory of houses, the condition 
of the house, the trailers, the condition of the trailer, the year old and so on that it is, the three bedrooms, 
the two bedrooms, the one bedrooms, the bachelor apartments and so on, the size of the trailer whether it 
is 12 feet wide, 60 feet long. All of these have a bearing and we couldn’t break down an individual cost. 
We could in the long-term but that question could be put on the order paper, if you wanted it on the 
order paper but it would take a great deal of time and effort to go through this process to get it. I really 
don’t know what more we will come up with than the figure that is in the blue book. That is there for 
everybody to see and to comment on if you want. 



 
May 18, 1978 
 

3030 
 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, you don’t have the breakdown and yet in the letter that you wrote you 
have a breakdown by some of your officials in 1976 and I guess we can assume from that . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It’s changed since then. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Has it gone up? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, no. We’ve got more houses, more trailers, more units. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I can only take it that it’s gone up, Mr. Minister. 
 
The other area, Mr. Minister, that I would like to ask you some questions on and it’s in the permanent 
house area. We discussed this in the Legislature. What had DNS done, I know that they have done their 
own investigation into the efficient work that was done under the RRAP program in the Cumberland 
House area. They have done their own investigation, April 21st this was finished. What has the DNS 
done to try to get the contractor back to finish that job and has that contractor since then, it’s Thompson 
Plumbing and Heating, has that company received any more contracts from the DNS? If so, was there 
any money deducted from the new contract to help pay the debt off? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — My officials tell me that there was no more contracts undertaken between the 
three or four contractors that under investigation. There is no way that our department will become 
involved in either getting the contractors to go back and finish those homes until the matter is resolved. 
What the member is asking or proposing the department do is, if in fact there has been criminal 
negligence or default or fraud or whatever, what you are asking the department to do is like getting the 
bank robber to go back and pay his money back into the bank. We are not going to get involved in that. 
The matter is under investigation by the RCMP and by the Attorney General’s Department and we will 
not be initiating any programs or any activity other than to follow the direction given to us by the 
solicitors in respect to the RRAP program that you are referring to and the problems that were associated 
there within Cumberland House and Sandy Bay. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I believe that this problem in the Cumberland House area anyway, is a 
result of officials in the DNS. I believe that the problem in the Cumberland House area where the 
contractor was paid out in full in a result of our officials in the DNS that accepted and I quote here: 
 

Howard Thompson phoned me (and this is from Mel Lafreuiere, I believe it is) and notified me 
of their completion. Howard had worked for us in the past with favorable results and they in 
Sandy Bay had no reason to doubt that they were completed. When billing, I took these items 
into consideration and this is what he paid on. Consideration one was that all plumbing jobs must 
have a permit issue and inspected or a journeyman could lose his ticket. The second was that all 
electrical must be issued on a J form and inspected or the contractor loses his licence, and three, 
that if the homeowner was not satisfied, he or she would not have signed the cheque. 

 
The telephone call came in and they said that everything was done and these are the three criteria that 
this gentleman used to say that the work must be done. There was obviously no inspection done by the 
DNS on these projects except the notice that they were completed and it seems that there is DNS 
inefficiency or mismanagement 



 
May 18, 1978 

 

3031 
 

somewhere along the line. We have got the contractor paid off and we have eight people out there who 
have had homes worked on all for – which is kind of amazing, each contractor, each home was $5,000 
each; it didn’t vary a bit and I believe that it is up to the DNS themselves now because of the mistake 
that somebody in your department made. Do you accept that inefficiency? That is maybe some of the 
things that I was talking about earlier about the people in the North being a little disturbed about what is 
happening within the DNS. With a few telephone calls into these areas, I find that the buildings aren’t 
finished yet and they haven’t had anybody out to see them in the last three weeks or recently to talk to 
them about this. The northern people are sitting there waiting for somebody to come and finish their 
homes and I believe that it is the responsibility of the DNS at this time because it is obviously a DNS 
mistake, to get in there and complete these homes for these people. 
 
The writer of the letter knew very well that this was going to be touchy. He stated in it that this report is 
required at an early date as this matter is of some sensitivity. The facts of the case are required so that a 
judgment can be made as to how they should proceed further in correcting this situation, Mr. Minister. I 
believe that in that statement that the DNS, your executive director is taking the responsibility there for 
the problems that existed. 
 
Now what are you going to do? Are you going to sit and wait and hide behind the Attorney General? 
That has been a year and one-half and is there no compassion for the people of the North who have lived 
through one winter with half finished houses and are still in homes that probably were homes when they 
were started and look more like shacks today because of the work that is not completed. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the department is not going to involve itself while the 
investigation is going on. As I say, even if it was a department employee, if they did not tell the truth or 
they contrived to defraud a person then it is a matter for the criminal branch of the Attorney General’s 
Department to investigate. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police have been asked to investigate. They 
are investigating and when they get their investigations done they will carry out their actions, either 
against people who are in the department now, who were in the department and left the department or 
wherever recommended that action be taken, it will be taken. But the department is not gong to interfere 
in any of those projects until the matter is resolved. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 


