



















































Hansard: March 15, 1978


327 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

March 15, 1978. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. M.J. KOSKIE (Quill Lakes):— Mr. Speaker, through you and to the House I take this opportunity to 

introduce 41 Grade Ten students from Muenster High School. I just want to say that with that group is my 

son, Morey. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOSKIE:— The group is seated in the west gallery and they are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. 

Afterchuk, Mr. Moore and Mr. Blechinger and Mrs. Koskie. 

 

I understand the class had an opportunity this morning to visit some of the interest points in Regina. I do 

hope that you enjoyed your trip here and will enjoy your visit to the Legislature and will gain some 

knowledge of the functioning of the Legislative Assembly. I want to say that I welcome the opportunity of 

meeting with you a little later this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt):— Mr. Speaker, I also would like to extend greetings to the 

students and teachers from Muenster. Muenster is a community that is very close to my home of Humboldt 

and some of the students, I believe, live in my constituency of Humboldt. I would like to extend my personal 

greetings to them and to their teachers, some of whom were colleagues of mine in the Humboldt 

superintendency when I taught there several years ago. 

 

Also it is an honor and a pleasure to bring to the attention of this House a group of students who are in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. They are from the Radar Hill Military Base in the constituency of Humboldt. They are 

Grade Eight students; there are 10 of them. They are accompanied by their principal, Miss Charlotte Ruuth 

and Mrs. Demartin, Mr. and Mrs. Ramsey and Mr. Sherritt. I think this is, if I recollect correctly, the first 

time we have had the honor of having students from the Radar Hill Base. I had the pleasure of meeting the 

students a year ago in their school, all of them. It is certainly good to see them here today. We hope that they 

will have a pleasant time and that this experience will be an educational one. I look forward to seeing them 

at 3:15 in the rotunda and later on in the Speaker’s dining room. I ask members to join with me in greeting 

the students in the Legislature. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to members of the House, a group of students who are sitting in the Speaker’s Gallery. While they are 

not from my constituency they come from the finest school unit in Saskatchewan and an extremely fine 

school, Clavet School. We have a number of students from Grade Five along with their teachers Mr. 

Firstenberg and Mr. Kraley. These students and their teachers were earlier at the Museum of Natural 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

328 

 

History. After spending some time here in the House I know they intend to visit the RCMP Barracks. On 

behalf of all of us in the House we hope that you find your stay here to be worthwhile and that you will learn 

something this afternoon and that you have a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland):— I should like to join with the member for Eastview in 

welcoming the group from Clavet, the teachers and students from Clavet, on behalf of the MLA for that 

constituency, Mr. Katzman the MLA for Rosthern. Unfortunately he is not able to be here just at this 

moment but he will be back in several moments. He has asked me on his behalf to welcome the students and 

indicate to them that he will be taking a few moments to meet with them presently. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre):— Mr. Speaker, as the former MLA for that area in which 

Clavet School is, I too, would like to welcome the students and teachers from Clavet School. I hope they 

have a good day and a good and safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Shellbrook):— Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in introducing this afternoon the 

reeve and council members of, I think, the most recently organized municipality in Saskatchewan, the Rural 

Municipality of Paddockwood. They are sitting in the Speaker’s Galley, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the 

top row, to your left, Mr. Speaker. I welcome them to the Chambers. I welcome them and introduce them to 

the members of the House as being one of the progressive areas in taking on municipal responsibility in the 

province. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry):— Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the House a group of councillors and their wives from the RM of Blaine Lake No. 434. It is a 

pleasure for me to introduce the reeve and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Sam Stupnikoff, the Secretary Treasurer 

Mr. Burak, Mr. and Mrs. Alec Kulick and Mr. and Mrs. Michayluk, and Mr. Eugene Szwydky, who are 

visiting with us today. I want to wish them an interesting afternoon, a good convention. I hope they have a 

safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek):— I too would like to introduce some councillors from the RM of 

Enterprise in our area, Councillor Stern, Reeve Ted Frisz and Councillor Allan Woelfle from Richmound 

area. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

329 

 

REGINA BOILER MAKERS UNEMPLOYED 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— I want to draw to the attention of the Minister of Labour an 

intolerable situation and ask him by way of follow-up what the government might do about it. 

 

A large number of Regina boiler makers as the minister may know are without work. They are unemployed. 

Yet on the Coronach power project around Estevan there are a number, quite a significant number of boiler 

makers from outside the province who are employed there. They as a matter of fact get preference in their 

employment to Saskatchewan people and I wonder whether the minister is giving some thought to 

introducing a policy for these and other people as Saskatchewan jobs for Saskatchewan people policy as it 

applies to public projects at least. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour):— I assume the member was directing that question to me. 

The member will be aware of the fact that efforts are made on every possible occasion to direct work to 

Saskatchewan manufacturers and we have in a great many circumstances made efforts whenever possible to 

see that this takes place. Often times there will be specifications involved in a particular contract that require 

that the order be filled some place other than in the province of Saskatchewan. These are things over which 

on occasion we have no control. But under every circumstance the significant details are not a factor but 

every effort is made to provide for the supplying of products manufactured in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will know that this applies in several 

situations. It applies to boiler makers and pipe fitters who belong to an international union in Kansas city 

whose hiring calls are located in Manitoba and in Alberta. Those Saskatchewan people seeking jobs in 

Saskatchewan by their Saskatchewan government have to apply for that job either in Winnipeg or in 

Edmonton. My question to you is, what assistance is your department prepared to give the Saskatchewan 

boiler makers and pipe fitters who are petitioning the international union for a local of their own and being 

refused by it so that they can have the preference for Saskatchewan jobs that Manitoba and Alberta people 

are currently getting. 

 

MR. SNYDER:— Well, I can only assure the member that we will take the matter under advisement and see 

if there is any accommodation that can be made, any influence that can be exerted by the Department of 

Labour in that connection. 

 

EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of Telephones. 

Since the Saskatchewan fire chiefs and provincial police chiefs have been pressing your government and 

Sask Tel for an emergency phone number, why has your department refused to initiate the use of this phone 

number? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment):— Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear his question precisely. 

Why is the department not taking action to initiate the use of emergency telephone equipment — emergency 

911. Sask Tel has been installing the equipment required for the emergency 911 number in a number of the 

exchanges like Saskatoon and Regina and at other points in Saskatchewan. Sask Tel is prepared to 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

330 

 

install that equipment as it will with any other piece of hardware in the telephone business. The problem that 

is not sorted out is how this will be administered. To develop any particular plan requires agreement from a 

good number of agencies such as the police force, the fire chiefs and a number of agencies like that to 

determine how the program will be administered. There are discussions going on, under way in Saskatoon, 

perhaps unknown to one of the members for there. There are discussions being held with Regina, with the 

city councils and with the agencies of the city council to determine how such a system could be delivered 

and paid for and at the present time I would say to the hon. member that no plan for delivery has been agreed 

to in any urban centre. 

 

MR. HAM:— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, about when do you expect it to be initiated? 

 

MR. BUYERS:— Mr. Speaker, any time that Sask Tel receives a proposal from any urban government in 

this province as to how they want the system delivered, Sask Tel is prepared to sit down and talk business 

with them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

BOILER MAKERS’ PROBLEMS 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— A question to the Minister of Labour about the boiler 

makers’ problem which I would suggest is an example of the employees suffering by the dominance of out-

of-country and out-of-province trade unions. I wonder whether the minister wouldn’t agree with me that . . .I 

have no concerns about the economic conditions in Manitoba and I suggest that the members of this House 

should have concerns about economic conditions in this province. 

 

I asked the minister whether we would not be better served in this province if the Trade Union Act were 

amended to give directions to the Labor Relations Board to encourage the formation of independent 

Saskatchewan unions, and whether we would not be better served to ensure that where you have the vast 

majority of people wanting to establish their own union . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order! I will ask the member who is asking the question to not put it in a debatable 

manner. The essence of what he was saying up to now was ‘debate’ and he is asking the minister to debate 

the issue. Now, if you put a question I will accept it. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— I will change the tone, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister agree that we would be 

better to have trade union legislation which encourages Saskatchewan trade unions and amendments to the 

trade union legislation which would make it possible for Saskatchewan trade unionists to break away from 

their internationals where it is their wish to do so, while, and I’m sure the minister would agree, the present 

Trade Union Act and the tendency of the board is to keep them dominated in the strait jacket of their 

international? 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour):— I would have to say that the member for Wascana has a 

different perception with respect to the responsibility of the Labor Relations Board than I have. He has a 

different conception of what the Trade Union Act is intended to do than I have. Section C of the Trade 

Union Act provides that workers in Saskatchewan have the right to join in a union of their choice. I do not 

believe it to be the responsibility of the Minister of Labour nor the prerogative of the Labor Relations 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

331 

 

Board to direct those workers into any particular union or to encourage them to join any particular union. 

That is a decision that must be made by the workers themselves and should not be imposed upon by a third 

party making any kind of authoritarian judgments with respect to what union they should belong to or 

whether or not they wish to form a union. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask the minister whether he would not agree with 

me that by saying that you stay independent you are, in fact, assisting the internationals to maintain their 

strangle hold over Saskatchewan workers and I ask whether the minister would not be prepared to introduce 

amendments which would make it possible for Saskatchewan workers to apply for certification even though 

they are now a part of an international union with jurisdiction in this province. 

 

MR. SNYDER:— Once again, Mr. Speaker, I would indicate to the member for Regina Wascana that I 

believe these to be individual judgments that are made by individual workers. It is not my prerogative nor 

that of the Labor Relations Board to make a determination as to what union they prefer to belong to. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order. I will take the member for Moosomin. 

 

GOVERNMENT POLICY PROPOSAL – SIMILAR TO DR. DEVINE’S 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to direct a question to the 

Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, this morning in your address to the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities Convention, you outlined a proposal for government policy similar to that initially 

proposed by Dr. Grant Devine, agricultural economist of the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, are 

you and your staff working closely with Dr. Grant Devine in the formulation of this policy? 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture):— Well, Mr. Speaker, the outline which I gave this 

morning was an outline of a proposal which was prepared with my staff. Much of the background material, 

however, is material which is available to Dr. Devine and I presume that when he made his proposition that 

he drew from the same material. We are certainly not against discussing our proposal with Dr. Devine. We 

think that anything that we can do to improve the feed grain policy of Saskatchewan has got to be a good 

thing. If Dr. Devine wants to come down and discuss his proposal with ours to see whether they jive, that’s 

fine. Certainly we didn’t borrow from his policy, it was one which was evolved by our department. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, with your permission I would like to now table these 

documents which prove, in fact, the hon. minister is the most enthusiastic pupil of Dr. Grant Devine. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Next question, the member for Wilkie. 

 

REVIEW OF SASKATCHEWAN INCOME PLAN FOR SENIOR CITIZENS 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie):— A question to the Minister of Social Services, you have announced 

that you will increase the Saskatchewan Income Plan to senior citizens by $5 a month, which comes out to 

about 16 cents a day. Would the minister not agree 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

332 

 

that 16 cents could possibly buy two eggs, one with a yolk and this would be putting a yolk on the senior 

citizens. Would you consider reviewing your policy on this matter? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services):— Mr. Speaker, I can see why the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) is so sensitive about this, because when he was the minister responsible he 

got exactly nothing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he took $5 million away from the senior citizens via deterrent fees. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! The question was ironical and rhetorical, which is against the rules and 

the answer was off the subject. I will take the next question. 

 

DECLINING VALUE OF THE CANADIAN DOLLAR 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Minister, we are all aware in this province and this country about the declining value of the Canadian 

dollar being down, barely making 88 cents now and bankers, of course, are actively now declaring that we 

may very well be looking at an 80-cent dollar not very far down the road. In that the minister indicated in his 

Budget last week that it is the intention of the province to borrow somewhere in the neighborhood of $440 

million and in that the finalizing arrangements with AMAX have not become clear, I believe you have some 

$35 million which you really haven’t decided how you are going to handle it yet. My question then, Mr. 

Minister, is, can you give this Assembly some indication as to how your department plans to proceed in its 

borrowings for this year. What markets are you going to go to? Do you plan to go back to New York? Do 

you plan to go to Euro dollars? Could you give us some indication please? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, we will be following the traditional practice of first of all borrowing at the 

Canadian market to the extent that we were able to get sufficient funds from the Canadian market and 

subject to the interest rates being favorable. We will be looking at the American market as well as the off 

shore market. All markets will be explored to ensure that we are able to get the best deal for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I am sure you are aware with the 

American dollar declining that to borrow $440 million you are looking at $500 million to pay it back. If you 

go to Europe, Swiss or German, you are looking at probably $5.5 million to pay it back. Would the minister 

very briefly tell us how could you logically with the capable people that you have got in your department, 

how could you even remotely look in external borrowing in foreign currencies with the terrible declining rate 

that we are experiencing right now? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, who said about foreign currencies. You can borrow in Canadian currency 

as the hon. member is well aware. The decisions have not been made. Certainly if we borrow in the United 

States then we will not be borrowing all the money on the American market. We will be spreading our 

borrowing portfolio to ensure that our borrowing portfolio is balanced. The precise decisions have yet to be 

made of where we will borrow, how much. All of that is subject, as I said, to get the best deal for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

333 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister tell this Assembly whether his 

government has actively in the past or is considering in the future the use of going to the Conservative 

government of Alberta and their Heritage Fund. In other words since the government of Alberta has loaned 

money previously to other unstable provincial governments, has your department actively considered going 

to Alberta and applying for help for your future capital needs? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance):— Mr. Speaker, the only money that Alberta has made 

available to their Heritage Fund is to those governments that have a Conservative government so far. They 

have not made it available to all of the provinces. Certainly, if money is available from Alberta we would be 

prepared to examine it subject to the favorable rates. We are interested in borrowing on the Canadian market 

first and foremost. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a supplementary 

to the Minister of Finance along the same idea. Would the Minister of Finance not agree that it might be a 

wise governmental decision on the part of the province of Saskatchewan to freeze all off shore borrowing 

until the fluctuation of the Canadian dollar begins to stabilize so that we don’t jeopardize the cost of the debt 

retirement to the Saskatchewan taxpayer in the future? Would the minister not take that into consideration, it 

may only take two or three months until something stabilizes and would the minister consider that? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— We are always timing our borrowing to make sure that the period of borrowing is the 

best period of time, whether it is postponing it for a month or two months but our investment and financial 

services are always concerned, always checking, always testing the markets and certainly it may be desirable 

and advisable to postpone borrowing for a period of time. 

 

ANSWER TO QUESTION RE RANCH EHRLO 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— A few days ago the member for Wilkie (Miss Clifford) 

asked a question of the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes) relating to the question to reimbursement of 

costs for Ranch Ehrlo. I think the Minister of Social Services took notice of that question. 

 

I would like to answer, briefly, that our intention is to reimburse Ranch Ehrlo in terms of their legal fees and 

disbursements only. The subject of the legal fees and the quantum of the disbursements and so forth is 

something which is the subject of correspondence between themselves and my department. 

 

SENIOR CITIZEN ASSISTANCE 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. In view 

of the fact that senior citizens in Saskatchewan and, indeed, members of this Legislature are terrified that the 

generous 16 cent increase in the assistance plan per day to senior citizens might be eaten up by the ravages of 

inflation, will the minister give us the assurance that any further assistance plan payments will be indexed to 

the cost of living in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. ROLFES:— Mr. Speaker, as I stated last night in my address to this House there are about $100 

million worth of programs for senior citizens in this Budget and the Opposition Liberal Party should keep in 

mind that we don’t take in isolation any 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

334 

 

particular program, but that we take the total program of the government for any segment of our society. In 

our Budget we have allocated about, as I said, $100 million, which includes increases in SIP certainly, but it 

also includes increases in subsidies for nursing homes, it increases subsidies for approved homes. It also, as I 

indicated last night, that we are looking at a proposal to assist nursing homes for heavy level III. The 

Minister of Health has already indicated we are going to increase level IV. The Minister responsible for 

Energy has also announced a program which will assist senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, I think it is totally 

unfair of the Liberal Party opposite to pick on one small segment and try to indicate to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we are not providing for senior citizens. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— I would like to ask the Minister of Social Services again the fundamental question. 

Are you prepared to index the SIP payments to the cost of living in Saskatchewan — that’s the question. 

 

MR. ROLFES:— Mr. Speaker, every senior citizen group in this province has advocated to us that the main 

responsibility for pensions rests with the federal government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES:— And, Mr. Speaker, it was not this government but it was the federal government that has 

taken away the indexing of pensions from senior citizens just recently. Mr. Speaker, we have given a 

substantial increase in this Budget for senior citizens, and we are proud of our program for senior citizens. 

 

CABLE T.V. — NORTH BATTLEFORD 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— I would like to ask a question to the minister responsible for Sask Tel. 

Why, when the government or Sask Tel sold the Outram Tower and Equipment to the North Battleford 

Cable Co-op, were the other cable operators not allowed to bid on the equipment (inaudible interjection)? 

Mr. Speaker, I resent being interrupted by the Attorney General. I asked the minister responsible for Sask Tel 

why they were not being allowed to bid. 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment):— Because, Mr. Speaker, as I understand the situation, 

initially, the four applicants who became successful licensees eventually, applied to use Outram as the outer 

head end for the receipt of the cable signals. Then about a year ago, three of the cable licensees changed their 

application to the CRTC and asked that Tolstoy, not Outram, be the head end. North Battleford did not ask 

the CRTC to change their application from Outram to Tolstoy, and therefore, the only successful cable 

licensee that was interested in Outram for the North Battleford Co-op. 

 

POINT OF PERSONAL PRIVILEGE 

 

WESTERN PRESS 1976 LIMITED 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg):— Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I have a point of 

personal privilege. On Monday last I asked the Minister in charge of SEDCO a question regarding Western 

Press 1976 Limited and the minister indicated that the company was in operation and the receiver had to his 

knowledge not been appointed. Mr. Speaker, I have a letter here that I will table from the Saskatchewan 

Provincial Secretary dated March 9, 1976, which states: The Western Press 1976 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

335 

 

Limited was incorporated in Saskatchewan the 13th of August . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! What is your point of privilege? 

 

MR. NELSON:— I am coming to it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Could the member get to it immediately and skip the other stuff. 
 

MR. NELSON:— I certainly will, Mr. Speaker. This corporation was struck from the register on the 30th of 

September, 1977 . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! Are there any other points of order? 
 

MR. NELSON:— That was a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, and I am getting right to it. 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— I am dealing with orders of the day. 

 

MR. NELSON:— I have been misled by the minister, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! I ask the member to take his seat. 
 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

express an objection on behalf of the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, he has a point of privilege. It is 

very difficult to bring that up without first of all explaining the circumstances. You cut him off before that 

was possible. 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— The member has to be very brief in bringing forward a point of privilege and it has to be 

a point of privilege. It can’t be a fallacious presentation of evidence that he finds himself in conflict with 

some minister. It has to be a point of privilege and I am not prepared to accept the member for Assiniboia-

Gravelbourg on that point that he raised. 
 

MR. NELSON:— On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order. I have already told the member that I am not accepting his point of privilege. I 

don’t see what the point of privilege is. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. W. E. Smishek, 

Minister of Finance, that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Penner. 
 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs):— Mr. Speaker, I am sorry we had the 

interruptions to moving into the Budget Debate. 
 

On entering this debate, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate my colleague, the member for Regina North 

East and the Minister of Finance, for one of the most judicious and forward-looking budgets ever presented 

in this Assembly. The 1978 Budget is an indication of the optimism that the New Democratic government 

has for the future of our province. It is a budget that calls on the best of people; a budget that works with 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

336 

 

people’s hopes and expectations, not on their fears or their prejudices. This 1978 Budget builds on our 

strengths and encourages people to look forward to their goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the better places to be living in in 1978. To keep it that way requires 

good management, competence, experience and a steady hand at the helm. But good management at this 

time means stimulation of the economy. It means priming the pump to keep moving ahead and this Budget 

calls on people to take part in the renewal of the economy and it gives them the dollars to do it. 

 

Let me review the features of this Budget: income tax reductions of 9.5 per cent with a $40 cut per taxpayer 

and a $30 cut per dependent child, to give Saskatchewan the lowest tax rates of any province in Canada for 

people who earn up to $13,000 a year; reduction in auto insurance premiums of 5 per cent — yes due to 

Safety ‘77, and yes due to the use of seat belts; a $20 million increase for school grants and increases of $45 

in the Property Improvement Grant which means that $72 of school costs are covered out of provincial 

revenue; an extra $20 million for senior citizens, including 1,500 new housing units with a continuing heavy 

emphasis on rural Saskatchewan; more level IV care beds, the tax on small business reduced by 8 per cent 

and a number of new programs to help small businessmen; no increase in power bills in 1978 and no 

increase in natural gas rates beyond 8 per cent. Mr. Speaker, $2 million has been set aside for livestock 

services and agriculture including upgrading of grazing lease lands and a new swine research centre; 

$200,000 to develop a major rural development program involving millions of dollars on a federal-provincial 

basis; nearly 20 million new dollars for municipal government — the largest increase ever recorded in the 

province’s history. 

 

This is an "Action Budget", Mr. Speaker, this "Action Budget" is not meant for an election but I want to say 

that I would be happy to take it to the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to listen to the Conservative financial critic and hear the old replay of the old 

routine of cutting sales taxes and the old game about who owns the Crown corporations. The only thing was, 

I could not tell whether this born again-Conservative was using a speech he had dug out of the filing cabinet 

from his days as a Liberal member or whether it was a musty old speech that his late father, Ross Thatcher, 

used to make as Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

It would have the same old promises that were never fulfilled by the Thatcher government and promises that 

will never be fulfilled by the Leader of the Conservative Party opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our government came into office in 1971, local governments were starved for funds. 

There was just no money for urban municipalities — grants to urbans in 1971 totalled $1 million including 

housing money — and there was not enough money for rural municipalities or school boards. Property taxes 

had to be kept low because people simply could not afford increases. The result was that local governments 

found themselves with little freedom or flexibility to make decisions because they just did not have the 

money. 

 

Our government was determined to turn around this declining strength and power on the part of local 

governments. We turned our attention first to education. In 1971, school boards were receiving $73 million 

with the bulk of that going to the "have" 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

337 

 

boards. We implemented the foundation grants formula which distributed the money more fairly; we began a 

series of large increase in operating grants to schools. In three years operating grants to schools doubled from 

$70 million to $140 million. For the budget year, this year, grants to schools will reach $200 million. The 

new money, as well as changes to legislation, allowed the educational system to function once more in a 

spirit of co-operation rather than in a spirit of controversy that had dominated the years before ‘71. 

 

Having accomplished the turnaround in education, we put our minds to the municipal system. A major 

package of urban assistance went into effect. A police grant and a new unconditional per capita grant was 

introduced. Assistance was provided for urban transit. The Community Capital Fund was introduced which 

made provision for $50 million in unconditional capital grants. 

 

We reorganized the Department of Municipal Affairs so that urban and rural problems could each get 

adequate attention. We then began discussions with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

and the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association to develop revenue sharing — the new system of 

financing municipal government in Saskatchewan. The first phase of revenue sharing is now ready to go. It 

will make 1978 an historic year for municipal government in this province. Mr. Speaker, the introduction of 

this revenue sharing program is historic on four counts. 

 

Revenue sharing has created a new excitement and interest throughout local government in Saskatchewan. 

Step by step the program has been worked out with SARM and SUMA representatives. Every councillor and 

every alderman and every reeve and every mayor in Saskatchewan has had an opportunity to comment on the 

program at major stages of its development. Our councils are excited, so are the people that they represent 

and there is a sense of anticipation, a looking forward to what will be possible with the revenue sharing 

program. 

 

The second historic aspect is the size of the revenue sharing pool. Now that councils have received the 

figures for their individual municipalities, their enthusiasm for the program has been borne out. There is a 

total of 19.1 million new dollars — $12 million for urbans and $7.1 million for rurals. As the president of 

SARM said yesterday, this program is a milestone program and it means about 300 new dollars for every 

farmer in the municipality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY:— In 12 months time there will be another increase in funds, a very substantial 

increase after which the pool will be high enough for the automatic escalator to work and to work 

effectively. The size of the pool in this year’s revenue sharing puts Saskatchewan ahead of every other 

province in aid to municipal government. 

 

Third, the revenue sharing program in Saskatchewan is historic because it is the first true revenue sharing 

program in Canada. It is true Manitoba has a system whereby 1 per cent of corporate tax and 2 per cent of 

personal income tax is paid to municipalities on a per capita basis. But corporate income tax and personal 

income taxes alone are not enough to provide an accurate reflection of what is happening in the economy. It 

is true British Columbia has a system it calls revenue sharing but it was developed in isolation from the 

municipal organizations of the province; it is so complicated that no one can understand it and there is little 

money in it to provide few meaningful dollars to 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

338 

 

municipalities, particularly the small municipalities. 

 

Other provinces have not even attempted revenue sharing. Oil rich Alberta has indicated it has no intention 

of doing so. Saskatchewan is truly then in the forefront of local government in Canada and we can be justly 

proud of our leadership. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY:— The revenue sharing program is historic because it gives true local autonomy to 

municipal government. We hear a lot of talk about local autonomy. But I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what does 

local autonomy mean? Surely local autonomy means having the right to make your own decisions and 

having the resources to back them up. Local autonomy and independence are only possible if the dollars are 

there to support local decisions. 

 

The Conservatives opposite talk a lot about local autonomy. Let’s talk about Tory local autonomy, Mr. 

Speaker. In Manitoba, at the municipal convention last fall, the new Tory Minister of Municipal Affairs told 

delegates that municipalities would have to revalue their projected capital expenditures in light of declining 

assistance from the federal and the provincial governments. The minister went on to suggest that a greater 

burden of increased expenditures will have to be absorbed by the property tax. Declining assistance from 

senior government, increased property tax, giving municipalities less and less room in which to operate — so 

this is local autonomy. 

 

How can the Conservative Leader opposite say he believes in the ability of local governments to make 

decisions when he makes sarcastic remarks to his convention about requests from villages and towns seeking 

grants from their provincial government. The Conservative Leader apparently opposes provincial grants that 

help people in those villages and in those towns. Mr. Speaker, in Alberta, our move to revenue sharing has 

been applauded by the urban and municipal associations. In fact, they are ecstatic, say the news reports. But 

what does the Premier of Alberta say? He says no, he says revenue sharing would put a strait jacket on 

provincial government. This is in Alberta where the latest available figures show that local government per 

capita debt is $891 — three times the Saskatchewan figures at $273. Mr. Speaker, the Collver Conservatives 

say they are in favor of local autonomy. It sounds a little hollow, doesn’t it. There is no local autonomy 

without dollars to back it up. These dollars must be unconditional. This year’s revenue sharing program for 

urban municipalities contains 100 per cent unconditional dollars and for rural municipalities, the 

unconditional share is 50 per cent. Mr. Speaker, in addition to providing more money for municipalities than 

any other province and in addition to being the only province which will truly share provincial revenues with 

its municipalities, this government provides more unconditional money at the local level than any other 

province in this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY:— I ask you, therefore, which political party in Saskatchewan really believes in local 

autonomy? A total of $62 million this year, a substantial increase next year, the question is, how is this 

possible. How is this possible in Saskatchewan at a time when other provinces are announcing cutbacks and 

deficits and tax increases, deficits of $1.5 billion here, $11 billion there, tax increases and medicare 

premiums to $44 per family per month. The Saskatchewan increases, Mr. Speaker, are possible for two 

reasons. One is the good planning and foresight of your government who put away 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

339 

 

money in the good years from 1973 to 1976 so that now when things are not so good, funds can be drawn 

upon to provide new money. This practice of stabilization has made 111 million new dollars available in the 

past three years. 

 

This Budget has been criticized by the members opposite because there is a 2 per cent difference between 

revenue and spending. I remind the members of the Stabilization Fund and I remind the members that we 

would not have had to use this money if taxes had not been reduced or revenue sharing had not been 

introduced. We could have had a surplus in 1978 in the government’s financial statement, but it seemed to us 

that the 25th Chapter of the Book of St. Matthew has something to say about that. We believe it is important 

not to boast but to keep moving ahead. 

 

Secondly, this increase is possible because of the sound management principles, the good management 

principles of the 1978 Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is the single most important industry in Saskatchewan. Agriculture is a base for the 

service industries around which rural communities are built. Agriculture provides our largest export 

commodity. Agriculture is the base for secondary processing which will become increasingly important in 

the future of western Canada. Things are beginning to look better for agriculture as beef prices rise and our 

Canadian Wheat Board makes record sales. But the agricultural sector can hardly be called upon to provide 

20 million new dollars to increase funds to municipalities. Farmers can no longer be the only source of 

revenue for Saskatchewan government. Our government has recognized this for some time and it has built its 

resource policies with this in mind. 

 

The 1978 Budget includes provision for the new Heritage Trust Fund which will include taxation revenues 

from oil and potash and uranium and sodium sulphate and coal and hard rock minerals. Since 1971 when our 

government took office, resource revenues have been raised from $33 million to over $460 million, an 

increase of 14 times one dollar in every four dollars today which comes from our resource wealth. Some of 

the resource revenue will be used to start revenue sharing, it will be used to cut income tax, it will be used 

toward the Property Improvement Grant increases, it will be used to create jobs. But most of the money from 

resources is being set aside for re-investing and development. This is a key strategy for Saskatchewan, it is 

one point where we differ strongly with the members opposite. We believe that the bulk of revenue from 

resources that are being used up should be plowed back into new investments. This money is a one-time 

profit and if we spend it all now, it’s gone forever. The Heritage Fund will invest in resources and resource 

development so that future Saskatchewan generations will receive the benefits of our resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time of huge deficits across the country we have major new money for local government 

and we have it because we planned and prepared for it. With the money in place we have developed a 

formula for distribution which ensures that all people receive the benefits of the program, the revenue 

sharing program planned carefully with SARM and SUMA, ensures equality in the distribution of the 

revenue sharing pool. Of the $12 million of new money to urban municipalities, $10 million will be paid out 

in unconditional grants. Every urban centre from village to city receives a basic $1,000. This basic grant 

guarantees a meaningful amount of money to even the smallest community. In addition, every community 

receives a per capita grant on the basis of its population. This money is unconditional. Together the basic and 

the per capita grant amount to 60 per cent of the urban money; the remaining 40 per cent is distributed 

through a foundation grant formula similar to that that is used in the 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

340 

 

foundation grant system for schools. That foundation grant formula takes into account differences in 

expenditures and different sized communities; it takes into account police costs and general costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some large centres have expressed concern because the police grant has become part of 

revenue sharing. We have said all along that police costs are recognized as part of the foundation formula 

and that the increases in grants will more than make up for the police grant. I believe that is evident now. 

 

Let us take some examples. Mr. Speaker, 1977 grants for equalization per capita and police for Saskatoon 

were $5.2 million. The 1978 total is 7.3, an increase of $2.1 million. In Regina last year $6.8 million, this 

year $8.9 million, an increase of $2.1 million. In the city of Moose Jaw $1.5 million last year, this year $2.2 

million, an increase of $740,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY:— I’ve heard some criticism from the mayor of Carlyle about this program. Last year 

the mayor of Carlyle received $23,000; this year he receives $45,000, almost double, an increase of $22,000. 

In the town of Kamsack $92,000 last year, this year $122,000, an increase of $30,000. Mr. Speaker, revenue 

sharing means far more to all these communities than the old grants would have even come close to 

producing. 

 

Rural municipalities receive 7.1 million new dollars, an increase of 40 per cent. For rural municipalities on 

the unconditional side there is a basic flat grant for each municipality. The average basic grant is over 

$4,000, this is completely new money. The second part of the unconditional money is equalization. The 

factors in the equalization calculation remain the same as the old grant system where differences and 

assessments and population from one municipality to another are taken into account. Equalization and basic 

grant means 4.4 million new dollars in unconditional grants to rural municipalities. This extra money 

becomes very clear when each municipality looks at its own figures. On the conditional side there is 1.5 

million new dollars in main farm access. 

 

We will continue the policy of completing the main farm access roads at the rate of 1,000 miles per year. The 

extra funds in this year’s Budget will allow some room for catch-up for municipalities that have overbuilt 

their quotas in the last few years. Super grids are budgeted at $2.5 million, an increase of $1.5 million. This 

will give the program a big boost in the 17 maintenance areas that have already been formed and in the 10 

that are holding discussions. Grants will continue for bridges, for grid maintenance, for industrial, for park 

access roads and for shelter belts and so on. 

 

Revenue sharing brings a new grant of $3 million for rural and urban municipalities to participate and co-

operate in ambulance, fire protection and recreation services. We call this grant the services grant and 

municipalities will have the option of participating or not participating as they see fit. We are working on the 

details of this program and the ambulance program will be the first one to be organized. It is expected that 

municipalities will co-operate to form ambulance districts, who will in turn make decisions concerning 

service for the area. 

 

Fire protection grants will work the same way, as will the recreation grants when the program details are 

worked out and there will be an announcement shortly. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

341 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, 1978 is an historic year for Saskatchewan. Agricultural prices are showing increases 

for the first time in three years. The energy of the new young people out there on Land Bank land and Farm 

Start loans in our communities is having its impact. A spirit of optimism prevails. There is excitement about 

the heavy oil development in northwestern Saskatchewan. 

 

There is excitement over the expansion at IPSCO to gear up for the Alaska pipeline. There is excitement 

over the headlines in all the financial papers which say that the centre of economic activity is moving to 

western Canada. That optimism in individuals and in local governments and in Saskatchewan is what the 

Budget by the member for Regina North East is all about. This Budget encourages people to look forward to 

their goals and to make their own decisions. This has always been the strength of Saskatchewan people, the 

Saskatchewan people who see what needs to be done and who go ahead and do it and do it on a 

commonsense basis. Mr. Speaker, this Budget gives individuals, it gives local government the resources to 

make decisions and to start to do what they really want to do. Mr. Speaker, this Budget encourages goals and 

hopes and it gives people the power to achieve them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the Budget. 

 

MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry):— Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to take part in this Budget Debate. 

The people I represent, the people of Redberry welcome and approve of this Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something gives me even more pleasure than making a few remarks in this Debate. I have been 

amused and humored the last few days to be able to sit here and watch the members opposite: the spokesmen 

of reaction in full retreat in the face of this Budget. 

 

For the last two or three years, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Leader, the Liberal Leader (whether old or 

new), the member for Thunder Creek, Mr. Thatcher (whether the finance critic for the Liberals or whether he 

is the finance critic for the Conservatives) are saying the same thing. These members and others are going up 

and down this province heaping scorn and ridicule on the efforts of this NDP government to keep the 

Saskatchewan economy moving. You’re heard their slogans, Mr. Speaker, cut back government spending, 

the government should get out of business, needed social programs are unnecessary frills, and the 

granddaddy of them all, Mr. Speaker, the government that governs least governs best. The list of one-liners 

is as long as your arm, they have got one for every occasion. In short, what they have been promoting is 

anarchy, Mr. Speaker. They say out of one side of their mouths that government should get out, government 

shouldn’t meddle; out of the other side of their mouths every time there is a little problem here or there, they 

have been saying it’s the government’s fault and the government should solve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can’t have it both ways. They have been saying that there is something immoral, 

something evil, something hideous about government working with private and co-operative enterprise to 

ensure that our economy functions in such a way as to give our people a decent standard of living. Until 

recently, unfortunately, they have been having some success in peddling these myths, Mr. Speaker. But I 

think people are beginning to see through this flimflam. People are beginning to realize that this mentality 

was the same one promoted by Conservatives and Liberals alike prior to and during the depression. They are 

doing the same thing today and people realize we 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

342 

 

can’t afford to make the mistakes of the 1930s all over again. People are beginning to realize that this 

mentality was the same one practiced by the Thatcher government in Saskatchewan in 1968 when they cut 

services, imposed deterrent fees and a thousand other horrendous tax increases. But, Mr. Speaker, they 

slashed taxes on turkey saddles. 

 

People are realizing that if we continue to have a million people looking for work in this country and not 

finding any we are headed for serious trouble. They know it’s costing our country $9 billion in added 

unemployment insurance payouts, welfare payouts, lost production, foregone taxes and wasted lives. People 

are realizing that many of the unemployed are young people and if we can’t give them work we are going to 

create a generation of permanent quitters and that is bad for our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are realizing and expecting that governments will have to take the lead in getting this 

country together and in creating jobs. People are seeing through the flimflam and the one-liners and they are 

realizing that a dollar spent by a government is as good as a dollar spent by anyone else and it circulates just 

as well. It may even be better if it creates a new job or builds something needed and lasting and stays in 

Saskatchewan. People are now saying that it is better to pay people to work than to pay them not to work. 

Mr. Speaker, the people are right. 

 

The flimflam artists who sit across from us, the Conservative Leader and his national leader, with whom he 

is in complete harmony, are beating a hasty retreat and trying to change horses. If it wasn’t such a pathetic 

sight, Mr. Speaker, it would be humorous and if it wasn’t for the fact that this public realization will produce 

some new double talk and some new one-liners, Mr. Speaker, the change would be welcome indeed. 

 

Some things have been happening in Saskatchewan and in Canada to produce this awakening, this 

realization I have been talking about. What are some of these things, Mr. Speaker? 

 

If we look at our sister province to the East, look to Manitoba, we find some of the answers. They had an 

election in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. Conservative Leader Sterling Lyon went up and down the province 

telling people how bad things were. On one hand he promised to keep all the good social programs and on 

the other hand he told people that they needed a dose of and I quote: "acute, protracted restraint". The fact 

that the two are totally incompatible was irrelevant — sounds like our own Conservative Party here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Manitoba is getting the medicine. All public buildings, senior citizens’ housing, hospitals; you name it, 

they are all winding up in the Tory deep-freeze. With those projects went the jobs. Unemployment among 

building and construction trades has gone sky high. Architects are out of work and unemployed. Mr. 

Speaker, next the small suppliers will be bankrupt and out of business. 

 

If we go one province further East to resource and industry rich Ontario, comparison brings home the stark 

realities even more clearly. They brought down their budget the same day as ours, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to give you a sampling of the reaction to the Ontario budget. Mr. Speaker, what was that reaction? 

 

The Toronto Star headlines tell the story — 37.5 per cent jump in Ontario hospital insurance premiums, the 

highest in Canada. Opposition furious. Ontario job plan criticized as useless. Allowance for disabled branded 

election gimmick. There is more, 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

343 

 

Mr. Speaker. OHIP increase hardest on those who pay direct. Mining firms get a break. It is no joke — 

booze, beer, wine taxes, too, are up on April Fool’s Day. Mr. Speaker, Darcy toasts the budget with 50-cent 

drinks. Those are from March 8, Toronto Star. With a disaster like that, the Ontario Finance Minister should 

have bread and water, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The headlines don’t say it all. The Ontario budget document which cost $75,000 to print says more. There 

was a $5 million saving for insurance companies; a $5 million saving for the mining companies. They had a 

couple of goodies: sales tax on storm windows were cut; retail sales tax on hotel rooms were cut. And what 

did the Tory minister say of that move? I quote: "It will provide a total tax saving for travellers and tourists 

in Ontario of about $30 million." Further on he says, and I quote: 

 

The price of a room has already been effectively reduced by 15 per cent since November, 1976 for our 

American friends and by as much as 40 per cent for visitors from Japan and western Europe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he had to raise medicare premiums to $528 per year so that he could give the mining and 

insurance companies a $10 million tax break. Then he had to raise hospital premiums to $528 a year for 

Ontario people to give Americans a $30 million tax break — a fine example of more Tory management 

coming home to roost, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What was the reaction, Mr. Speaker, to our Budget? The Star Phoenix, which is no friend of this political 

party, the Phoenix on March 7 reported the Budget extensively. Listen to the headlines, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Residents to Receive $85 Cut in Taxes; (an $85 dollar cut for every man, woman and child in this province, 

Mr. Speaker.) Saskatchewan Income Tax is Cut 17 Per Cent; Property Improvement Grants up 14 Per Cent; 

(lower taxes for everyone, Mr. Speaker.) Municipal Grants to Rise 45 Per Cent; (our local government, our 

RMs and our school boards — increased grants.) Small Firms to Receive a Tax Break; (Our small 

businessmen, Mr. Speaker.) Farm Research Funding Up $1.1 Million (There is still a list of them, Mr. 

Speaker.) Auto Insurance Rates to Decrease; (due to our Safety ‘77 Program). Programs Expected to Create 

5,800 New Jobs; Mortgage Help Planned; Power Rates to be Frozen; Health Budget Jumps 32 Million 

Dollars; Anti-Crime Program Proposed. 

 

There’s more, Mr. Speaker, and it’s all in the same view. It is entirely opposite to the reaction of the Ontario 

Tory budget. 

 

Senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, in this province receive a budget of $100 million compared to 1971, $.5 

million, Mr. Speaker. We are able to expand our capital budget for highways by 18 per cent in this province 

and a thoroughly needed share of that is being done in the Redberry constituency. There is expansion on 

housing programs for senior citizens, for farmers and for low rental income. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if I were the Conservative Leader, I would have done exactly as he has in the face 

of this Budget. He’s going into hiding and well he should be. He was crafty, though. Instead of standing up 

and making a fool of himself again in replying to the Budget, he looked around for the most likely burr under 

his saddle and he took the member for Thunder Creek. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

344 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BANDA:— So the member of Thunder Creek, (Mr. Thatcher) looking for some more punishment, 

jumped into the breach. We weren’t disappointed, Mr. Speaker. The member for Thunder Creek replied in a 

fashion that was indistinguishable from that of his leader. His arithmetic was wrong and his double talk was 

strong. We spent too much but we are not spending enough. No one in this House was fooled, nor do I think 

the public will be fooled. 

 

The examples of Tory Manitoba and Tory Ontario stand as reminders of what can happen when the 

economic strategy, made famous by the Thatcher government, is in full force. The people of Saskatchewan 

remember seven years ago and they can see what’s happening in these two provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Budget they can see that good economic planning and wise resource management and 

taxation policies can yield good results for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to be able to take more time but because of the sincere opposition over there 

cutting into our time, I want to say that because this is a people’s Budget, I am proud to support it and I will 

be supporting the motion. 

 

MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair):— Mr. Speaker, never in the seven years of the Blakeney 

government have I been more proud and pleased to participate in a Budget Debate on behalf of the 

constituents of Saskatoon Mayfair. I am sure that I share this pride and pleasure with the Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Smishek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada today is enduring very difficult times. Our dollar has reached a new low in the money 

markets of the world and is in serious trouble. Unemployment has never been higher since those devastating 

1930s that many of you will remember. We are still suffering from severe inflationary pressures which cause 

hardship and anxiety for many whose incomes, savings and pensions are being rapidly eroded by ever 

increasing consumer prices. While our country is in real trouble, this Budget provides some sensible 

direction for all of Canada. It provides for greater confidence. It provides for and indicates stability in the 

Saskatchewan economy. It indicates a faith in the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The last seven years, Mr. Speaker, have been good for Saskatchewan. When other governments are talking 

about restraints and leaving our troubles up to the private sector who have failed so miserably in the past, the 

government of Saskatchewan is doing something concrete to help people with the high cost of living; to help 

our economy; to create more jobs; to provide tax relief for many and to expand programs for those who are 

in need. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan support the new deal 1975, as I am sure they will support this Budget. This 

Budget, Mr. Speaker, could be called a "Good Deal 1978". 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK:— While the costs of health care and education are increasing at alarming rates each year, we 

have been able to reduce income tax by 5 per cent; put $34 million back into the pockets of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and removed 22,000 people from the income tax rolls. While reducing taxes we have been able to 

expand and improve many worthwhile programs already in operation. I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to programs 

such 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

345 

 

as the Senior Citizens Home Repair Program and the Senior Citizens Income Plan Supplement and to 

increase grants to the property owner, for example, from $200 per home to $230 per home and business from 

$220 to $250. 

 

In 1971 we spent $150 million on health care. In 1978, Mr. Speaker, $435 million on health care. Although 

improvements could be made in our health care, the people of Saskatchewan know, that all things 

considered, we have away and above the best health delivery system in all of North America. While I say 

that, Mr. Speaker, I want to warn the people of Saskatchewan, I want to suggest to them, that this health care 

program that we enjoy today is not guaranteed. There is absolutely no guarantee that the health care program 

that we have today will be here tomorrow if there is ever a change of government in this province. I say this, 

Mr. Speaker, because I know that had we not pursued the tax policy we did on resources, we would not have 

had the moneys to pay these high costs. 

 

We have been able to maintain these programs and I want to emphasize and reiterate that no other provincial 

government across Canada has been able to accomplish tax decreases, develop new programs and expand 

and improve old programs during periods of rapidly rising costs in every government department. You might 

ask, why is this possible in Saskatchewan? It is possible because this government believes in deriving 

revenue from resources like oil and potash instead of taxing people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK:— It is possible because through prudent budgeting over the years we have developed surpluses 

in good years to help us in more difficult ones. 

 

In Conservative Ontario they have spent $6 billion more than they have taken in from taxes in the last five 

years — $6 billion of borrowed money. That, Mr. Speaker, is fiscal responsibility, Conservative Ontario 

style. Now, as you know, what would have happened to this tax revenue from resources, had the 

Conservatives been in power during these years in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, all those millions of dollars 

that we are deriving from our resources, under any other government — Liberal or Conservative — would 

have been substantially lost. This money would have quietly slipped across the line to the United States and 

other parts of the world and we wouldn’t have ever seen it again. The taxpayer of Saskatchewan would be 

paying a good deal more in taxes and receiving a good deal less in benefits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK:— In say, Mr. Speaker, that is a bad deal. I am pleased and delighted that this Budget contains 

funds for the development of the Saskatchewan River Bank in Saskatoon. This development was part of our 

program in the 1975 election and I am pleased that we will be doing something to enhance the already 

intrinsic beauty of the Saskatchewan River Bank in the city of Saskatoon. Grants to the city of Saskatoon 

have increased $2 million to over $7 million, compared to a few $100 thousand in 1971 under the Liberals. 

Certainly these grants, along with increased grants to school boards, should allow the mill rate to stay exactly 

where it is, in spite of increased costs of operating schools in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

I was happy to note in the Budget that there will be no increase in the cost of electrical power and that 

natural gas rate increases will be limited to 8 per cent. Between 60 per 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

346 

 

cent and 70 per cent of our natural gas is imported from Alberta. A few years ago we were paying about 20 

cents per 1,000 cubic feet of natural gas from Alberta. We are now paying $1.20 per 1,000 cubic feet; a 600 

per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, a 600 per cent increase that has been very difficult for many of our users to 

pay. 

 

Certainly the $5 increase to the Senior Citizen Income Supplement will provide some tangible help in this 

regard for senior people, to help them pay their utility bills. But this is not enough and I believe that the 

federal government, whose responsibility it is to provide pensions for senior citizens, has been completely 

irresponsible in not providing an adequate income for our senior people, the people that built this province; 

the people hurt the most by the rising costs of food and fuel and housing; the people whose savings have 

been virtually lost because of uncontrolled inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget also increased from $500 to $650 available under the Senior Citizens Home Repair 

Program and people who have applied for a grant under this program five years ago, may apply again for a 

grant. This program has certainly been of real benefit to many senior people who wish to remain in their own 

homes. For senior people who are unable to remain in their own homes because of ill health or other reasons, 

there will be an 8 per cent increase in grants for special care homes to alleviate the cost in this area. 

 

I know that MLAs from Saskatoon and across the province will be pushing for renter’s grants and I know 

that Paul Mostoway and myself will be working very hard for a grant for renters. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the matter of what the Conservatives would do if 

they were in power. I would like to indicate to you and to the people of Saskatchewan what the provincial 

Conservatives have been saying and what the Conservatives that are in power in other provinces, have been 

doing. In Conservative Ontario, for example, when their Budget came down on March 7, health premiums in 

that province were raised to $528 per family per year. Mr. Speaker, this is a tax on health care — a tax on 

health care that people of Saskatchewan do not have to pay because in Saskatchewan we don’t have any 

health care premiums. The tragedy of this situation in Ontario is that while health care premiums went up to 

$528 per family per year, they reduced the tax on mining by $5 million. Ontario gets more tax revenue from 

health premiums on people than it gets from the total corporate income tax. This is the situation in a highly 

industrialized province where there are large numbers of corporations operating and I warn the people of 

Saskatchewan that a health care program as we know it, is not guaranteed. There is no guarantee that it will 

continue in the future as it has in the past. Conservative Ontario has already indicated what would happen. If 

the Conservatives were elected to power here what would happen? Faced with rising costs of health care as 

we are today, they would not only be charging premiums of $528 per year as they are charging in 

Conservative Ontario but they would long ago have put in deterrent fees as the old Liberals did in 1967. 

 

The Conservative member for Swift Current, Mr. Ham, has already said that he supports deterrent fees. Mr. 

Roy Bailey, the Conservative member for Rosetown-Elrose says that people wouldn’t mind paying $10 a day 

to stay in the hospital. These comments, Mr. Speaker, are on the record. They cannot be refuted. These 

Conservatives across the way, Mr. Speaker, would tax the sick as the Liberals did in 1967. They would tax 

the sick — the people least able to pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Conservatives cannot be trusted with the management of our natural resources and 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

347 

 

they certainly cannot be trusted with the health care of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now in Saskatchewan we have a very low rate of unemployment compared with other provinces in Canada. 

Why is this so? Why do Conservative Ontario, Conservative Manitoba and Social Credit British Columbia 

and the Maritimes have such high unemployment? One of the reasons is that their philosophy is to rely 

entirely on the private sector to create jobs. As a matter of fact at the Premiers’ Conference held recently in 

Ottawa, premier after premier with the exception of our own Allan Blakeney said, leave it up to the private 

sector — leave it up to the private sector they said, and the problem will just go away; it will disintegrate and 

go away. Many people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, remember the 1930's and the then Conservative Prime 

Minister Bennett who said we should leave it up to the private sector and for 10 long years the people of this 

country languished with high unemployment and no jobs available — young people riding the rods 

desperately begging for jobs but none were to be found. 

 

The economy virtually stood still for 10 long years. It stood still while many people languished in austere 

poverty. They languished in poverty while Conservative Prime Minister Bennett said leave it up to the 

private sector. The problem was finally solved by the World War II. 

 

Many people in Saskatchewan remember those days of the 1930's; they remember them very well but I want 

to remind some of those who don’t remember that they should review their history and draw some lessons 

from the 1930's. They should draw some lessons from history because the premiers of this country are saying 

exactly the same thing now as they did in the 1930's — leave it up entirely to the private sector and our 

problems will just go away. I just don’t believe that is good enough, Mr. Speaker. It is not good enough and 

it just won’t wash with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK:— In our province we are taking concrete steps to ensure that our low level of unemployment 

stays at a very low level. In this Budget 4,400 new jobs will be created as a result of stepped-up capital 

works projects in Crown corporations; projects to build hospitals; projects to build recreational facilities and 

projects for university facilities, oil development and power development and so on. These are concrete steps 

that will put people to work and create employment. 

 

As Premier Blakeney said at the Prime Ministers’ Conference, ‘jobs today and energy tomorrow’ and I 

believe that he is right. If only the other provinces would follow suit; if only the federal Liberals and 

Conservatives would learn from history which I know is a futile hope, Mr. Speaker, because they will never 

change. The international corporations to whom they owe their heart and soul will not allow them to change. 

 

There are other incentives in this Budget to keep our economy buoyant — small business assistance. 

Property income tax rate for small businesses has been reduced from 12 per cent to 11 per cent; four new 

programs have been started to assist small businesses to develop including a Main Street Improvement 

Program and an Industry Technical Assistance Program. The Youth Employment Service funding will be 

increased to $1.2 million; $500,000 is earmarked for helping high school students gain employment. 

Funding for the Employment Support Program will be increased 72 per cent reflecting the government’s 

desire to see people working rather than being on welfare. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

348 

 

Mr. Speaker, on every front while other provinces are cutting back, while other provinces have high 

unemployment, Saskatchewan is forging ahead — forging ahead on all fronts. I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan will support this Budget now and in the next election. 

 

The opposition opposes this Budget, Mr. Speaker. I oppose the opposition and support the people. I support 

this Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to take part 

in this Budget Debate. I want to say that which has been said I think many times over, not only inside this 

Chamber but outside the Chamber, and that is that the Minister of Finance, the member for Regina North 

East, Mr. Smishek, probably has brought down one of the best budgets that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have seen in a long time. I believe that the Minister of Finance has displayed a degree of 

diligence and hard work. He does this, I think, characteristically, no matter what portfolio he tackles, but 

certainly in this area a hard amount of work and diligence has gone into what I think has produced probably 

one of the best budgets in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. All of us congratulate him for that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, that in itself is a very significant accomplishment because these are very 

difficult times in which to govern a province. These are very difficult times in which to govern a country 

indeed. I suppose, a country of ours, one that’s made up of a confederation — 10 provinces, problem of 

inflation, problems of unemployment (perhaps no problem of unemployment here in Saskatchewan), 

problems of national unity, questions of western alienation — which I think sometimes we tend to overlook 

in the debate about Canada, thinking only in terms of the French Canadian language problem, and that’s a 

serious one to be sure — but one where we need to look at a broader horizon in terms of western alienation. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, these are very difficult times — inflation, unemployment, national unity, a number of 

other problems. I know, some will say that under the NDP here in Saskatchewan we have the lowest 

unemployment in Canada and things are going well. We don’t need to worry. Some will say the French 

Quebec problem, that’s a Quebec problem. We don’t need to worry. I don’t agree, Mr. Speaker. These are 

times which demand perhaps a higher degree of leadership, both within the province of Saskatchewan and 

the Dominion of Canada than we’ve ever had up to now — leadership which has its eye on the problems, 

both as a nation, leadership which has its eye on the problems of a province making sure that there’s an 

orderly development in job creation, opportunities and a sharing of the wealth and a redistribution of income 

and opportunity for all if this country is going to survive. This is not a time when people take the question of 

the leadership and somehow dismiss it as not being an important aspect of political process. Mr. Speaker, 

leadership in Canada today and in Saskatchewan is probably more important than it has ever been in a long 

time, especially if this country is to remain united. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we in Saskatchewan are fortunate not only to have a good Budget today but we’re 

fortunate to have leadership, leadership for the province’s future, leadership to tackle the problems of 

Canada for tomorrow under Premier Blakeney and his leadership in this province. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

349 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— You know, there has been a lot of talk in the last two and one-half years, since the 

1975 provincial election, about leadership. There has been a lot of talk about elections. Sometimes you run a 

speculative story somewhere talking about all of the Conservatives coming up a little bit and the Liberals are 

falling down a bit, or quite a bit depending on whether you are listening to a Troy or an NDP and sometimes 

the Liberals are going up and the Conservatives are falling off. You hear that around Saskatchewan. No 

doubt about it, Mr. Speaker. But you know what you also hear invariably as you go around the province? 

You also hear invariably that there is no other alternative to the leadership of Premier Blakeney when you 

compare the leadership of the other parties. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Somebody will express a momentary concern about seat belts, or a momentary 

concern about lotteries, or a momentary concern about the kinds of problems that government runs into day 

in and day out and in the end result when you ask him, yes that’s true, but who would you want to have as 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the answer is almost to a man — Premier Blakeney. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Little wonder, Mr. Speaker, a man of integrity, a man of unparalleled intelligence, a 

man of experience, 16 years or so in the House, governing, during the good times and during the difficult 

times, Mr. Speaker. Sure, he makes his mistakes. Sure, we as government make our mistakes. We are going 

to make mistakes as government, but the fact of the matter, that in Premier Blakeney this province is very 

fortunate in not only having an NDP Budget of this nature, but a leadership which is virtually in some ways 

unparalleled with respect to its vision for this province and this country, especially when you dare to 

compare it with the alternatives. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— What would we have if we had the Liberal Leader and the Liberal Party as Premier of 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, we would have a party which has fallen into disrepute and almost every part of Canada 

except a little hold, the stronghold in Quebec in trying to hold onto some other areas. We have here a party 

which is a party of big business, a party of large business and large corporations, a party which does not seek 

to mold public opinion, does not seek to lead, to define the problems of this province and to work at the 

solution of those problems . . . (interjection) . . . No, but a party that follows public opinion almost on a daily 

basis. I think we are entitled to say in Saskatchewan that if we had a Liberal leadership in government ever in 

this province — and I don’t think we need to worry about that for a few years — we would be able to judge 

by the kinds of things that they did when they had the chance to govern. My colleague from Saskatoon who 

just took his chair before I rose talked about deterrent fees; that’s a government that acted; that’s a Liberal 

Party. A government that enacted Bill 2 shut down collective bargaining. Oh, I know that SGEA and the 

boys are striking now and having a dispute with the government. You talk to them and no matter how angry 

they may be with the collective bargaining process at least one thing they know under Premier Blakeney 

they’ve got the right to strike at a collective bargaining operation and under Liberals that was taken 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

350 

 

away. 

 

Closing down small hospitals, giving away resources — the member for Indian Head knows all about giving 

away resources, the Hatton Gas Fields, the sodium sulphate deal, one cent a ton for sodium at SEDCO, one 

cent a ton, now something in the neighborhood of $25 to $30 a ton, Mr. Speaker — giving away the 

resources; it’s all in the record. 

 

Oh, I know, the press says you keep on talking about those old times and some of the Liberal boys try and 

say that’s another government you know, not our government. Mr. Speaker, this is a Liberal Party; this is a 

Liberal leadership, inexperienced, dedicated to a dogmatic conviction to private enterprise, locked together 

with the large corporations of our country, one that follows public opinion and has not the courageous 

strength to stand up to the issues that meet the province. No, Mr. Speaker, no matter how much they may be 

concerned about this government of today, the New Democratic Party government, no matter how much they 

may be concerned, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member for Indian Head, they will never take the Liberal 

leadership back in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— I guess there is something nice about having a true and sure and safe and reliable, 

predictable old friend, like you have in the old Liberal Party here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we also have a new predictable or unpredictable friend. Well, I’m not so sure you can 

call it new or even call it so much a friend in Saskatchewan politics. It’s an old party. Saskatchewan people 

much older than I remember the PCs in the 1930s. Oh, yes, the member for Saskatoon Eastview and member 

for Moosomin they laugh because that’s their only self defense in this House from the embarrassment that 

they know the PC Party brought on the history of the province of Saskatchewan. They remember those four 

years as if somehow this is a different crowd, as if somehow this is a different situation. Mr. Speaker, I say 

that it is not. I say that it is not. In the 1930s we had a political movement in this province that was involved 

in probably the most insidious kind of a campaign against many of our people in the province of 

Saskatchewan that history has ever seen. And I ask the member from Eastview, the Liberal member, to deny 

that. Today, now, we see this old predictable friend rising again the PCs, not rising as much as some of the 

boys think that it’s rising .. the same kind of tactics of name calling. Yes, name calling the Leader of the 

Conservative Party is in his chair. He wasn’t here yesterday or the day before yesterday when the member for 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake made the speech about communism in Cuba and the fact that a few of the members 

on this side went on a Cuban holiday. I’ve got to warn everybody in Saskatchewan don’t go on a Cuban 

holiday or you are going to incur the wrath of the PC Party who somehow in its worst demagoguery will call 

out McCarthy-like tactics to bring this matter to an end. That’s the same tactic that was there in the 1930s. 

That’s the same kind of a tactic, with a different label and a different kind of an enemy, as in the 1930s. 

 

What about the member sitting behind you who talks about filthy hospitals? He doesn’t care if he maligns 

every hospital in the province of Saskatchewan. He’ll sit there for two days and will never, never, withdraw 

the remark. The same kind of a tactic. Never withdraw the remark. We passed a resolution in this House, 

ultimately to bring it in. Or the Ranch Ehrlo situation — a blanket accusation that Ranch Ehrlo — or I tell 

you, as the 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

351 

 

Leader of the Conservative Party during the course of the Moore Inquiry into the Prince Albert riot, your 

blanket accusation that the Department of Social Services was interfering in the administration of justice. 

Judge Moore himself, Mr. Speaker, specifically denied that as an allegation in the report. Specifically I refer 

you to page 43 of the report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the trend that we are seeing. In government we don’t have in recent history how to judge 

the PC government. I think we can go back and some of the old timers will go back to the 1930s but I want 

to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and you don’t have to go back to the 1930s but the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

remembers. All right, you can go to other provinces. You can take a look at what happens when a PC 

government takes office in Manitoba. This is exactly what’s going to happen here, Mr. Speaker, if it takes 

place. Yes, the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) is making a signal to me that the throats will be 

slit. The Conservative member for Sutherland says that the throats will be slit and never truer words or 

actions were spoken than by that member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. That is exactly what they did, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, in Manitoba they bring in their corporation friends — Conrad Riley, President of Dominion Tanners 

Limited, President of Canadian Indemnity Limited, Director of Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce and 

Monarch Life. He is going to have a task force on what to do with civil servants’ jobs. He is aided by one 

William McCats, who is on the Great West Life Assurance payroll. He is going to help the minister do what 

they are going to have to do with the slitting of the throats that the member for Sutherland says, slitting of 

the throats of the civil servants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in four months of government in Manitoba, the PCs have fired three deputy ministers, before 

they even took office they fired them. They fired six deputy ministers by January 21, fired 78 planning 

people, laid off 700 people and now the Winnipeg Tribune says that what they are going to do is that they are 

going to lay off — here it is: "Massive government job cuts may affect 1,200 more workers." That is what 

they are going to do. No, the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland wasn’t joking when he showed me the sign 

of slitting the throat, Mr. Speaker. That is exactly what they did in Manitoba, the PCs. That is exactly what 

they would do to the civil servants if they ever should be elected in Saskatchewan and we must not allow 

them to get away with it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— But, Mr. Speaker, the thing that I find the most amazing is the touch of arrogance of a 

party which is still by and large a third party. They can argue that whatever way they want, but even if they 

are the second party it doesn’t matter — a touch of arrogance. The kind of the intimidation aspect of the 

Conservative Party, which bothers many of thoughtful Saskatchewan people. The Leader of the Conservative 

Party laughs at this. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there is something which has not received much coverage anywhere in the province 

of Saskatchewan, but I think should. The headline in the story in the Prince Albert Daily Herald is dated 

January 26, 1978 and it says, ‘An Explanation is Needed’. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to give a little background on this. On or about December 16, 1977 the Prince 

Albert Daily Herald ran a story that the PC Leader, Mr. Dick Collver, had offered his resignation to the PC 

executive caucus. The story in the Prince Albert Daily Herald had quoted the source of the story as being a 

provincial PC executive member, 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

352 

 

I don’t know if it’s right or if it is wrong. I don’t care whether he is going to resign or he is not going to 

resign; that is not the issue or the point of my story. The point is, the story was run by the Prince Albert Daly 

Herald in those terms. According to this article on January 26, somebody called the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald. I think the best way to do this, Mr. Speaker, is to read the report. Quote: 

 

The day after publication of the story the Herald received a telephone call from a person identifying 

himself as Paul Rousseau. It is understood Rousseau is the party’s finance chairman, who will be seeking a 

nomination in the next provincial election. The caller demanded that the Herald identify its source of the 

information on the Collver story. When the demand was not met, what followed on the caller’s part might 

best be described as threatening and abusive. ‘We will get you and we will get the Herald’, the caller told 

the managing editor. The conversation was terminated almost immediately. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER:— On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— What is the point of order? 

 

MR. COLLVER:— The Attorney General is reading into the record only a portion of the article and is not 

reading the last part of it . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! The member does not have a point of order. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, I am glad that the Leader of the Conservative Party rose because I am 

not finished from quoting from this article, because, Mr. Speaker, there are some funny things which took 

place in this article, as well, not the least of which is and the story says as follows: 

 

The incident was related to local PC candidate Dick Spencer, who raised it with a Conservative member 

for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Garnet Wipf. Sometime later Wipf contacted the Herald to inform us that he 

had personally chewed out Rousseau, up one side and down the other. 

 

Now, I think, Mr. Speaker, that apart from the fact that that would be an interesting episode to watch, the 

member for Prince Albert chewing up and down Mr. Rousseau, or chewing up and down the Leader of the 

Conservative Party. Nevertheless the story says that, but the Leader of the Conservative Party just denied that 

when he got up and interjected. Why would Mr. Wipf chew out Mr. Rousseau if he is innocent in this 

operation? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the records also go on to indicate that a telephone call can be traced from the PC caucus 

on the date in question, in the time in question, made to the Prince Albert Herald, and I can only conclude 

the way the Prince Albert Daily Herald story concludes, quote: 

 

Because of the implications for the news gathering process for this newspaper and others in the media, we 

believe it is absolutely essential for the Conservatives to provide some definite answers. This can only be 

achieved by an admission from Mr. Rousseau that he did place the call, or 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

353 

 

some conclusive proof that he did not place the call. 

 

Neither has come forward. Now, my point is this, Mr. Speaker, my point is this. I have been in politics for 10 

years and I have never gotten into the situation where someone gets up to say, ‘we will get you and we will 

get the Herald’. And what I don’t understand is the silence of the news media in the other parts of the 

province of Saskatchewan, because if a party does this in opposition, Mr. Speaker, I shudder to think what 

they would do if they should ever become a government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— But make no mistake about that, Mr. Speaker; leadership, the province knows about; 

integrity, the province knows about; experience, the province knows about; intelligence, the province knows 

about, Mr. Speaker, and in the end result I have no doubt whatsoever that if the election is called in June, 

1978 or June, 1979 Premier Blakeney is going to be returned once again as the Premier of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Now, Mr. Speaker, in a very few hours from now, in fact in a very few moments from 

now, this Legislature is going to be voting on this Budget. The Liberals and the Conservatives are going to 

be voting against it, they said so. They’ll be voting against 5.5 point decrease in the personal income tax. 

They will be voting against per cent decrease in the corporate income tax. These friends of business are 

voting against the assistance to business. They are going to be voting against $30 cut per dependent child. 

They’re going to be voting against a reduction in an increase in the Property Improvement Grant and they’re 

going to be voting against a revenue sharing formula which the president of the SARM, Mr. Boyd Anderson, 

himself described as an historic first for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, there are many other provisions in this Budget which have been 

discussed at length but I say, Mr. Speaker, that that vote against the Budget by the Liberals and the PCs is a 

vote against Saskatchewan’s future and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re going 

to be doing when they vote against the Budget. I want to say to the province of Saskatchewan with that kind 

of leadership displayed, why couldn’t they acknowledge — I think that everybody says this is an excellent 

Budget and I think that is universally admitted; there are some problems and difficulties, no doubt, but it’s an 

excellent Budget — why couldn’t they have exhibited leadership, have gotten up and said, yes we support 

you Premier Blakeney in this Budget but they didn’t. They stood up to oppose it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make one point. It’s been made and it has to be made over again. You can’t give tax 

cuts unless you get revenue from somewhere. Mr. Speaker, we’re getting that revenue from our resource 

policies and oil and potash and mining and the Liberals and the Conservatives oppose us in getting that 

revenue from the oil and potash and the mining interests in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you 

can’t give a tax cut of some $50 million or more without getting revenue elsewhere. You can’t give more 

and you can’t create jobs and you can’t get involved in this kind of an expansionist Budget unless you get 

money somewhere. Mr. Speaker, the policy of this government is to get the money from the multinational 

resource companies of this province. There’s no doubt about that. We hold the position, we hold the point of 

view 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

354 

 

that the resources of this province belong to the owners of that resource. That’s you, that’s me, the people of 

this province. That’s who gets it, not your friends in the oil industry or the potash industry. You, me, all of 

us, we get the revenue. That’s our cornerstone. We say there’s got to be a fair return. We’ve to make sure 

that we are trustees in the management of those resources that we conserve for future generations. We’ve got 

to make sure that we develop it within a sense to the environment. 

 

Those are public interest considerations in the development of natural resources which is the cornerstone of 

any government which is doing a job on behalf of its people, Mr. Speaker. But making a good speech, 

doesn’t bring it about. Saying that you believe in the same things doesn’t bring it about. PCs and Liberals 

who say that they also believe in managing the resources for the interest of the people don’t do a thing for us 

by just simply stating it. It takes action, Mr. Speaker, it takes commitment, it takes legislative action by a 

government to guarantee that the windfall profits of resources come so that we can give these benefits to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— That means the member for Saskatoon Eastview on Bill 42 that you opposed; that 

means to the member for Saskatoon Eastview on Bill 47 that you opposed; that means a potash reserves tax 

which said that the more money the potash companies make, it’s only fair that they should be paying more to 

the Treasury, a tax system which you opposed and the Tories oppose it. That means a resource policy 

involving potash and the Potash Corporation and Sask Oil. That means an active role guaranteeing that the 

resources are managed in the interests of the people of the province of Saskatchewan not in the interest of 

Imperial Oil and your big business friends. That’s what it means. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Half truths. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina South says half truth — It is not a half truth. He 

has opposed consistently every one of these moves that this government has taken with respect to resources 

in the province. You too have consistently opposed it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can’t get into the kind of situation where you present a budget like the Budget presented by 

the Minister of Finance unless you get money from somewhere. That money’s got to come from the resource 

companies. You can’t be like the PCs who say they’re going to sell back the Potash Corporation to their 50 

friends. You can’t be like the PCs who are going to set up this club of the fabulous 50s, who are going to run 

the Potash Corporation. That, Mr. Speaker, is putting it in the PC Manitoba league. That means cutting back 

on government expenditures and stimulating the private sector — that’s what it means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it — when the PCS and the Liberals talk about restraint in government, 

they’re talking about the Ontario budget. They’re talking about a budget which taxes people on health care 

premiums and cuts back on taxes for the mining companies. That’s restraint and stimulation for the private 

industry. When the PCs say that that’s what they’re going to do if they ever should be in power, Mr. Speaker, 

I guarantee the province of Saskatchewan that we will see either deterrent fees or a reimposition of health 

and medicare premiums implemented in their very first year in office if they should be there or as the 

Minister of Finance says from both. They’ve 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

355 

 

already intimated they’re going to do it. The member for Rosetown-Elrose who I, personally, think is a very 

strong asset to the PC caucus — I think he is one of the very few there who can articulate a strong position 

for the PCs. He’s one of the very few there who has at least a philosophy in this area. He’s one of the very 

few who can take part in debate, hit hard and get hit hard and not take it personally, unlike the other guys in 

the caucus over there. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that he did say, on behalf of his Legislative 

Assembly group, that as far as he was concerned many people in the province would be willing to pay $10 a 

day for a hospital bed. That’s what the PCs said. In 1974, the PCs talked about hospital treatment generally. 

They talked about a plan to discourage needless medical treatment, by the candidate in Yorkton, one Dr. Ivan 

Dock(?). I won’t read the details of it but that’s . . . 

 

MR. WIPF:— Read it. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Well I shall. The Conservative invites me to do that — I will do it. I’m going to read 

a portion, quote: "Dr. Dock (?) told the meeting they favored some measure to curtail needless medical 

treatment. He praised former Liberal Premier Ross Thatcher’s bravery in introducing the utilization fee" end 

of quote. How can you rebut any further the leader of the Conservative Party? Everything is a misquote to 

him. They didn’t say that. I know that the member for Thunder Creek, who is the son of the late Premier, has 

strong views on deterrent fees. I’m sure that if that ever should come about when a PC government is formed 

in Saskatchewan — I think it a likely prospect — that that would be the way that restraint in government and 

stimulation of the private enterprise operation would be involved with respect to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying, for the people of Saskatchewan and to the members of this 

House, that come this next election, whenever it comes, there are going to be two central issues: leadership 

and ability to lead this province and assist in this great ongoing resource debate and also it is going to be the 

issue of resource policy, who gets the benefit from our resources and how are they distributed. We know the 

PCs are opposed to the Potash Corporation and the Liberals are opposed to Bill 42 and so forth across the 

line. Those are the two issues you’re going to have to answer, boys. You know, some of the press people say 

to me, Mr. Speaker, this Budget is so good surely you’re going to have a June election in 1978. Well I want 

to tell the member for Eastview that I, for one, would welcome a June election in 1978, provincially, on this 

Budget and on the leadership issue. I tell you, Mr. Speaker — I tell the member for Eastview, your misery is 

still going to have to last a little while longer in this Legislature, because if you think this Budget was a good 

budget, I would like to have one more year to show the people just one more time what resource policy can 

do, in the next budget, Mr. Speaker, upon which the election will be fought. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, when the battle lines are drawn, when the battle lines on leadership and ability are drawn, 

when the battle lines on resource policy are drawn, when the people of Saskatchewan have to choose 

between Blakeney and the other two, when the people of Saskatchewan have to choose between resource 

policies which distribute the benefits for them or give the benefits to the multinationals, I have no doubt 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to vote like I’m going to vote today on this Budget, and that’s Yes to 

Blakeney and the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, it’s rather interesting. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

356 

 

The Attorney General has one job or one task for the NDP. He never, ever, has the responsibility of talking 

any common sense economically in the Budget. He doesn’t have any responsibility to talk about anything, 

his job is to rally the troops. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve found that the NDP have been so downcast. In the Fall Session it was almost like 

you could throw the bomb, but they were so downcast and so depressed they have watched their support 

dwindle and erode to such a degree that now a year and one-half away from a budget they are coming in with 

what they think an election Budget. We have to try and bolster up the troops. We’ve got to try and save the 

downfall. Today we get the Attorney General coming in and you know what he did? He said, my God, the 

NDP is in such a bad position in Saskatchewan that we had better not talk about the socialists, we had better 

not talk about the NDP, we had better try and talk about Blakeney. 

 

You remember how they did in Manitoba? When they were on their way down, straight down, they ran the 

whole election campaign on Ed Schreyer. They tried to save the NDP in Manitoba by running it on Ed 

Schreyer. They tried to save the NDP in British Columbia by running it on Bill Barrett, but I am going to tell 

the Attorney General, you are going to have to run the next election on the NDP philosophy and people are 

not going to buy that kind of nonsense that you tried to display today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— You know, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. MESSER:— What did the Liberals do . . . ? 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— The Liberals have not been a factor there, Jack. You just watch what we are going 

to do. We are going to have an opportunity to test it federally in about two or three months in the province of 

Saskatchewan. You just watch. I also ask you, you watch what happens to the NDP in Saskatchewan in this 

federal election. You just watch. They may be annihilated, the NDP federally, and not only that, you boys 

know it. You are very scared. Federally you are scared. Why didn’t the member for Regina Victoria (Mr. 

Baker) run federally? Why he was all ready to go. He was the great NDP white hope in Regina Victoria, or 

in Regina East or wherever it is. Then he decided, oh, oh — well Henry only goes with a winner and he 

knew he was a loser and he knows the NDP is losing and that’s why he didn’t go and that’s why the Attorney 

General today got up and he gave that great speech. 

 

I am going to tell you something. Stick together, stick together? Listen, I am going to tell you something. 

You watch us stick together because we are going to elect the member for Regina South and we are going to 

elect the member for Regina Wascana. You see if we stick together, Mr. Member for Tisdale (Mr. Messer). 

Don’t ever kid yourself. You just watch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is rather interesting. The NDP is really proud of this Budget. You know it was rather 

interesting the last couple of days. The last couple of days they were beginning to get a little sensitive. Like 

the Minister of Social Services and the Minister of Education — they are a little — oh, 16 cent Rolfes. I am 

going to tell you, the member for Eastview (Mr. Penner) is going to send up that nickname to the city of 

Saskatoon. Remember six buck Adam? Well 16 cents Rolfes is going to have a lot harder time trying to 

explain that to the city of Saskatoon. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

357 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you something. A close analysis of this Budget 

makes it rather interesting. First of all they start off by saying they are so proud of the tax reductions. Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to say to you today that there were no tax reductions. There were tax shifts and increases 

in taxes because what they did they took the taxes off the income — 5 percentage points, and you know what 

they did? They put it on the Crown corporations and public utilities and I say that the average family in the 

province of Saskatchewan is paying $150 more for power, for gas, for telephone, for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance. $150 more for a family and in some cases much more, Mr. Speaker. They turn 

around and say, why we have reduced the tax burden. I am saying, Mr. Speaker, it was a very clever and 

subtle tax shift. A shift, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately, when you shift the taxes from the income of people 

where it is progressive, the more you get, the more you pay, you turn around and you put it on the old and the 

sick and the halt and the people on fixed incomes, it is a very regressive way of trying to gain the revenues 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, let’s have a look. 

 

Saskatchewan Power rates went up 102 per cent. You don’t have to ask the people of Saskatchewan. They 

are aware of this. Every month they get the power bill they know how much the power went up. Fifty-seven 

per cent in electricity in the last two years, Mr. Speaker. Telephones up another 8 per cent. The minister in 

his Budget speech gets up and he says, we are going to hold the line on power rates — no increases. That’s 

an insult to the intelligence of the Saskatchewan people because he just finished raising them . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— . . . in September, Mr. Speaker, by something like 21 per cent. No, Mr. Speaker, I 

am saying that there were no tax reductions in this Budget. It was a tax shift and a vicious, vicious tax shift, 

the most vicious that we have seen any government do. 

 

Let’s talk about even the camouflage and I say camouflage tax shifts that they brought in because they were 

camouflaged. What did this government do? They said, we reduced the income tax 5 percentage points. Mr. 

Speaker, it is only a couple of years ago that the provincial income tax in the province of Saskatchewan was 

40 per cent of the federal, 40 per cent. This year it was 58.5 per cent, the highest in the Dominion of Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, not only did they have to, the professional man and the person on middle income and the 

person that was in business was leading the province of Saskatchewan in droves because of the high income 

tax rate. And then they turn around . . . (interjection) . . . yes, the only person and I’ll tell you I am going to 

talk about job creation and population in a minute as well. You want to talk at the acid test. That’s right, the 

old acid test. 

 

Then we turn around, Mr. Speaker, and then you talk about the corporation tax. They reduced it 1 per cent. 

First of all they increased it to such an extent that it was one of the highest in Canada. They made war on 

business; they’ve insulted every businessman that’s associated with any kind of a national or international 

corporation and now because nobody will develop business, we haven’t got a new potash mine in this 

province since the NDP came into power; we’ve got no oil exploration since they came 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

358 

 

into power; we’ve got no pulp and wood development in the free enterprise since the NDP came into power. 

We have not got one single major industry of any type or description in the province of Saskatchewan since 

the NDP got into power in this good province. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, no, there were no tax reductions and then they turn around and they give their little goodies 

away, their little goodies. They raised the utility costs of senior citizens $150 and they give them 16 cents a 

day, 16 cents a day, Mr. Speaker. That is insult or adding insult to injury and the senior citizens in this 

province will soon know exactly what $5 is worth and they know exactly, also, what their power utilities and 

bill are. No, Mr. Speaker, it’s an insult to suggest that the NDP lowered taxes in 1977. What they did is they 

shifted the burden from a progressive form of taxation to a regressive form on the public utilities of 

Saskatchewan and you only have to look at the Budget. The $15 million — imagine, Mr. Speaker, raising 

taxes, raising power rates and telephone rates when they’re making such a large profit. They’re taking a 

dividend into the general revenues to make up for the taxes that they’re supposed to have reduced. Mr. 

Speaker, I say to you that that is not a tax reduction, it is a tax shift and one of the most vicious camouflage 

jobs that’s ever been done to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, the other part of the Budget, what do they talk about? They talk about 

natural resources. And you know this Budget Speech, Mr. Speaker, is just filled with plaudits and 

compliments about resource management and the great rate resource policy of the NDP government. Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to tell you, that the resource policy of the NDP has been an absolute failure and I’m 

going to ask anybody to assess it. Mr. Speaker, normally when we talk about a resource or a policy, we look 

at it from these measurements. We look at it, first of all, for the idea of growth. We look at it from the idea 

of jobs. We look at it from the viewpoint of investment and then we sometimes look at it at the revenue. The 

only thing that the NDP can say about resources is that they’re getting more revenue and I should say they’re 

getting more revenue, so is Alberta, so is Uruguay, so is Russia. The oil revenues in the province of 

Saskatchewan are no different; they’ve all shot up. They’ve shot up in the north; they’ve shot up in Alaska; 

they’ve shot up in Alberta; they’ve shot up in Venezuela; they’ve shot up in the OPEC countries, of course 

they have. In fact, Saskatchewan isn’t even getting the world price and the other countries are getting more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second thing — let’s look at the other measurements. As far as the number of jobs in the oil 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan, there are not only fewer, they’ve almost been reduced to nothing. 

And the reason is that it’s the kind of bungling that they do in the resource management for an example. The 

oil industry today in Saskatchewan is at a complete standstill, Mr. Speaker, because the Minister of Mineral 

Resources hasn’t even published the tax rates under Bill 47. No, Mr. Speaker, the resource policy in oil 

development is a complete failure, look at it in potash. In 1971 there were six mines in the province of 

Saskatchewan that were ready to expand their production, major expansions, Mr. Speaker, multimillion 

dollar expansions. Since the NDP has taken over not one of those companies has expanded, there has not 

been one new potash mine. Under the Liberals there were nine. There hasn’t been one new potash mine; 

there hasn’t been any oil exploration. The production is down from about 88 thousand barrels to about 60 

thousand barrels. Mr. Speaker, the number of wells drilled, the number of people employed, the number of 

wages that are paid, in every measurement that you can think of, Mr. Speaker, the NDP resource policy is an 

absolute failure with the exception of revenues that they had absolutely nothing to do 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

359 

 

with. And I tell the Minister of Finance and he says, oh, but we set the tax rates. Oh, yes they did set the tax 

rates, of course they did. Every province — Alberta is getting billions of dollars from resources. Do you 

know what happened? They were so greedy and so vicious that the very thing that they are proud of — and 

listen to the Attorney General. They get so excited and nervous whenever you talk about resources. They 

were so vicious that that’s the responsibility and the reason that your resource management is such an 

absolute failure. 

 

What about jobs? If you can believe you could invest $350 million to $400 million in industries in the 

province of Saskatchewan and have less jobs when you finish investing the $350 million than you did before 

you invested it, and they say to me that that is a successful program. I say it is an absolute failure and they 

should be ashamed of themselves, Mr. Speaker. If that is what you call resource management. No, Mr. 

Speaker, there is just no question when you turn around and take the resource policy of the NDP 

government, it has been an absolute failure with the one exception of revenues and let nobody, nobody argue 

that, that the revenues from resources in every country and in every province in Canada and in every country 

in the world have gone up at almost the same level as they have in the province of Saskatchewan or more, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me give you another example. We phoned Saskatchewan Power Corporation, today, and we said what do 

you pay in Saskatchewan for an MCF of gas? They said, 35 cents is the cost approximately for SPC wells to 

produce it. What do you pay to the private producer? Anywhere from 15 to 35 cents per MCF. What do you 

charge the senior citizen? $2.56 and do you know what you charge the IPSCO and the potash mines — 

$1.43. You call that a return to the Saskatchewan people. All I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that resource policy 

is a very, very bad failure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one more thing. This particular Budget was also supposed to 

generate jobs and all kinds of jobs. Well I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, it needs to start to generate 

some jobs, because since 1971, in the Statistics Canada, in 1976 here is what it is. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— . . . jobs. 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— Yes, but I don’t believe your figures. I am talking about your job figures. Here is the 

population — in 1971 there were 926,242 people; in 1976 there are 921,323. There were 5,000 less people 

after five years of government in the province of Saskatchewan. I just went out and got the latest Statistic 

Canada. The last Statistic Canada estimated in April 1977 — 935,000, an increase of 9,000 people — and 

that is only an estimate. Up until 1976 you were 5,000 less than you were in 1971 and we had the lowest 

unemployment in Canada in 1971. Where are all these jobs? The only jobs that have been created in the 

province of Saskatchewan are civil service jobs, those are the only kind. Where are the rest of them? Where 

did you get the people? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will give you another example. They talk about construction and here it is. The 

employment and earnings in the non-agricultural industries in Saskatchewan, it says in 1968, based on the 

index 100, there was 131.7, 31 per cent over a 100 based from 1960 from your Budget Speech, on page 51. 

Look it up. And then you turn around and in 1969 — 106. Do you know how many people are working in 

the construction industry — 2.4 per cent more than there were in 1961. That is the kind of success that you 

want. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

360 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, this Budget is a very clever camouflage, cosmetic. The Liberal financial critic called it ‘the 

lipstick and rouge approach’ because it covered over all the evils. It flowered things up and made it look as 

though there were some tax reductions, when in reality it was a vicious tax shift. It turned around and made 

it look like the resources in the province of Saskatchewan were expanding and growing and developing, but 

instead of that, it was the exact opposite. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, I say that the resource management policy is a dead policy. I say that this Budget is a bad 

Budget. It does not reduce taxes, instead it shifts the taxes in a very regressive form to people who can’t 

afford to pay them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the Budget but I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, due to the fact that 

previously negotiations had been arranged between all three parties to enable me to have 30 or 35 minutes to 

speak and since we don’t have that length of time, I wonder if it would be possible, by leave of the 

Assembly, if we stopped the clock at 4:12? Would that be possible? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! 

 

The rules about the conclusion of this debate are very specific and are laid out in the rule book and I hesitate 

to even put that question to the Assembly, that I ask their leave to suspend that rule because it should apply 

to everybody and everybody is aware of it. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to hear the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) just now 

speak about the Liberals sticking together in the forthcoming federal election. We are convinced that they 

will stick together and that they will undoubtedly enact the same kinds of policies provincially that they 

enact federally and I am sure the people of Saskatchewan will be interested to hear that that sticking together 

between the provincial Liberals and the federal Liberals and the similar kinds of policies will in fact occur. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that brings me to exactly what the Attorney General was speaking about 

today and that is leadership. This is what the province of Saskatchewan is looking for. This is what in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, the country is looking for, leadership. 

 

Now in reality, Mr. Speaker, there are two kinds of leadership or leadership towards two ends that are 

absolutely essential if we are to have the kind of society that all Canadians want to have. One is economic 

leadership. This is what the member for Indian Head-Wolseley and the Attorney General were talking about 

today — economics. They spent all their time talking about so-called economic leadership. Within the last 

few days our member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) and our member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) have 

proven beyond any reasonable doubt that the economic leadership of the present Premier, elucidated in 1972, 

is a blatant and complete and total failure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like today to talk about another kind of leadership and that’s moral 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

361 

 

leadership. Where is the moral leadership in the province of Saskatchewan? What kinds of effort does the 

present government and the present leadership make towards moral leadership? 

 

Let’s talk for a moment about the kind of innuendoes spelled out today by the Attorney General with 

reference to hospital care premiums and deterrent fees on behalf of the Liberals and Conservatives. I am 

going to table today, Mr. Speaker, an article from the Star-Phoenix dated June 7, 1973 and I will read the 

headline for the benefit of the members opposite — "Free Medical Care — Part of the PC Package". I am 

going to table another article, Mr. Speaker, dated June 9, from the Leader Post . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— What year? 

 

MR. COLLVER:— . . . same year, 1973, same year, "Smishek Health Plan Defended" and in that article 

Mr. Smishek, the then Minister for Health contended that Saskatchewan’s joint premium is quite reasonable. 

He continued to defend the joint premium for the next four or five months and then the NDP introduced the 

elimination of the medicare premium which we suggested and advocated back in June of 1973. He then 

introduced it as the PC Party had suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question or doubt that our party’s stand is that we do not believe in deterrent fees in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it is we who have called for the elimination of the 

unfair premium on the pharmacare program. That’s the kind of attack that the present government is using, 

the kind of twisted words, twisted logic. Where is the moral leadership there? Where is the moral leadership 

for the province of Saskatchewan when the Premier calls to his convention recently and says that over 

124,000 in 1975 and more today, over 124,000 individuals who voted Progressive Conservative are his 

enemies he said. We know who are our enemies, the Progressive Conservatives. Well I want to inform the 

members opposite and the members to my right that I don’t consider the NDP my enemies. I don’t consider 

the Liberals my enemies. In the province of Saskatchewan we may differ in our views but we are not 

enemies and any leader who tries to lead his party by calling attention to other people as enemies means that 

he is dividing those people. Where then is the moral leadership? Where is the leadership there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Then we want to talk, Mr. Speaker, for just a moment about the logic that we have seen in this Budget 

Debate from the members across the floor. Here is the logic, Mr. Speaker. The moral leadership that they are 

trying to provide, Mr. Speaker, is by appealing to people’s prejudice, by saying that one PC believes this, 

therefore all PCs believe this; one PC in this part of the country believes this, therefore all PCs believe this, 

tarring PCs with what one Progressive Conservative believes. Now, Mr. Speaker, let me suggest to you that 

that is the same kind of prejudice that was exhibited in the United States as it relates to blacks — one black 

is wrong therefore all blacks are wrong. That’s the kind of moral leadership that is being provided by this 

government. What kind of threats do they use, Mr. Speaker, when the message of their kind of leadership is 

being brought to the people? It is the same as the Russian spy episode in Ottawa. Here we have Russian spies 

right across the country travelling with impunity. 

 

The federal government was warned of these Russian spies two years ago and although they did absolutely 

nothing until the heat became so hot that they had to get rid of a few of them. Then, Mr. Speaker, because 

one member of the Progressive Conservatives in Ottawa starts bringing to the attention of the government 

that there are other Russian spies in our midst, that they are travelling with impunity in our country and that 

they 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

362 

 

should be looked at by the federal government, whom do they attack, Mr. Speaker? They attack the 

messenger; they don’t attack the message. 

 

Let me tell you members opposite and members to my right that shooting the messenger doesn’t change the 

message and the message is that the people of this country want moral leadership as well as your so-called 

economic leadership. For example, Mr. Speaker, during the recent debate on Bill 47 we see the present 

government having made a mistake, the decision of the Supreme Court calling attention to their mistake, Mr. 

Speaker. Who do they attack? Do they look inwardly and say we made a mistake and we are going to change 

it? No they don’t. The members across attacked the Supreme Court of Canada, an institution that should not 

be attacked in our democracy. Why, Mr. Speaker, why? Because they believe, Mr. Speaker, that their kinds 

of moral judgments that attacking those institutions will call people away; will take people away from the 

real facts. The fact of the matter is that that kind of moral leadership is unacceptable to the people of 

Saskatchewan. They want leadership that is in fact, going to lead the country towards proper morals and not 

the kind that you elucidate. 

 

Let me give you another example. Here we are treated by the members of the press corps in our country to a 

very interesting situation in which the chief law enforcement official in our country blatantly breaks the law, 

admits to it and that is supposed to be O.K. But because he blatantly breaks the law, it’s all right and that’s 

moral. That is not moral leadership. 

 

We find the Solicitor General in Canada before that, Mr. Speaker, also charged with the same responsibility 

of upholding the laws of our land and in all conscience he stated, Mr. Speaker, that he couldn’t support the 

law of the land at the time — the death penalty; he couldn’t support it but he was charged with the 

responsibility. He could have resigned but he did not. He could have resigned as a Cabinet Minister and as 

an independent individual Member of Parliament he could have stood up for what he believed, but he did 

not. He stayed on as the chief law enforcement official and said he could not support the law of the land of 

that day. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not moral leadership. 

 

The same kind of judgement is being made by our members of the present government in Saskatchewan. We 

see a situation in this province, Mr. Speaker, where hardened criminals are walking the streets of our 

communities, endangering the lives of a great many people. What is the reaction of the Department of Social 

Service? What is the reaction of the Attorney General’s department? To mollycoddle the prisoners with 

special privileges — cross country skiing, canoeing, fishing trips and other such country club activities, 

when what the people are looking for is for you to uphold the law and see that hardened criminals do not 

walk the streets of our communities; so that people in our communities can feel safe. 

 

Will we see, as raised by the member for Regina South, a situation in this province where all three parties 

broke the law in the Pelly by-election? All three parties — some of them broke the law technically, some of 

them broke the law blatantly but nevertheless no charges were laid. Where is the moral leadership in that 

kind of approach to your problems? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— (Inaudible interjection) 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

363 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, we asked for that. Charge all three, Mr. Speaker, charge all three. At the 

federal level . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Oh, here we go. Not the charges but the other ones, that’s right, Mr. Speaker, let’s 

investigate the Progressive Conservatives. That’s the approach of the present Attorney General. We suggest 

. . . heckling, inaudible. Furthermore, on this moral leadership, what do we hear from the Attorney General 

of this province? Three years ago in 1975, here’s what we hear from him — Conflict of Interest legislation 

will be introduced in this Legislature, he said. Individual MLAs will be called to account for their personal 

holdings. Individual MLAs! Where is the conflict of interest legislation — not been introduced. Why? We 

suspect, perhaps, because there are MLAs on this side of the House and perhaps on that, that have 

organizations dealing with the government of Saskatchewan. We say let’s have conflict of interest legislation 

brought into play, now. That would provide the kind of moral leadership that this government is looking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn, briefly, to another point and that point is with regard to moral leadership — 

telling the truth at election time. In the federal level we find the federal government, the Liberal Party that 

goes to the people, we find them going to the people totally against wage and price controls completely 

against it. As a matter of fact they ran the election on that. I remember the little secretary hiding and freezing 

behind the block of ice, freezing behind them and yet within six months of that election, introducing wage 

and price controls exactly what they ran against. 

 

We see exactly the same kind of thing, the NDP presenting legislation to this House on the nationalization of 

the potash mines when absolutely no mention was made of it prior to the provincial election of 1975. 

Absolutely no mention was made of the suggestion that they were going to nationalize the potash industry. 

The people of Saskatchewan had no opportunity to vote on that. They had no opportunity to vote on whether 

or not your government stood for compulsory seat belt legislation. No opportunity whatsoever. It wasn’t part 

of your program and, therefore, you implemented it after you were in office — serious matters, matters 

which affect the future of the province of Saskatchewan. The billions of dollars that your government is 

wasting on these resource developments, your so-called resource developments, when in fact all you get is a 

piece of paper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the moral leadership in Saskatchewan? Where is the moral leadership in Canada? 

 

We see continued social confrontation. I suggest to you and the member for Saskatoon Buena Vista (Mr. 

Rolfes) that you talk about morals. The people don’t buy that kind of an attack, Mr. Minister. The people 

don’t buy that kind of unsubstantiated attack. They want the kind of leadership that will approach the 

problems that we have in our country and they approach the problems with moral decisions, not immoral 

presentations as were made this afternoon by the Attorney General of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Continued confrontation with civil servants, with oil industry, with the potash industry, with every possible 

citizen in the province of Saskatchewan. And then we see, Mr. Speaker, a group of farmers who are fed up 

with the kind of return that they are getting from their produce. Fed up with the kind of taxation increases 

that have gone on in the province of Saskatchewan; fed up with the kind of power bills they are paying. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

364 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for power bills says the people are happy with the power bills they are 

paying, and the gas bills they are paying. I suggest to the minister that he get a little closer to the people as 

anyone elected in a democracy is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn to one other point on moral leadership, because this is an example, Mr. Speaker, of 

what is occurring in our province. We see the continued advocacy of abnormal aberration-type sexual 

behavior on television; the continued promotion of homosexuality on TV; the continued increase of violence 

and sexual news in movies and this NDP government does nothing, nothing, to encourage, Mr. Speaker, 

does nothing to encourage the kind of moral integrity that the province of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan expect from their government officials. For example, Mr. Speaker, there is no sales tax on 

Playboy, no sales tax on Penthouse, there is no sales tax on other kinds of pornographic publications but in 

Saskatchewan there is a sales tax on crayons, there is a sales tax on coloring books for children, there is a 

sales tax on diapers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard the Attorney General earlier today refer to the 1930s, before I was born and before 

most of the members on this side of the House were born. Members on his side of the House I know were 

born before the 1930s, most of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present Budget of Saskatchewan doesn’t come to grips or even come close to approaching 

the kind of moral leadership that is essential in the province of Saskatchewan. The government continues, as 

was suggested by one member of the government in the press yesterday; they think it is a good idea to have 

the kind of lotteries for bonds as suggested by a member from the Liberal Party. They go on supporting the 

Western Lottery and the Express and they may take away the rights of individual recreation boards and local 

community organizations to hold lotteries for their community organizations and then they say at the same 

time, we support small town Saskatchewan, we support our rural brothers. Well, I say to the member 

opposite and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is time in the province Saskatchewan where we have moral 

leadership, where we have leadership that did not play with the truth, where we have leadership that did not 

have the kind of budget excesses that occur in the present Budget, the kind of thing alluded to by the member 

for Indian Head-Wolseley where they suggested they were going to have tax cuts and a lovely budget for the 

people of Saskatchewan and then jack up the prices for gas, jack up the prices for power... 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I must now under Rule 14(3) to give the Minister of Finance 20 minutes to conclude the 

debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance):— Mr. Speaker, I was indeed surprised at the closing 

remarks of the Leader of the Conservative Party. Mr. Speaker, may I say that the hon. member for Nipawin 

should perhaps be the last person in this Legislature to lecture us on morality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, I remind him, is breaking the law, The Election Act moral? And you have 

done it. It’s Is that moral? Mr. Speaker, is it moral, is it political morality to have the political leader 

embroiled in all kinds of law suits, is that the standard for morality? Mr. Speaker, I don’t think any of us 

want that kind of lecturing on 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

365 

 

that kind of morality. Mr. Speaker, he is the last person to be talking about morality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am reminded last year — he talks about telling the truth — remember the Conservatives 

making allegations about filthy hospitals? They said they would bring in substantiation, that they will bring 

in revelations that they will prove and document their case. Was that telling the truth? We are still waiting. Is 

that honesty? Is that political honesty? Is that the standard that the PCs have? Obviously that is. Telling 

untruths is politically moral for the PCs. That’s his standard, Mr. Speaker. That’s not our standard. 

 

Now, I am also reminded just a few days ago about the Conservative Leader, the Leader being quoted in the 

Prince Albert Herald as saying that he suspected that this Budget was phony. He didn’t have any actual 

evidence yet but his people were checking. More revelations were promised, more information, more 

documentation. Mr. Speaker, I am still waiting with bated breath. No evidence, is that political morality, Mr. 

Speaker? That’s his standard; that’s not our standard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I rise to close this Budget Debate, my heart really goes in sympathy to the members sitting 

opposite. They have had some difficulty in trying to mount an effective criticism and that is understandable. 

Because this is, Mr. Speaker, an historic Budget. One that, point by point, tackles the problems of our 

economy. One that, point by point, meets the real needs of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, the Prince 

Albert Herald said on March 8th, "It is a difficult Budget to fault, one of the best Budgets in years." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can feel for the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) and for the Conservative Leader 

when he scrambles to confuse this House with Alice-in-Wonderland computations to some fanciful figures 

he calls the ‘real’ deficit. When you’re a critic you have to criticize and when you can’t criticize the facts, 

Mr. Speaker, you have to set up your own straw men to attack but when he is playing this game, Mr. 

Speaker, I recommend to the member for Thunder Creek not to take advice from his leader. Last year the 

member for Thunder Creek talked about what the real deficit would be in the current fiscal year. And he 

repeatedly predicted that we would reach $100 million. He was wrong, Mr. Speaker. The deficit this year 

appeared in the Estimates at $40 million and it will be no more than $40 million. 

 

The Conservative financial critic is just as wrong in 1978 as they were a year before. Mr. Speaker, I was 

fascinated by the Conservatives telling us how they would manage the Budget, that they would lower the 

personal income tax, not to 53, but to 50 points. They would reduce the sales tax; they would reduce the 

gasoline tax; they would increase spending on agriculture; they would put more money into revenue sharing. 

Mr. Speaker, they would at the same time balance the Budget. How, Mr. Speaker? Well, that was just a little 

unclear. 

 

We can find some clues by looking at the Conservative governments in other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

Ontario also brought in the budget on March 7th. Ontario is one of those provinces extolled by 

Conservatives opposite because its personal income tax rate is lower than Saskatchewan’s. And what did 

Ontario do, Mr. Speaker? Well, one of the things they did was to raise its family health care premium to 

$528 a year, $528 a year in Ontario, zero in Saskatchewan. Now this approach would give the Conservatives 

a great deal of room to move in Saskatchewan because the Ontario health premium applied to Saskatchewan 

would yield $156 million, equivalent to 25 Saskatchewan income tax points, Mr. Speaker. We could reduce 

the income tax rate, not to 50 points, 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

366 

 

Mr. Speaker, but to 28 points, much lower than Ontario’s, much lower than Alberta’s, which also levies 

health care premiums of $169 a year per family. Alberta’s personal income tax rate is 38 per cent. Ours 

could be 28, Mr. Speaker, with Ontario’s health premiums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am indebted to the Globe and Mail for publishing a little table the other day. It compares, by 

province, the combined impact of federal and provincial income taxes plus health premiums for a family of 

four earning $10,000 a year. For Saskatchewan, they used our old tax rate which I have revised to reflect the 

reduced income tax rate in this Budget. 

 

Let me tell you what it shows, Mr. Speaker. The Ontario family pays $1,034. The Alberta family pays $640. 

The Saskatchewan family will pay $326, Mr. Speaker. Taking these three taxes, Saskatchewan stands the 

lowest in Canada for a family in this tax bracket — one-third the level of Ontario, one-half the level of 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when listening to Tories one should observe not what they say but what 

they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn briefly now to the Liberal financial critic, the member for Saskatoon Eastview. He 

had predictions about the deficit too, Mr. Speaker. He had done a little research, he said. He’d gone back to 

1973 and what did he find? He found that every year this government overestimated its revenues by an 

average of 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Applying that to the new Budget, he predicted the deficit would be 

$210 million. Now, that was rather startling to me, Mr. Speaker, because I and my predecessors have on 

occasion been chided by our cabinet colleagues for underestimating revenue so we did some checking and 

we found that the Liberal’s financial critic had indeed gone to the right sources for his information. Indeed 

he went to the right place but, unfortunately, he was comparing the wrong figures, Mr. Speaker. When he 

looked at the revenue estimate for ‘75-‘76, for example, he compared it with the actual revenue for ‘74-

‘75 — the year before, Mr. Speaker, and he did that straight through, all the way. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that for the whole period we have consistently underestimated revenue by an 

average of 6 per cent, which blows the Liberal case sky high. The Liberal financial critic needs either a new 

pair of glasses or a new researcher, or perhaps both. As I said at the outset, however, members opposite had a 

tough job. I don’t fault them for trying but it would be just a lot more constructive if they’d get their facts 

straight. 

 

One of the facts is that this is the right Budget, at the right time, in the right place. Mr. Speaker, this Budget 

has struck a note of consensus among the people of this province, which I have not seen before in my 

political lifetime and that consensus covers a very broad spectrum. 

 

Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Speaker — The President of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce said, 

according to the Leader Post, "It is a Budget that is very attractive to business. We can live with it." The 

President of the Regina Chamber of Commerce: "It is an expansion Budget that is needed to stimulate the 

economy and is a Budget of which I approve." The Regina Downtown Business Association, according to its 

president, thinks the Budget is a good one. 

 

Working people, Mr. Speaker: A spokesman for the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor, according to the 

Leader Post, said, directions indicated by the Budget are the kind the province needs. 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

367 

 

A spokesman for the Consumers’ Association of Canada, Saskatchewan Chapter, called it a healthy move for 

the economy. 

 

Senior Citizens’ Organizations said that this Budget will make a lot of difference to the senior citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a person like the Chairman of the Saskatchewan Committee of the Canadian Bankers’ 

Association, reacting to the provincial government’s latest Budget, said it aims in the right direction and 

could not be criticized. The areas that needed looking after were looked after, he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Times Herald, in March 8 headlines, said, Local Reactions Positive. Mr. 

Speaker, a sample of editorial comment: The Star Phoenix called it a smart Budget and ended its editorial 

with what is certainly a compliment, coming from that source — If Premier Blakeney suddenly called an 

election, he would be a tough man to beat. 

 

The Leader Post said, on March 8: Yesterday’s provincial Budget is a sound one that skilfully deploys 

established revenue available to finance an array of government spending initiatives, little room for serious 

criticism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Montreal Gazette looked at the Ontario Budget and at Saskatchewan’s and had this to say 

on March 10th: Those Finance Ministers who have not yet presented their ‘78-‘79 Budgets should follow the 

model of Saskatchewan — not Ontario. 

 

The list goes on. Not everyone was entirely happy, of course, and here I include some SUMA spokesmen. 

I’ll have more on that item in a moment but of all the comments I have seen, Mr. Speaker, the only negative 

ones have come from members opposite trying to sharpen their very dull political axes. 

 

As I have said, this is a consensus Budget, broadly responsive to the needs of people in all walks of life. 

How did we achieve it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I submit it is because this government has listened to the people, consulted interested groups and sought the 

advice of people across this province in a way which few other governments have. The Cabinet has travelled 

outside Regina, talked to people, listened to briefs, seeing conditions first-hand more than any other Cabinet 

in the history of this province. Committees of Cabinet met almost every week with Saskatchewan groups to 

discuss their problems and their proposals. Our MLAs play a very important part in this process. Their 

constituents know that they can reach a minister or the Cabinet and deal with problems. They know that our 

progress is part of the decision-making process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the government that listens and this is the government that responds, Mr. Speaker. For example, the 

Municipal Association, particularly SUMA, have been urging the revenue sharing idea for a long time. It was 

a difficult program to develop because it was new and there was no blueprint to follow. My colleague, the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs and his department, worked long and closely with SUMA and SARM to 

develop the idea to a suitable starting point and we launched it this year. I said in my Budget Speech, that 

this is phase one; that we would make this very significant start and that we would continue to consult with 

both the urban and rural municipalities and that we 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

368 

 

would move forward with phase two next year. We are committed to perfect the plan over time, Mr. 

Speaker. I think most mayors, reeves and councillors in Saskatchewan accept and believe in that 

commitment. I have talked to a few over the past week and their response has been very positive, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let me share with you a portion of a letter which I received last week from the Mayor of Saskatoon, because 

I think it typifies the response to the approach we have tried to take in working with people to solve 

problems. Let me quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

With respect to the Budget and the question of revenue sharing, I want to state, without abandoning my 

well-publicized opinion on maintaining a separate police grant, that the start that has been made in terms 

of dollars available, is a most generous one. Doubtless, this program is one that will be in the evaluation 

state for some time. We will continue to make suggestions on changes leading to a final form and I want to 

assure you that these will be done in the spirit of co-operation. Once more, please accept my gratitude for 

your initiative and my best wishes. Signed, Cliff Wright. 

 

I have Mr. Wright’s permission to quote this letter, Mr. Speaker. I thank His Worship for this letter because I 

think it reflects the working attitude between the provincial government and the municipalities which has 

made a start on revenue sharing possible and which will guarantee the future of this precedent-setting plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude my remarks, I want to say just a few words about one aspect of our job 

creation strategy for which I have particular responsibility, and that is housing. Construction of new housing 

in Saskatchewan over the past several years has maintained a remarkable level. We had a record year in 1976 

with over 13,100 starts in housing. But almost equally remarkable, Mr. Speaker, was the performance of the 

housing sector in 1977 with over 12,800 starts, Mr. Speaker. There is no doubt that the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation has played a key role in these accomplishments. We have increased housing capital 

spending in the coming year to $52 million to accomplish several objectives: 

 

1. to maintain a healthy construction industry; 

 

2. to provide jobs; 

 

3. to make good housing affordable for all people; 

 

4. to assure that the housing supply keeps ahead of demand so we can complete the job of removing rent 

controls. 

 

I am confident we will accomplish those objectives with this Budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I 

brought down the Budget eight days ago I said that few assignments during my public life have given me as 

much satisfaction. Nothing that has been said in this debate has diminished that satisfaction. Indeed, I am, if 

anything, more confident that the plan for the year ahead which is laid out in this Budget is what this 

province wants and is what this province needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, for those opposite the moment of truth has arrived. They 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

369 

 

have heard the people of this province and they’ve heard the way they’ve responded in a positive way, they 

are overwhelmingly in support of this Budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I asked those opposite where do 

they stand. I challenge them to vote against this Budget, Mr. Speaker. If they do, they will be voting against 

the personal income tax cuts. They will be voting against the corporate income tax cut for small business. 

They will be voting against revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. They will be voting against jobs for the 

unemployed. They will be voting against for more benefits for senior citizens. They will be voting against 

more jobs and more housing for young people, Mr. Speaker. If they dare to vote against these things, they 

will be voting against the wishes and the interests of their own constituents. I say to them, stand up and be 

counted. Mr. Speaker, this is a responsive and responsible Budget presented by a good government. I will 

support the Budget. I will oppose the amendment. I will support the motion. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 19 

 

Malone McMillan Birkbeck 

Merchant Nelson (As-Gr) Ham 

MacDonald Clifford Berntson 

Penner Collver Lane (Sa-Su) 

Cameron Bailey Wipf 

Anderson Lane (Qu’Ap) Katzman 

Stodalka   

 

NAYS — 30 

 

Blakeney Kowalchuk Faris 

Pepper MacMurchy Rolfes 

Thibault Mostoway Tchorzewski 

Bowerman Banda Shillington 

Smishek Kaeding Skoberg 

Romanow Kwasnica Allen 

Messer Dyck Koskie 

Snyder McNeill Johnson 

Byers MacAuley Thompson 

Baker Feschuk Lusney 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 30 

 

Blakeney Kowalchuk Faris 

Pepper MacMurchy Rolfes 

Thibault Mostoway Tchorzewski 

Bowerman Banda Shillington 

Smishek Kaeding Skoberg 

 



 

March 15, 1978 

 

370 

 

 

Romanow Kwasnica Allen 

Messer Dyck Koskie 

Snyder McNeill Johnson 

Byers MacAuley Thompson 

Baker Feschuk Lusney 

 

NAYS — 19 

 

Malone McMillan Birkbeck 

Merchant Nelson (As-Gr) Ham 

MacDonald Clifford Berntson 

Penner Collver Lane (Sa-Su) 

Cameron Bailey Wipf 

Anderson Lane (Qu’Ap) Stodalka 

Katzman   

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — AGRICULTURE — Subvote 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN:— Order, turn to page 12, Agriculture, subvote 1. 

 

Subvote 1 agreed. 

 

The Committee reported progress and asked leave to sit again. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 o‘clock p.m. 


