


























































Hansard: April 07, 1978


1183 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 
April 7, 1978 

 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce 40 Grade Nine students from 
the Gull Lake School to the members of this Assembly. They're accompanied by their teachers, Mr. and Mrs. 
Arnold Weston and Mr. and Mrs. Gerry Elmslie as well as Mrs. Inga Meister. We realize that you must have 
been up early this morning in order to be in Regina here at 10:00 o'clock this morning. The member for 
Morse, Mr. Wiebe, also wishes to welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. We hope you enjoy your stay in 
Regina and we also hope that you enjoy the experience of being in the Legislature this morning during the 
question period and we'll be seeing you shortly after the question period. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

The Expansion of SEDCO Activities 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I will address my question to the Premier as soon as he 
is able to hear. This morning the Minister of Industry announced a reorganization of SEDCO and I would 
like to quote, if I may, briefly, very briefly from the press release that was issued. First of all, he says that the 
main purpose of the reorganization is to gear up for the needs of the 1980's when Saskatchewan's 
requirements for risk capital are expected to increase in scale and range, and Mr. Overend goes on to say 
this: 
 

In response to the latter priority, (that's the need for risk capital,) SEDCO plans to establish a 
Regina branch that will be located at but distinct from its headquarters operations. Further 
branches will be established as regional needs and volumes of business warrant. 

 
My question is this, when did your government make the decision to compete directly with the credit union 
movement and with Northlands Bank whose stated aim is to do precisely the same thing? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Our government had made no such decision. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. When the decision was made to expand the 
operations of SEDCO to utilize, to come to SEDCO first, and now to open branches, not only in Regina but 
throughout Saskatchewan, would that not suggest to you that that is an expansion of SEDCO operations into 
the exact areas covered by the credit union movement and the Northlands Bank? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It would strike me that is an expansion in activities. It would strike me that it is not 
in the area, exactly covered by the credit unions or Northland Bank, if indeed, we are now competing with 
the 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1184 
 

credit unions since the Industrial Development Fund was established in 1947. I think that that record of now 
more than 30 years of happy relationship between the co-operative financing agencies and the Industrial 
Development Fund and its successor, SEDCO, bears witness to the fact that the relationship was one of co-
operation and not of competition. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. When the decision was made to expand the 
operation of SEDCO into branch financing, as announced today, and when the decision was made by 
SEDCO to advertise, 'Come to us first', were those decisions discussed with either the senior officials of the 
Credit Society or with the officials of Northland Bank before the implementation of such a policy? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know with whom the board of directors of SEDCO may have 
discussed their proposals. It is certainly no function of the Cabinet of Saskatchewan to decide whether a 
Crown corporation opens a branch office in some particular part of Saskatchewan if, in the judgment of the 
board, they feel that it is in the best interests of the business, unless it represents a change of policy. I can 
detect no change of policy here with respect to SEDCO. 
 
I understand the motive of the questions of the hon. member, who was not here last night, and whose 
members got him into difficulty with the co-operative movement. I understand his efforts, his rather lame 
efforts, at extracting himself from that very difficult situation. 
 

Five per cent Reduction in Automobile Licenses 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. 
 
The question arises out of a matter that was brought to your attention yesterday, about when the effective 
date will be on the 5 per cent reduction in automobile licence insurance. Is it not a fact, Mr. Minister, that the 
effective date of this reduction, the 5 per cent reduction, will be May 31, and that those people who are 
purchasing new licences when their licences expire April 30, are not going to be taking advantage of that 
particular reduction that you announced? And it is only those car licences that come up at the end of May 
will be able to take advantage of reduction? 
 
HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I think the announcements that you 
have in your hand, and I am speaking to the Leader of the Opposition, indicate that the reductions begin in 
May. That is for renewals that are for those licence plates that expire on the 31 of May. Those licences 
become valid on the first of June. There was never, at any time, an announcement and it is not possible, 
because of the computer, to put through the number of registrations that expire at the end of April. Under the 
regulation, which is clearly stated, (I am sure the hon. member has read it), it is necessary that you renew the 
April expiry date and that you pay the old rate. If you decide to take out a new licence plate, because you 
have to be covered when you take it out, it goes back to the rate that applied during the month of April. Do 
you understand what I am saying? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No . . . (Laughter) 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. May I suggest to 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1185 
 

the minister that the news release you refer to and which I now have in my hand, clearly indicates that the 
rate reduction will come into effect May 1, and that those people whose licences expire on April 30 will be 
expecting that reduction because they will be getting a new licence effective May 1. May I suggest to the 
minister, is it not correct there will be some 125,000 motorists in Saskatchewan who will not be able to take 
advantage of this rate reduction? May I suggest to the minister as well, that your statement on March 31, 
1978, is clearly misleading and clearly deceptive, because those people feel they will be able to take 
advantage of the reduction at this point in time. 
 
MR. WHELAN: — The statement is not misleading, and I would rather think that the hon. member is trying 
to mislead the House. (Inaudible interjection). Because that is not the case. At no time did we suggest that 
the people whose motor vehicle registration or licence that expired on April 30 — at no time did we suggest 
they are going to get the reduction. Incidentally, there are not 125,000 people involved; there are about 
101,000 in the April group. It is the largest group and because it is so large, it is difficult to feed the rates 
through the computer on short notice — therefore they do not get the rate. There has never been any 
indication, never any suggestion at any time, that it was possible to do this, or that we were going to do it. 
What it says, if you look at the release very carefully, the rate reduction comes into effect May 1 and 
continues for a full 12 months. The new rate will apply progressively, to all renewals, commencing May 1. 
That is clear — that is very clear. The renewals that come up in May are not validated and are not a valid 
registration until the first day of June. But those renewals come up in May; they are May licence plates with 
a May sticker on the plate — that should be clear. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary. The statement clearly says, the rate reductions 
come into effect May 1, and may I suggest to you Mr. Minister, that a person whose licence expires on April 
30, expects it to be renewed effective May 1, and 125,000 motorists are going to expect to take advantage of 
the 5 per cent reduction. They are not going to be able to get it this year; they may get it next year about this 
time, (and one can only wonder why it has been put off until next year), but the 125,000 people have been 
deceived by this particular press release and I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that you . . . 
 

Details of CRTC Approval 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — A question to the minister in charge of CPN or the cable problems that 
we are having. In a statement on March 1 in the Leader Post, Mr. Byers, the Minister responsible for SaskTel 
indicated that a filter and converter system and equipment had to be developed and then approved by the 
CRTC. I note that in a statement of yesterday that you have ordered 10,300 converters, but do not expect 
delivery of the first 500 until May. 
 
My first question is, would you now tell this Assembly the date that the CRTC approved the converters that 
you have ordered, with whom the agreement was made and detail for us, the agreement and the specific costs 
of the converter and the company manufacturing it? 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the specific date that 
the CRTC gave approval. I do not have the name and address of the company and I do not have the specific 
price. If he wants information that is that specific (and I'm sure he would not want it unless it was specific) I 
would suggest that he put it on the order paper. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1186 
 

MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister, I believe is in fact saying, that the 
CRTC doesn't have approval and you don't have the specific information because the issue is one that has 
been confronting the Saskatchewan public for some time and a matter of great concern. 
 
Now that the CPN will be off the air today, the Attorney General of Saskatchewan said, (and I'm quoting 
again) 'There is nothing to worry about.' Now, the statement made by the Attorney General would indicate 
that you have some plans to maintain CPN. Would you tell us what your plans are to maintain CPN during 
the period it is off the air, and does it, in fact, mean that, with the loss of at least $100,000 that you have 
made a further financial commitment to CPN to keep it afloat when the wise decision would be to let CPN 
go belly up and in fact, let us take our loss and get on with establishing a cable . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 
 

Dumping of Industrial & Fluid Milk 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture and indirectly, to the 
Minister of Labour. Some very disturbing news this morning indicated that there is a real possibility of 
negotiations breaking down and affecting all of the dairy producers throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
and that possibilities of rotating strikes on Monday are a very real likelihood. 
 
Because industrial milk and fluid milk are perishable products, storage facilities by dairy producers 
throughout the province are at a maximum of two days. There is a possibility that 700,000 pounds of 
industrial milk and 1.3 million pounds of fluid milk costing in the neighborhood of $220,000 could be 
dumped on the ground each and every day that the strike exists. In view of the fact that this is a perishable 
product and that negotiations over the weekend could be very, very crucial in regard to protecting this major 
segment of our economy, can the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister of Labour use, in any way, his 
influence to try to work towards a settlement during the weekend to avoid this disastrous loss that could take 
place next week? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — If I might attempt to answer the hon. member's question, I 
think he will be aware of the fact that one of the senior industrial relations officers with the Department of 
Labour has been in contact with both of the parties. My understanding is, as a result of a report as late as 
yesterday from the senior industrial relations officer, Mr. Walters, the negotiations are continuing. He 
expressed some degree of optimism that a settlement might be reached before Monday. Our senior industrial 
relations officers do not work on a 40-hour week. Obviously, if there is anything of consequence that can be 
accomplished by meeting over the weekend, those negotiations will continue to attempt to resolve the 
problem. I think we have some reason to expect that some progress will be made over the weekend. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The comments made by the Minister of Labour, 
of course, are very encouraging. I think it is, as well, very imperative that we do everything in our effort to 
avoid any possibility of a strike. Not only do we stand a risk of losing dollars in regard to milk being dumped 
on the ground but we have a possibility of losing our federal sharing quotas to other provinces in Canada, 
should the strike go longer than a week. I wonder if the Minister of Labour could tell me who is looking after 
negotiations on behalf of the government of Saskatchewan and the 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1187 
 

Department of Labour to help alleviate some of these problems over the weekend. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Well, I indicated to you earlier that one of my senior industrial relations officers is the 
person directly involved and directly responsible for negotiations between the three trade unions involved 
and the employer organization. Every effort is being made and I am expecting that it will continue over the 
weekend. I think your question was, who is directly involved on behalf of the government or the Department 
of Labour. Mr. Sig Walter is the senior industrial relations officer who is in charge. 
 

Motor Licence Office 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — A question to the minister in charge of the motor licence office. Is the 
minister aware that there are severe service problems being encountered at the motor licence office, in 
Regina in particular, especially for those people phoning in for assistance? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, I do not think that that is an accurate assessment of the office. There are 
eight people on telephones. I understand that this is the time of the year when there are a lot of renewals, 
more renewals during the month of April than at any other time. This is the April renewal month that we are 
in now and since there are 101,000 of them that are registered during that month, this is the time when you 
would actually expect a lot of people to be calling in on the telephone. I understand that our people are there 
long hours and that they are doing a good job. They operate from a set of instructions that are provided by 
the Motor Vehicle Registration people. The problem that we had last year, when everyone was switching 
over, was much greater. 
 
The number of complaints that we are getting — I think there are bound to be complaints because it is a 
change, even a change in terminology which you probably caught in the question period. The people who are 
asking the questions here are used to the old terminology, while there is a different terminology being used. 
That has to be related to the public and I think it is something that has to be explained. Sometimes the 
complaints that are made are really complaints where the public is not accepting the new, sort of, 
terminology rather than criticism of those who are handing it out. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My sympathies to the office staff, Mr. Minister. This problem 
has been going on for longer than just the last month. Is the minister further aware that frequent phone calls, 
if the phone is able to be answered, must ring more than 20 times, many times, and usually left on hold for 
up to 15 minutes? What steps are you taking to rectify this poor service? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — We have increased the number of full-time phone people to eight, at one time it was 
four. If that is happening at the present time I would be very surprised because I haven't had a complaint like 
that. If people, as a general rule, can't get in on a telephone they phone me. I know what happened last year 
and I know what is happening this year. I don't think the two situations are comparable at all. 
 

Redevelopment Project in Weyburn 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a couple of 
inquiries to the Minister in charge of Municipal Affairs. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1188 
 

Is it a fact, Mr. Minister, that the downtown redevelopment project in Weyburn is now in your department, 
has been pulled out of Government Services where it would ordinarily be, because it had been flubbed so 
badly and that, in fact, some firings have taken place in Government Services over the matter? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the downtown development of 
Weyburn is going extremely well. I think if the hon. member inquires of the city council in Weyburn they 
will assure him of that. 
 
With respect to the management of that project, so far as this government is concerned, the management has 
been in the hands of Mr. Harold Jones for some time as the co-ordinator of the project. Mr. Jones is working 
with Government Services and is working with the Municipal Affairs Urban Division. I am very pleased 
with the progress on that project as a matter of fact. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, would the minister indicate whether it is, in fact, true that the matter 
was taken out of Government Services? If that is true, why was the rather strange transition made from 
Government Services, where it began? Would you also indicate whether it is true that two separate architects 
were hired and that you now face litigation because one or the other of the architects has been dumped off 
the job and you face the prospect of paying for both because of the stupidity of hiring both in the first place? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, it was never taken out of any place. It was placed in the hands of Mr. 
Jones, as I indicated, as the co-ordinator of the project. 
 
With respect to architects, I have no knowledge of the matter raised by the hon. member. I can inquire, but to 
my knowledge, in the area of hiring architects, I don't think we are yet that far. We are in the process of the 
purchase of land; we are in the process of negotiations with developers and with commercial people, but I 
don't think we are so far as to having architects and drawing up plans but I will look into that matter and I 
can report to the hon. member on it later. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I noted that the minister had to refer to the former minister in charge 
of the project and I wonder if you would confirm that in fact it was within the responsibility of the Minister 
of Government Services and the date when the transition was made from the ministry of Government 
Services to your ministry? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I may refer to hon. members here on matters other than the hon. 
member raised. It may have been that I was talking to the hon. member to my right here on other matters. I 
might have even been asking him the time of day. 
 
With respect to the development of the project, so far as the ministerial level it has been a project that Mr. 
Shillington, the Minister of Government Services and myself have handled right from the beginning, in 
terms of the ministerial level. 
 
Now I have forgotten . . . if I haven't answered the hon. member's question adequately . . . he latter part of the 
question he may raise it with me again. All the laughter from the other side has distracted me and I am very 
sorry for that. 
 

Driver Testing Appointments 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I too have a question for the Minister for 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1189 
 

Last Mountain-Touchwood, because I believe he is in charge of the motor license testing office. 
 
Last session I asked a question about changes in the driver testing. I understand there are still severe delivery 
problems and the procedure for driver road testing, especially in Regina. I understand that all applicants are 
required to meet at 8:30 at the test office, be assigned their time for testing and in most cases make a second 
trip back to the office. Does the minister not feel the system is causing great inconvenience to the public? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the driver testing program and the issue of the 
scheduling of tests, normally the procedure is to allow a test, as I understand it, for an hour. Sometimes, I am 
told that tests in fact do take longer than an hour, depending on the situation and therefore the scheduling 
gets out of whack. 
 
With respect to the problem of backlog, I think the Highway Traffic Board tries to monitor that and attempts 
to add additional staff when it is required, on a temporary basis in order to meet the backlog. While there 
were complaints raised with me during the summer, I think there was an attempt made to cover that off; I 
think in fact that it was covered off, and we attempt to meet it as the needs arise, usually drawing on driver 
training people who are available to us during summer periods when they are not working in the schools. 
 
MR. HAM: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not admit that a return to the 
appointment system would prevent applicants finding it necessary to make a second trip? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, I think that there could be a better system of appointments but I think I 
pointed out to the hon. member, that sometimes appointments are hard to keep in terms of time frame 
because of different situations with drivers. For instance, the testing of a school bus operator can vary 
extensively. It could be a new operator; it could be an experienced operator, and the time frame would 
obviously be different so the scheduling becomes somewhat of a different problem in light of that. 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Wascana requested 
information the other day with regard to hedging and sinking funds. Mr. Speaker, a two-hedge on the foreign 
currency loan is normally arranged at the time that the loan is arranged. The hedge involves purchasing 
foreign currency in the amount of the loan for delivery on the maturity date of the loan. This protects the 
borrower from losses as a result of foreign currency fluctuations. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, purchases of 
foreign currency in the forward market are for the most part, one year or less. Sometimes it is possible to 
arrange for forward purchases for a longer period of time but I am led to believe that this opportunity occurs 
irregularly and would not exceed five years. In any case I should point out that hedging normally involves 
some cost, a cost which is related to the term of the forward purchase. The cost of hedging, while it protects 
the borrower from exchange rate fluctuations, erodes the interest rate saving by borrowing in US dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province's US dollar obligations are long-term. For this reason it is not possible to buy US 
dollars forward to provide a hedge. As I have said previously, Mr. Speaker, the difference between the 
Canadian and US interest rates provides sufficient protection for a hedge against likely long-term 
movements in the exchange rate. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1190 
 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the sinking funds, I would like to inform the hon. member for Regina Wascana, 
that Saskatchewan has maintained a very prudent sinking fund policy to assist us in debt retirement. As of 
March 31, 1978 the par value of Saskatchewan sinking funds was approximately $215 million. For the recent 
long-term loans arranged in the United States, an amount of 1 per cent of the debentures outstanding is set 
aside each year during the term of the debentures for the purpose of retiring the debenture at maturity. A 1 
per cent annual contribution to a sinking fund compounded annually, at current rates of interest will 
accumulate to more than the principal amount of the original loan. The Saskatchewan Financing Fund policy 
provides some opportunity to protect ourselves from foreign exchange fluctuations when the US Pay 
Security are a relatively good investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to give a copy of that to the hon. member. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister whether he is not aware, and I trust that you would 
be aware, that you can hedge for one year for about .5 per cent. I suggest to the minister that the hedge that 
would have been involved, the renewal of the hedge on the $44.5 million would have cost about 1 per cent 
and would have saved the Saskatchewan taxpayer about 12 per cent. I also ask the minister whether you 
recall saying in this House in answer to questions posed by me and by the member for Thunder Creek when 
he was still a Liberal, in your response about a year ago that these loans were taken on the faith that you had 
that the dollar wouldn't decline beneath about 90 cents and that as long as it was above 90 cents it was a 
good deal. I ask you whether you would not agree that now it has been turned out to be a very bad deal and 
that the borrowings by hindsight (admittedly) but many people in the money market could see that far ahead, 
that your borrowings have been very inopportune and very bad for Saskatchewan? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Our borrowings are for a 30 year period and I am confident that over that 30 year 
period the Canadian dollar with the American dollar will probably average out at a par rate and when you 
consider the preferred interest rates that we get it from United States we will be money ahead. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, this morning I would like you, Mr. Speaker, and the 
members of the Legislature to welcome here a fine group of high school students from the Wakaw High 
School. They are led here today by their teacher, Mr. Ben Heppner and their bus drive, Mr. Ron Thompson. 
 
Wakaw is the largest town in my constituency and it's a very active place. The students started very early this 
morning to get here and I know that their experience here will be a wonderful one, a pleasant one and I also 
want to wish them a very safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.H. LANGE (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of Grade 
Eight students, 21 in number, who are situated in the Speaker's Gallery. I can hardly see them from here but I 
presume that they are up behind the clock. They are from Gladmar School. Gladmar, as you know, is a 
community situated very close to the American border, one of the southern-most communities in the 
province no doubt. 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1191 
 

It is basically an agricultural community and it is also extensively involved in the production of sodium 
sulphate. 
 
This group of students is accompanied by their principal, Mr. Tom Bowan; by chaperons, Mrs. Frischolz, 
Mrs. Melle and by their bus driver, Mr. Mack. After they visit the Legislature they are also going to visit the 
government Energy Conservation House. So we hope that they enjoy their trip to Regina, hope that they 
enjoy the proceedings of the Legislature. They are going to observe the Legislature for one half hour and 
then we are going downstairs for coffee and then we'll tell them how the Legislature really works. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I too, want to take this opportunity 
through you and other members of the House to introduce a group of students from the community of 
Windthorst on No. 16 highway, east of the city of Regina. There are 25 in number, in Grade Eleven and are 
accompanied by Mr. Brian Kunz and Miss McArthur, the chaperon. 
 
I would like to say that this community and this particular school has always followed with a keen interest 
the affairs of the Legislative Assembly. They are yearly visitors and I want to take this opportunity to wish 
them a pleasant day and I hope they enjoy the proceedings of the Legislature this morning. 
 
HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 

Points of Order on Question Period 
 
MR. MALONE: — Before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I could rise on a Point of Order coming from 
the Question Period. It is a rather minor thing, Mr. Speaker, but I draw it to your attention in any event. It is 
your policy of indicating a final supplementary — that is, before the member asks the question, you say 
'final'. I can appreciate why you do that, to put the member on notice that it is the last question he has to ask. 
I wonder about the advisability of it, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, there may be something accruing from the answer 
that the question is directed to which would open up another supplementary that if you decide what is final, 
it cuts the member off from asking the other supplementary. The second point is, that it puts the government 
members at somewhat of an advantage, in that they know they cannot be asked another question, because 
that question is the last one, thus they tend to make speeches. Indeed, the Premier waxed rather eloquently 
this morning, when he knew it was the last chance for him to respond. I put that to you, Mr. Speaker, to see 
if you would consider your position on it — perhaps not indicate final supplementary until after the answer 
has been given. 
 
Another Point of Order if I may, Mr. Speaker, draw to your attention. That is the matter of ministers having 
given notice of a question, coming in at a later date and responding to the question. I realize that's within the 
rules to do during question period, but it seems that when you have a fairly long answer like today — which 
we received from the Minister of Finance — it cuts very much into the question period time. I wonder if 
there is any possibility of having those answers given during Ministerial Statements, or if the Rules 
Committee would review that prospect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I thank the member for his comments on the two topics that he raises. With regard to 
the Speaker saying 'final', in some cases it is readily apparent to me what 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1192 
 

is going to be final, regardless of what comes up on the supplementary, because for some other reason I may 
be deciding that the member's question rather lacks urgency, or something of that nature. I am going to cut 
him off anyway, therefore I say 'final' so that they can put their best foot forward on whatever supplementary 
they are on. I do not, very often, let it go beyond two supplementaries — occasionally — but not very often. 
 
I try at all times to curb minister's appetite for making speeches, as I do to members asking questions from 
making speeches. I have trouble on both sides of the House every day on this subject. I do not know what the 
answer for it is, except to keep attempting to police the matter, and I would hope that ministers will not give 
long answers, and that members not ask debatable questions, because the one encourages the other. 
 
With regard to the answer coming in later, I think we have dealt with this before . . . and I would ask 
ministers when they are bringing answers in later to keep them brief and to the point. I let the minister go on 
on this particular answer today because it seemed like a fairly important question and he was answering two 
aspects of a rather important question, I thought, at the time it occurred. Even though it was past the time of 
question period I allowed one supplementary to attempt to tie it together. Ministers, I think, have a tendency 
(I notice this when they come in with a prepared answer) that it is usually longer than the answer they might 
give in the House. I would ask them to delete any extra verbiage in the answer. I realize today it might not 
have been possible. But on some other answers that come back prepared I realize they are a bit long. 
 
Any other points of order? 
 
MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I rose to reply to a question because I understood that when we gave leave to 
introduce students that we were returning to the question period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No. I am sorry if I give that impression. But when I ask leave to allow members to 
introduce students, the question period had already run over three minutes, over the 25 minutes, so I wasn't 
going to take any more. Perhaps the minister can bring it in next opportunity. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Faris that Bill No. 22 
An Act respecting Elementary and Secondary Education in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with interest to the 'Faris-wheel 
approach' of the government on Bill 22. I listened intently to the member to my left, the education critic for 
the PCs and was amazed by the apparent shallow level of his reasoning. But, however, that is typical of the 
members to my left and particularly that member. 
 
The member for Maple Creek (and our education critic) very eloquently stated a number of our concerns 
about the present bill. As he said, three years and three Education Ministers later, all the government has 
produced is increased polarization in 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1193 
 

trying to be flexible, in trying to be all the things to all people at all times, at one time or another at any rate, 
the government has only produced further confusion by consistently changing its position. This attitude has 
now put trustees and teachers against each other with students and parents caught in the middle. This plan of 
disregard for the educational system has ended up like a game of chess; the government has treated the 
people of Saskatchewan in their usual fashion, as pawns, only to be manipulated in whatever way possible as 
to initiate more votes in the next election. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — That's exactly it. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — The basic and fundamental concern of the education of our youth and what is best 
for them has been secondary in this ‘Faris-wheel approach’. 
 
This method of dealing with our educators has caused a sense of paranoia that has never existed to such an 
extent before. Everyone is looking over his shoulder, suspicious of wording and possible meaning of words, 
just in case certain circumstances may arise. Such an approach has caused a backward step in the relations of 
teachers and trustees. 
 
As a teacher, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned first about the education system and the overall result of the 
province's children. It would do well for everyone here to think seriously about that. 
 
The NDP have played with people's lives again in this issue and the PCs, in a very calculated and political 
way, intimated that they are friends of everyone. That's what they tried to do, Mr. Speaker. What they have 
really done is show that they are friends of no one. 
 
Let us not forget the educational system and what is best for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the best things that being in the Liberal caucus does is that we can be individuals. We 
can present our viewpoints without having to walk lock-step with the caucus decisions. I know there must be 
members of the opposite side of the House that can see some of the major problems that are in this bill but 
are unable to stand up and speak about them. 
 
The Tories in their usual fashion are in the same position. 
 
As a teacher, I want to express briefly on some of the concerns that teachers have. There are provisions for 
security for teachers with two or more years experience with the same board. The teachers want it to begin 
immediately and apply for demotions as well. This suggestion has been considered by many as tenure from 
day one but it can be equally perceived as no tenure from day one. The bill, as it presently stands, will affect 
the starting teacher, or the teacher changing positions and they do not have the same security. I feel that 
teachers and the government must seriously consider having an appeal mechanism to this binding award. 
The main problem of appeal is primarily the time limit. Such regulations can be established to ensure that an 
appeal must be completed in a short span of time. 
 
If the Legislation does not have an appeal, administrators will be leery of taking a chance with teachers who 
have potential but have troubles in their first two years and the same applies to teachers who move from one 
school district to another. It has been 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1194 
 

proven many times that teachers often get settled and know themselves and their abilities and their 
techniques only after three, four or five years of teaching. 
 
This reluctance to give the teachers the benefit of a doubt and rely on instinct that their potential will 
blossom is primarily caused by the binding arbitration. The teachers, I feel, would not mind an appeal 
mechanism as long as there was a short time limit on the decision. We feel all sectors should have the right 
to appeal a decision and we'll be presenting such an amendment. Acceptance of this amendment would 
prevent an unstable and moving teacher population that will be inevitable with new teachers and transferring 
teachers, if the present legislation remains as it is. This will be especially bad if the teacher surplus continues 
to increase. Much concern, Mr. Speaker, has been expressed about the omission of 'shall be responsible for 
the quality of the learning experience of peoples' and 'giving instructions' as opposed to 'diligently and 
faithfully teaching peoples'. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a prime example of paranoia on both sides. Teachers, as all professionals, have a 
professional responsibility and a code of ethics. As a teacher, I take for granted that I will teach diligently 
and faithfully, and will provide quality learning experiences. This polarization and suspicion of intentions 
initiated and fostered by the government causes trustees to feel teachers are trying to shirk their 
responsibilities and teachers feel that quality is too general and it looks like they are solely responsible for 
the quality learning experience. Everyone knows that the learning experience is affected by the decisions of 
the parents, administration, boards and government and in many cases, teachers have little control over the 
situation and how they feel it could be bettered. Many of the ingredients or items which affect learning 
experiences are not negotiable and therefore, it is a real problem. Teachers want the restrictions to be 
removed in collective bargaining and as in every bargaining, there are pluses and minuses to this. They feel 
that if the boards have unlimited scope, then teachers should have the right to negotiate. This suspicion and 
uncertainty again, has been perpetuated and been given additional fuel by games played by the government 
and the minister opposite. 
 
In my opinion, there is something to be said about managerial or administrative rights and bargaining. 
However, there's still a lot of room for flexibility in the present bargaining system. Simple requests, such as 
access to teacher's own files would be a start in the process. The member for Indian Head-Wolseley stated 
yesterday that there is an alarming amount of information on the government computer systems and that 
everyone should have the right to examine his or her files and correct any obvious wrong about the negative 
effect or economic and social lies. This only seems fair. Or, Mr. Speaker, what about compassionate leave? 
Such a thing should be negotiable, for such things are individual circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill is not a bowl of cherries for any group and changes are needed. What we really need, 
though, is a government and a minister that projects an attitude of genuine concern for the education system 
and the children of this province, a government and a minister that will not play around with legislation so as 
to manipulate different groups but simply have education in mind. We, unfortunately, do not have a 
government or such a minister. In the meantime, what will we do? Until such time as the member for Maple 
Creek is Education Minister, we can slow down this ferris wheel effect . . .  
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1195 
 

MISS CLIFFORD: — . . . by convening the education committee of the Assembly so that some of these 
problems can be rationally and sensibly discussed and logical compromises 
and solutions arrived at to ensure that our children are receiving the best 
education possible. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, this is one of the most important bills to be 
brought before this House, in this session, and I think I have to take the opportunity to review the comments 
made by the member that has just spoken. I, therefore, beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, I wonder if I might beg leave of the Assembly to make a brief 
announcement. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If the member will just hold for a minute I will clear the first question out of the way. 
The member has asked leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Carievale - 75th Birthday 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, there are four communities that I know of in Saskatchewan that are 
celebrating their 75th anniversary this year, 75th anniversary of incorporation: Midale, Moose Jaw, Regina 
and beautiful downtown Carievale. 
 
I know that some of you this summer, sometime, may be planning a trip to Carievale — a shopping trip or 
something like that — and I know that you will all be welcome. To use the words of the Minister of Finance, 
it's the best town in all of Saskatchewan, probably in Canada and maybe even North America or the world. 
 
I would ask the pages to hand out these little badges of the Carievale jubilee, 1903 to 1977 and ask the 
Assembly to join me in wishing Carievale a happy 75th anniversary. 
 
HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could perhaps add a 
word or two to the comments of the hon. member for Cannington. I was born 23 1/2 miles from the present 
site of Carievale. My grandparents have lived in Carievale for a number of years. I have a sister there and 
had three sisters living there at one time. The community is celebrating its 75th anniversary this summer. 
They have a grand celebration planned and I am looking forward to attending at least some of that 
celebration and certainly want to join with the hon. member in congratulating the community for its 
achievements over the years and for setting aside a good part of a week to especially commemorate the 75th 
anniversary. 
 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — CO-OPERATION AND CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT - 

VOTE 6 
 
Item 1 (continued) 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1196 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! When we adjourned yesterday evening we were on page 29, Co-operation 
and Co-operative Development item 1. 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Chairman, last night, I believe, the member for Redberry 
(Mr. Banda) asked, while Mr. Robbins was looking up some information, if he might pose a resolution to be 
considered. Then we spent two and a half or three hours, I think, on that resolution. Mr. Robbins, I am sure, 
had ample time during those two and a half or three hours to look up the information to the question that I 
has asked. 
 
I think the question, just in review was, how many of the Co-operative loans that were guaranteed — how 
many of the Co-operatives who had received guaranteed loans were in financial difficulty, other than the 
ones we had referred to? 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Co-operatives): — Do you want the number of individual loans? Just 
the number? 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just to simplify maybe the minister can just give me the name of the Co-operative 
and the amount of money. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — There are 28 loans in which there are guarantees, unless some of those have been 
completely wiped out since. 
 
The total sum of money originally was a little over $15 million, $15,814,000. The original amount of the 
guarantees was $13,636,000; the balance currently outstanding is $7,717,000 and the principal balance still 
guaranteed is $6,487,000. There is of that amount $1,530,000 past due. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — That is in addition to the ones that we established yesterday, I presume, the loan to 
the Poultry Producers Co-operative and to SM Breeders? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — That includes them. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Well, my point is, Mr. Minister, in asking these questions, there seems to be quite a 
large number of these loans and certainly an amount of money. Last night, we were talking about, I think, $2 
million or something like this to CCIL Implements and already here under this Co-op Guarantee Board there 
seems to be a direct loss of $850,000 in the first instances as far as Poultry Producers and another $200,000 
in the case of SM Breeders. What protection, really, or precautions are there? This seems to be a very large 
percentage of the total amount of loans, or guarantees that we have. When you start getting $1 million out of 
a total of $13 million or something along that line. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Almost $16 million on loans, yes, it is a relatively large amount, but I think that it is fair 
to say that these organizations did perform some reasonable function in terms of our economic society over a 
period of time. I am not sure — yes, there is no chance of recovery in terms of the Poultry Producers of any 
of that $850,000 or the $200,000, but I think it is fair to say that there has been some economic benefit to the 
province in relation to those loans over that period of time. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — You know if I remember correctly from last year, again, there were 35 shareholders 
in the Poultry Producers Co-operative and there was $850,000 that we are writing off. You know that is 
writing off about — if my arithmetic is right — about $24,285 per shareholder. Is this not correct? 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1197 
 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, you are approximately correct, about 35. They are very large producers. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — It is a question then, Mr. Minister, of what sort of scrutiny is given to these types of 
loans before they are actually granted. How do you go about establishing whether or not the operation is 
financially viable? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I would have to point out that so far we have only had two, the Saskatchewan Poultry 
Producers and I admit that is a substantial loss, and the SM Breeders. Incidentally, the SM Breeders was 
guaranteed, not while this government was in power, but the government of the party of which you are a 
member and actually against the recommendation of the Co-op Guarantee Board, I must tell you. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just another question. It would seem though that a large amount of money is 
$1,850,000 and when it works out to $24,285 per shareholder, this is an excessively large amount of money 
to give to 35 people. I don't know . . . the minister I know, is very shrewd when it comes to finance and 
business. At least that is my impression. I would think possibly that there is some reason to take a look and 
see that these types of things don't happen again in the future. 
 
There is one other thing that I would like to ask a question about and that is that last year again, we were 
talking about . . . I believe it was a lamb processing plant that was built in the province of Alberta at the town 
of Innisfail, and I think that the province of Saskatchewan became involved in that — that there was a loan 
or a guarantee of a loan, to the extent of $50,000. Would the minister indicate just what the financial position 
of this Innisfail lamb processing plant is and to what extent that Saskatchewan's $50,000 guarantee is 
threatened, if at all? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Just before I answer the one in the lamb processors, perhaps I should point out that the 
actual percentage of guaranteed loans up until now, and I admit that those are two large ones, have been .32 
per cent of the total amount of loans guaranteed, or less than one-third of 1 per cent, for all time up until 
these recent ones — these two last ones. The lamb processing plant — yes, we have $50,000 in shares in 
Innisfail, Alberta. The Alberta government has taken over its assets and liabilities and we think the Alberta 
government is fairly sound financially. The book value is still $50,000 on those shares. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just one final. I presume when the minister was giving his percentage figure he was 
relating it to the number of loans and not to the actual value in dollars of the loans. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The actual amount of money was $36,782,000 guaranteed, and the losses up until these 
two recent ones which you asked about were $110,996. The two most recent ones which you specifically 
asked about brings that loss to $1,160,996, of the $36,782,000 which is still not a bad ratio. 
 
Now I will admit that you are raising the point with respect to the 35 producers, and it is a big loss in relation 
to those producers. What we were attempting to do there I presume, was to maintain a poultry industry in the 
province, and as you are well aware, it went out of the hands of the little producer into larger and larger units 
and the feeling was that we were attempting to maintain, of course, a viable industry there. The Department 
of Agriculture had a fair bit of input into that. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1198 
 

MR. STODALKA: — One more question — back to that poultry producers. We established I believe, that 
the loss then that the people of Saskatchewan had to absorb was around $24,285, per shareholder. What did 
the shareholder actually lose — those 35 shareholders? What did they actually lose out of their investment? 
The loss is $24,285 of the province's money. What was their financial loss on an individual basis? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I should point out of course, and emphasize the fact that the guarantee board in this case 
is the 'lender of the last resort', and obviously there is higher risk involved. The actual loss to those 
shareholders was $205,663. I'm adding two figures together. Loss to other creditors was $222,000. Do you 
want me to repeat those? 
 
MR. STODALKA: — That's a total loss, Mr. Minister, of $205,000 to all 35 shareholders. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It was $205,000; other creditors lost $222,000. There was about $427,000 to $428,000 
lost. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — But where is their own individual loss that would be in the range of about $6,000 
plus per shareholder? You said, yes? The province on the other hand lost $24,285 and I think other creditors 
lost $6,000 and that gives you $200,000 plus? So the big losers in this I suppose, were probably the people of 
Saskatchewan and the government. The other lenders were at a loss to the same extent as the shareholders 
and each shareholder actually lost about $6,000. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, that's true. As I pointed out previously it was the 'lender of last resort' and 
obviously there is high risk involved there. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Mr. Minister, on page 12 of the annual report you refer to the arrears. Would 
you supply me with a list of the ones in arrears, which co-operative, and then I would like to know the length 
of time of arrears. In other words, 60, 90 days or in excess of 90 days. Then I would like to know — your 
statement in the same paragraph that there were 28 guarantees in effect with a maximum possible guarantee 
if fully advanced, of $10,242,355. I would like to know, and your staff can prepare it if they cannot get it 
right away, the actual amounts advanced to date on each of the guarantees made, along with the maximum 
guarantee. A specific question, was that an actual financial commitment as well on the Northland Bank? Is it 
a pay out of that amount of money or is that an advance or a guarantee? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — If I heard the whole question correctly does it relate to the Northland Bank. Is that the 
one you are referring to? 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — First, yes. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The original loan amount was $2,600,000 and the principal balance guarantee is 
$700,000 — it is an advance, it has not all been advanced as yet. The maximum possible principal that could 
be guaranteed would be $2,600,000. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — So it has not been advanced? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Right. 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1199 
 

MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — I do not know if your staff picked it up but on the arrears, (I just ask you to supply 
it in due course) the co-operatives are in arrears, and those arrears — 30 days, 60 days, or 90 days and those 
in excess of 90 days. I am sure your staff can put that together. If you would just give me that commitment, 
Mr. Minister, I will take it later. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I can give you the number right now. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — I would like to get it in writing if I could. I cannot write as fast as you can give me 
the figures. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well yes, we can get those I guess. There are seven in arrears at $1,530,212. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — What guarantees and what are the financial arrangements between this government 
and the Co-operative Programming Network? What are the terms of the commitment? What are the terms of 
the guarantee? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I can tell you the amount. The original loan is $2,600,00 but a . . .  
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — That is a loan. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Total loan. But the advance so far is $900,000. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — To what date was that advanced? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The term? March 31, 1978 that amount had been advanced — $900,000. The term is a 
five year term to be due on June 1, 1982. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — So the first payment will be June 1, 1982? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The loans are advanced by Northland Bank and guaranteed by the province. The 
original loan amount, the first one, was $1,540,000 — that is the special capital loan? — $700,000 has been 
advanced to date on that loan. It has a five year term to be repaid by June 1, 1982 — the first six months, 
anyway — July, 1982, and that is a demand type loan to be repaid in full before that. The second loan is a 
capital loan of $1,060,000 of which $200,000 has been advanced so the guarantee currently up to $200,000 
and that is to be repaid in 24 equal payments, commencing on July 1, 1982. After the first loan is repaid then 
the payments begin on the second loan. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — What is the interest on the loan and when does the interest start to be calculated? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The interest rate on the capital loan which is the $1,060,000 is the average cost of funds 
for wholesale transactions for the Royal Bank, the Mercantile Bank, and Northland Bank; that's when they 
go out on the market and secure funds, plus 2.5 per cent adjusted every 90 days. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Commencing when? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Commencing? When the funds are advanced. The second loan is the average cost of 
funds for wholesale transactions, a similar thing with Royal, Mercantile and Northland, plus 2.25 per cent 
rather than 2.5 per cent. That one is adjusted every 90 days as well. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1200 
 

MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Commencing when? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — When the funds are advanced. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — What securities did the government of Saskatchewan take for these guarantees or 
did they? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The tender takes the security; in this case, the Northland Bank. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — You have no other security — well, you just have the guarantee document? 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Surely, Mr. Minister, you would have an idea of what guarantees were provided? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — There is a registered floating charge in terms of the province. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — What about any other securities? Any chattel mortgages registered? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The floating charge covers all the chattels and the lender has actually taken security on 
those terms. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Oh no, it doesn't. What about chattel mortgages? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It's a floating charge on all assets. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Only the floating charge. Have you got any . . .  
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I'm sorry I didn't hear that. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Only the floating charge is what you are saying? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I'm trying to find out. We'll have to check that further. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — When you decided to participate in this venture, surely when you are putting up 
$2.6 million, you did some careful checking into the experience of the individuals involved that would be 
operating such a program. Would you tell me what information you gathered or what attempt you made to 
gather information on the skills of the individuals that will be operating CPN? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — First of all, we don't advance any money; it is advanced by the lender, obviously and he 
takes all the required securities that he feels are required for a commercial lender. He also makes a check 
with respect to the management skills of the people involved. Our communication secretary ad would have 
some input in that respect as well. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — O.K. Are you aware that in this case there were checks made on technical skills? If 
so, can you advise me what personnel you have? You have the confidence obviously to guarantee this type of 
money and to ensure the viability. What checks did your department make? 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1201 
 

MR. ROBBINS: — We get a very detailed application plus a viability study, which the board peruses and 
the board may often go back to the lender requesting the guarantee and asks for some additional information 
and also, sometimes for additional security. In addition, it is reviewed by Finance and the Cabinet before the 
OC is issued. 
 
MR. LANE: — Are you prepared to supply the application that CPN made in this particular case, for the 
government guarantee? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, we think since it is a loan agreement it is confidential because it is between a lender 
and a borrower. 
 
MR. LANE: — No, it is not. It is an application for a loan guarantee to the government. You have already 
admitted that, now would you table the document? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, but it relates directly to that loan, obviously, and there is a confidential factor in 
there between the lender and the borrower. 
 
MR. LANE: — So you are saying you refuse to table the application? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, I refuse to table. 
 
MR. LANE: — Who signed that application on behalf of CPN? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The president and the manager of that organization. 
 
MR. LANE: — You will give me the names of the two that signed it? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — George Dyck and Jerry Parfeniuk, I believe it is. 
 
MR. LANE: — I don't imagine that there were any personal guarantees put on in the application to the 
Northland Bank, an application that you have seen? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — You would have to ask Northland Bank. 
 
MR. LANE: — You did not see any personal guarantees in the application made, which you have seen 
which was tabled before you? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — There aren't any; they are acting on behalf of their organization. 
 
MR. LANE: — The Premier of this province has indicated that CPN is a high risk venture. What aspects of 
the application to the Northland Bank, which you have seen, were so striking that caused you to get into this 
high risk venture? Which parts of the application caught your eye? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, as I previously pointed out with a lender of last resort, if they could secure their 
credit from normal lending channels that is where they would get it. They obviously come when there is a 
relatively high measure of risk involved, because we are the lender of last resort. 
 
MR. LANE: — What monthly income and expenditure what monthly incomes are you predicting for CPN 
when you are talking about 24 equal payments on the second loan? You must have had some income 
projections. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1202 
 

MR. ROBBINS: — They are projecting on the basis of about 25,000 subscribers. Saskatoon, Regina and 
Moose Jaw inclusive at roughly $10 a month. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head - Wolseley): — I would like to follow up a couple of questions 
with the minister. 
 
Can the minister indicate to me when the terms of that loan, the repayment, begins? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I gave all that information a few minutes ago. You must not have been in the House. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — I guess I wasn't. Would you mind repeating just that? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — There is a special capital loan of $1,540,000 of which $700,000 to date has been 
advanced. That money comes due and it has a five year term and comes due on July 1, 1982, but on a 
demand basis they can demand money from that, prior to that date. In addition, there is a capital loan of 
$1,060,000 of which $200,000 has been advanced and repayments in that case are 24 equal payments 
commencing on the 1st of July, 1982. In other words, the first loan is to be wiped out and then the second 
loan payments commence. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Okay, you are basing, or Northland Bank is basing on 25,000 subscribers at $10 a 
month. I notice that, as of two weeks ago, they only had 4,000 subscribers. I'm going by what the Minister of 
Telephones said in this Assembly, Mr. Attorney General and . . . okay, let's take 8,000 . . .  
 
HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Telephones): — You can check the records the figure is 4,000. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Well, I'm quoting from the Leader Post . . .  
 
MR. BYERS: — Well, what the Leader Post says is one thing but what was said in this House is another. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Referring to your comments in the House when we were debating the telephones, 
you stated there were 4,000; now let us assume 8,000. In the three cities, we've just about completed hook-
ups, according to the Minister of Crown Corporations, just about completed; he was very proud of the fact 
that we have just about completed all the cable hook-ups in the cities — should be completed, June at the 
latest, I think would be fair. No, I'm talking about installations by SaskTel, that's what I'm talking about. We 
are just about completed, just about completed. And the three cities — all the completion you have 8,000; 
you're predicting 25,000. It should be obvious to you that CPN is going to fall dismally short of its goal to 
get 25,000 subscribers. That means that in addition to the comments by the Premier that CPN is a high risk 
venture it's becoming, in fact, a right risk venture. Now, you must be expecting that you're going to have to 
act on this guarantee fairly shortly by any look at the projections and the actual number of subscribers. Are 
you prepared to write off the $2.6 million? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the member talks about cable being laid; sure it's laid but that doesn't 
mean all of the people have been even contacted with respect to those subscribers who may subscribe to 
CPN in the future. I could tell him quite bluntly that I could very well be one myself. But I don't intend to do 
that until I'm living back there on a 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1203 
 

permanent basis. Two to three years to reach the break-even point is a normal sort of situation and gradually 
those loans will be paid in. We expect a gradual increase in the number of subscribers in those three cities. It 
doesn't have to have 25,000 subscribers to make money. It could have a great deal less than that but that's 
their projection in the long term. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Okay, now. What marketing studies were done, if any, to determine firstly, the 
market potential of CPN and secondly, the market potential as against a conventional cable bringing in 
American programming? Are you aware of any? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I understand there was a consultant firm that did a survey in Saskatoon that indicated 
there would be a good market for CPN. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Are there any present negotiations going on or discussions, no matter how 
informal, involving the government of Saskatchewan to extend the guarantee to the CPN and increase the 
amount to be guaranteed? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Are there any limits as to the amount that can be advanced; what I am saying is, 
can it all be advanced at once or are there term advances to draw down? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It is advanced as they require it. The maximum is $2.6 million. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — No, no, but what I am asking is on the loan, can they advance all the funds at once 
or is there a term for differing advances? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — They can advance it as they require it. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — So they could draw it all down at once? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, not at all. They submit monthly financial statements and if they were drawing more 
than they needed we would have a hard look at it of course. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — Well, how would that arise? You are saying then that they can't draw it all down at 
once, you could stop that? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — They give us a monthly statement and ask for advances of funds if they are required 
and, if they need it in our view, we advance, otherwise we wouldn't. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — O.K. Would you now table the last monthly statement that you got from CPN that 
was given to you? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I would like to say a word while the minister is preparing 
his information on this and I want to say it in as non-political terms as I can, about the CPN if I can. 
 
First of all, I find it somewhat strange that the hon. member is asking as many questions about CPN and the 
guarantee by this government of the CPN loan as he does without asking questions about Cable Regina, the 
conventional cable loan. 
 
MR. LANE: — I'll come to it. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1204 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, he's going to come to it, he says but the fact of the matter is that there has been 
no interest expressed there whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the CPN has had its problems. First of all there has been a jurisdictional dispute as to who 
owns the cable hardware. That is not of the making of the CPN, that was a provincial government dispute 
with the federal authorities, which was only recently resolved in December causing a delay in the CPN 
getting operational. Secondly, and as a consequence, the loan guarantee was also delayed pending the 
outcome of the jurisdictional dispute which, as obvious to all members, would further delay the 
establishment of the CPN. The loan was not approved I believe until sometime in late December of 1977, or 
as the minister says, January of 1978. Hardly a couple of months to get going. Thirdly, as all the members 
know there has been a technological difficulty which I am hopeful is about to be overcome with the 
converter and the filter which is being mass produced in the States and Canada, now in eastern Canada, and 
which will be available here within the next three weeks or four weeks. These are all problems which in 
some form or other were not without reason or not without some impact on the CPN becoming operational 
and I think to some large measure can explain the fact that the CPN subscriptions have not risen as 
dramatically as they did in the original period. 
 
Surely CPN is hopeful that once they get their full five channels operational in the next several months and 
there is the provision of an alternative form of broadcasting for the public of Saskatchewan, the appetite and 
the market for this area will increase. I share that optimism. It is risky, there is no doubt about that because I 
think this is one of the few places in Canada where we are having an alternate source of entertainment which 
is in effect competitive to the conventional cable. But I do want to say, Mr. Chairman, before I sit down, that 
ought not to deter the members of this Legislative Assembly or to deter the public from trying this bold 
experiment on closed circuit broadcasting and on CPN. I think it is a bold experiment. I think if we look 
back in history, if one looked at the viability of the Wheat Pool as against the line grain companies back in 
the early years of Saskatchewan, one might say economically, they have no membership, there is no room for 
it, they are going to go belly up, why is the government of Saskatchewan of the day supporting them? The 
same thing with credit unions, the same thing with co-ops, the entire co-op movement. 
 
I think that CPN in an entirely different area holds out the prospect of something which is an exciting, new, 
uniquely Canadian in a sense, project. It is the chance to get something a little bit different than Starsky and 
Hutch repeated over and over again on conventional cable. We now have under Canadian broadcast content 
rules 60 per cent Canadian content, 40 per cent American. What conventional cable offers to the people of 
Saskatchewan is not 60 per cent American but 100 per cent American. So now we have the choice of getting 
Starsky and Hutch at 10 o'clock on CKCK on a given night, Thursday night; now with conventional cable we 
will have the choice of having Starsky and Hutch at 4 o'clock in the afternoon on an American channel. I 
don't rail against conventional cable; it is an inevitability. Surely if we as Canadians are facing a Canadian 
culture content problem, if we are facing a Canadian culture crisis, if we are facing gaps in our 
communications delivery system, which I think we are . . . I mean look at your CBC National News at 11 
o'clock and see how many western Canadian stories there are. Take a look at your CTV at 11 o'clock and see 
how many Saskatchewan stories there are which is even perhaps more abysmal in its coverage nationally of 
this region than the CBC. Take a look at the kind of local programming that there is, the kinds of opportunity 
for debate, extended debate on important issues or controversial issues or religious or political or economic. 
Now maybe CPN can't deliver all that, I don't 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1205 
 

know. Maybe it's going to be a costly operation. I don't know. But I think there is one thing that CPN does 
do, it at least offers the hope of an alternative community controlled broadcasting mechanism with the 
chance of Canadian community content there and a high degree of Canadian content. You can get a 
tremendous amount of programs from, take for example such areas as the Ontario Educational Council, the 
Ontario Educational Broad-cast Authority, broadcast authority like Sask Media, has produced many award 
winning childrens' programs of Canadian content. There are other variations of that. Perhaps, Sask Media 
might at some time provide to the operation. I am not against American childrens' programming, or French, 
or whatever the content comes from. But we have here the possibility of a local community having a say in 
broadcasting, and I say, having a regional say in broadcasting in the four, or five or six years down the road 
if we keep our eye on the ball, on the objective. 
 
It is not free of difficulty, I know that, but to attack it and to criticize it, to kill it, leaves no other alternative, 
no other alternative, but as I say, the kind of American pablum that we have been getting here, as a Canadian 
side of our cultural operation. 
 
I conclude, Mr. Chairman, by saying that if anybody looks at CRTC studies you will see that even of the 60 
per cent Canadian programming on conventional television, there are fewer and fewer Canadians watching 
the Canadian programming and more and more switching their dials and watching American programming. I 
think it is of little surprise. When you see King of Kensington, which is a very good Canadian program, what 
is distinctively Canadian about it, other than the fact that the actors are Canadian? It doesn't tell us a thing 
about Canadian culture, or Canadian way of life. It is kind of a varied version of All in the Family, American 
style. You could almost take King of Kensington and put it out of Toronto and package it in Chicago or New 
York, as indeed, I am told the King of Kensington is being done. 
 
Maybe this is a pipe dream; I don't know. Maybe it is a socialist planning, if the members want to be 
political. I don't think it is an ideological thing at all. I don't attach it as a Socialist, or a Liberal, or a PC 
operation, but I do say that it does hold out the hope, the prospect, of an alternative regional community 
controlled, alternative media source with a Canadian culture aspect, a co-operative aspect, which, I think, if 
we were pioneers of 60 or 70 years ago — maybe who knows, 60, 50, 10 years from now our successors will 
say those guys had some foresight, some guts and some vision to give it a try. That is the basis. 
 
I am not here to defend the fact that it has to have a 100 per cent support to succeed, I don't know, but I do 
think that the people of the province of Saskatchewan are prepared to take that chance in the best tradition of 
the co-operative movement as they have in other areas. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Chairman, I haven't entered into the matter, as yet, and I hate to enter into it 
after the Attorney General has addressed us in sort of dulcet tones, because usually he shouts at us. And I 
react to what he said by saying that that is such absolute hokum; in fact it is, and I suspect he knows it is. I 
think the only reason he chose to rise was because his minister was just on the verge of tabling the most 
recent report from CPN. I hope that will be tabled and the minister, during the 15 minutes or so, doesn't 
reconsider and decide that that is the kind of information he wants to keep. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I'll relieve your suspense because I am not going to table it. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Well, because he has just had 15 minutes to think about it and 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1206 
 

decided he wasn't going to do it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it is interesting that the Attorney General now has a whole new reason why we have CPN. 
When CPN was first handled in the political way and advanced as a requirement, the reason was advanced 
that we weren't going to get conventional cable in the small rural areas. That was the only reason. Now, that 
has just been not absolutely out of the box. The applications, the CRTC, in May, is going to call a number of 
applications in Alberta and there will be 87 different applicants for areas that are as small as Cardstone. The 
very, very small areas in Alberta are going to be handled by the private investor, private cable. 
 
In Ontario, as I said, when that reason was advanced, that justification was advanced, in Ontario and in the 
East very small areas are serviced by conventional cable. Now the minister gives us a little hokum about 
Canadian content. What is the reality of that? 
 
The CPN network will have an educational network. So does cable; they have an educational channel, 
conventional cable; CPN is going to have a community affairs channel. So does cable, they have community 
affairs. Neither is watched. Neither gets watched very much. Neither will be watched very much. It is 
something that you carry in conventional cable because the CRTC hopes that it may flower into something, 
but in reality it is unlikely to flower into anything. What CPN would be is just a means of showing old 
copies of All in the Family, a means of showing movies which are principally American, and in fact, just 
again more American material coming into our homes. I don't say that is wrong. I certainly say that it is 
absolute hokum for the minister to stand there in his place and tell us that he has got a pipe dream about 
putting American media out of Saskatchewan. That's just not true. 
 
The fact of the matter is, that the whole reason for CPN was political and nobody should lose sight of that. 
CPN was devised purely and simply as a part of the negotiating tack taken by this government in their 
struggle with the CRTC and the federal government over the ownership of hardware. CPN, all you have to 
do is look at the birthing. You had the CRTC hearings. The CRTC hearings didn't quite go the way this 
government wanted them to go, Mr. Chairman. This government, particularly this Premier is given the 'snits'. 
I say that CPN was birthed in a snit because what they did then was they said, 'Well if we can't have co-op 
control of the cable, conventional cable, we'll set up something on our own and we'll control that.' So, in a 
snit the Premier launched CPN and he sent Gerry Parfeniuk right out of the secretariat that the hon. Attorney 
General now represents, right out of the government service, went straight to Bev Dyck, a very well known 
NDPer, went back to the same co-ops that the government had been trying to prop up and support as part of 
the negotiating tack. Then, Mr. Chairman, when they won, when CPN had served its purpose and they had 
won the argument, they had control of the hardware, the government . . . Some people could say, they are 
loyal to their friends; others would say they were so stupid as to go on backing this ploy that they had called 
CPN. If anybody ever said to me, at least they are loyal to their friends, my response would be, I don't mind 
you being loyal to your friends, but are you being loyal to your friends with Saskatchewan taxpayers' money. 
Because they had CPN out on a limb, then they were determined to support CPN, that's the reason they went 
ahead. You know, Mr. Chairman, I think the people of the province thought that the whole area of cable and 
CPN pay television had been taken out of the hands of Ned Shillington because he had flubbed it. It may 
well be that he just had too much political integrity to carry on with CPN when he knew that it was 
injudicious and a mistake, a bad thing to do in terms of using the Saskatchewan taxpayers' — dollars. 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1207 
 

Now, where are we left? The hon. Attorney General talks about a pipe dream. We are not in a pipe dream. 
Where we are, is, we're in the cadillac program. We are going to have more American material, more 
channels and more television available in Saskatchewan, with a population of 950,000 we're going to have 
more material available in Saskatchewan than any place in the world. More than New York, more than Paris, 
more than London, more than Toronto or the Niagara Peninsula, more than any place in the world. A cadillac 
program which would be fine, but regrettably it's a cadillac program paid for at the taxpayers' expense. What 
is worse, is it's a cadillac program paid for by all of the taxpayers in Saskatchewan which restricts the ability 
of this government to get conventional cable or CPN into the rural areas. So that as a city member, did I sign 
up for CPN? I certainly did. You guys want to subsidize a program like that, I'm delighted to be a subscriber. 
I don't know how my colleague for Morse feels when it means that Swift Current probably won't get cable or 
CPN for perhaps decades because CPN is now crowding that market and because the government's ability to 
spend has been stretched as far as you can be stretched with supporting CPN. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the hon. Attorney General can get up in his pious way — I like him better when 
he keeps his tones down. Forgive me for not following in that regard and say, well maybe I've got a pipe 
dream about Canadian content. That's absolute garbage. CPN was birthed in politics and paid for by the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer and I think we'll be paying for decades. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I think a few words in response are necessary. First of all, the 
member talks about subsidy and cost to taxpayers. The member, with all due respect, just does not know 
what he is talking about. 
 
The hon. member opposite as I said, doesn't know what he is talking about. The simple fact of the matter is 
that CPN, being a customer of SaskTel (fine relationship), is charged by SaskTel a rate whereby SaskTel can 
recover on a business relationship its obligations that it incurs to get CPN set up. I don't know whether the 
rate should be higher or lower. I leave that to the judgment of SaskTel management who have had a great 
deal more experience in rate setting than (with all due respect) the hon. member for Wascana has or can be 
expected to have. I believe that to be the case. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the loan guarantees, it is true that if the $2.6 million loan guarantee turns out that 
CPN does not function as the Opposition is predicting, indeed I would say almost hoping that it does not 
work out, then there is an obligation. That is obvious. But so far there has not been that obligation. So far, as 
the minister has indicated, they think it is a two year operation to see if this thing can work. I think it is a two 
year operation. 
 
I forgot to add, as I move to my second point now, the political argument, that one of the other detriments 
that CPN has always had is the kind of political attack which we have seen this morning from both the PCs 
and the Liberals. 
 
I tell the member for Wascana, who is a consummate politician, he should look some time at the member 
organizations that belong to CPN. Take a look at the member organizations who support CPN — from the 
Saskatchewan Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (if you can call that a diverse organization), 
to, if you will, trade unions. 
 
The member for Qu'Appelle does not concern himself about this. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1208 
 

I am simply saying that there are people of all kinds of stripes who belong to individual church groups . . . 
take a look at the church list, individual church groups who are supporters of CPN as a concept and I think 
for the member to simply get up and say everybody in SPCA is member organization (and I know that 
happens to be one) because the member organization of CPN is political, all NDP, is doing a terrible 
disservice to the individual organizations. 
 
A member publicly decries the fate of his Liberal Party as always having been portrayed as being anti-co-ops 
and anti-trade unions and anti-native. He says that's not true. But the reality is that you paint yourselves in 
that position by these kinds of broad, sweeping generalities. You pick out George Dick, whom you allege is 
an NDP (and I don't know if he is or isn't). I know George Dick very well, I don't know if he is or isn't. You 
pick him out . . . all right, even if he was an NDP, you pick him out and you say the whole organization is 
NDP. I am saying that that's the kind of stuff that keeps you people in opposition forever. You don't have any 
kind of a vision. You don't have any kind of a discrimination in terms of the nature of the attack. So I say, 
Mr. Chairman, those who argue that this is political, simply just are painting with such a broad brush as to 
not know their facts. 
 
Finally, I think one other point on the question of Raquel Welch. My friend representing Qu'Appelle is 
obviously concerned about Raquel Welch. There is no Saskatchewan content in Raquel Welch, quite 
obviously, but the member does not know anything about CPN. CPN is a five channel operation of which 
one of the channels is a movie show channel, one of the five. There is education, there is community, there is 
children's, there is the American and there is one other channel. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Children are seeing the American shows. We get those now. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well time will tell whether that's true. The member says that the children's movies 
will be the same as the American ones. Time will tell. That may be so. I say that the objective of CPN and 
our hope in a broad general sense representing the public, is that that would not be so. We cannot do without 
American shows. I know that. I did not say that. I'm simply saying that with CPN we have the chance of 
having a higher degree of Canadian content and because it is locally controlled a higher degree of a local 
flavor in that kind of a programming. 
 
Now the hon. member says that the community channel on conventional cable is a throw-away. That's what 
he says. And I agree with him. It is a throw-away. It is a throw-away because the conventional cable 
operators have made it a throw-away. They run their backward running clocks and their forward running 
wind charts and they put on their temperatures every second or so. They don't make it a meaningful 
community channel, because it is a pro form of thing to get the CRTC license. Maybe CPN will end up the 
same way. I don't know. But I think that when you have a community organization, SPCA for example, or 
the United Church up there in Saskatoon that is gung ho for this, maybe they want to have the prospect being 
community themselves, of having a community debating forum, a community exchange of opinions. Maybe 
that's the case. And I think that the chance is just a heck of a lot better in this regard than they are under the 
kinds of normal circumstances. 
 
Now I simply close by saying, Mr. Chairman, it is not my intention (and I am trying this in my dulcet tones) 
as the member for Wascana says, to say this purposely because I say, with all the sincerity I have in me, I 
believe that this is a project which is worthy of a look-see. It is not worthy of an immediate shoot-down 
without you boys even seeing what the 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1209 
 

product is. It is not worthy of a blanket attack on all of the organizations that have seen fit to support it. It is 
not worthy of that. It is worthy of a look-see at all of those possibilities that we have talked about. I think, if 
the finances have been analyzed as they have been analyzed, I think it can work and it will work. It will 
work. There is no argument that says because we have closed circuit, somehow we are going to hurt the 
conventional television guys or the cable guys. I think the viewer is too discriminating nowadays to be so 
fractured permanently one way or the other that the market is down the line. 
 
Your argument will have greater validity a year or a year and a half from now if that is the situation. That is 
what I am saying. But to immediately jump on it for purely, well I will not say political because that just 
rattles everybody but for a preconceived bias is wrong. I want to tell you also, that I for one entered, before I 
entered the communication secretariat, with a high degree of skepticism toward the objective of the CPN. 
Like you guys, I think traditional television — that somehow broadcasting means CTV or CKCK ownership 
and you kind of get indoctrinated that the air waves are private enterprise or there is some sort of holy 
sanctity to that conventional cable operation. If you really unshackle your minds a little bit, you will see, as I 
think has happened in my case, that there is the chance for community input in these kinds of Canadian 
culture contents. Give it a chance. Do not shoot it down now. Do not dump on it. Do not force the $2.6 
million to be lost by the continual kinds of attacks that you have. I think if we have a vision for it, maybe 
something of this whole political game will have meaning to it ten years from now when they are looking to 
see what the heck we are doing about it here. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Well, I want to make three quick points. First, it is interesting that the Hon. 
Attorney General can so easily castigate one group of co-operators and say that they are incapable of 
providing all these good services that you described. They are going to waste their community channel. They 
are going to take — let us take Cable Regina, co-operators. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You said cable operators. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — No I did not. I said both. I said that people do not watch community channels and I 
do not think they ever will. Now you are saying you believe that CPN will build theirs into something better 
because they are a community group. Well why will Cable Regina not build theirs into something better? 
They are a community group too. Why will North Battleford not build theirs into something? They are a 
community group. Why would you set co-op against co-op? That is what you are doing. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Chairman, one cannot really be led into the trap. I do not think, if you think about it 
at all, believing that when you go to a church group or you go to a trade union or you go to any of the other 
good organizations you belong to and say they support all of these units. What was really said by Cable 
Regina, by CPN, by all of them? Some familiarity with the way you sign people up; you go to them and say, 
look we are going to have a community channel. If we have a community channel, will you use our 
community channel? Of course they say yes. They say yes. They are not in bed with you on the deal. They 
just say you go ahead. If you get the facility we will use it. That, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is what these 
members are always saying when they accuse us in our attacks either on some of the cable operators or on 
CPN, as attacking the United Church. The United Church said we may use some of those community 
facilities. That is the way they got signed up. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Chairman, there is a second point. Why, if everything is as good as the 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1210 
 

Attorney General makes it out to be, why the cover-up, why will your minister in estimates not give us the 
recent reports from CPN if everything is looking all right? What have you got to hide? Why did the Minister 
of Telephones — You should have been there. It was incredible. He walked in with a wheelbarrow full of 
bricks and a bag full of mortar and he was trying to get the whole desk covered up and he got a lot of help 
from the chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee. — Just incredible! Would not answer a thing! 
Would not even give us information we had, lots of it, because most of the material that we were asking for 
is fully documented by the CRTC (Canadian Radio and Television Corporation). He would not tell us what 
the rates were. Oh he had lots of justifications on why CPN should be charged a lot less than conventional 
cable. They were pretty silly justifications like, they only use five channels instead of using 12. Well once 
you have got the facility in, it does not matter whether you use 30 or five. They were silly justifications and 
he knows they were silly, but he would not even say, yes the rate is going to be lower, though anybody who 
knows anything about the financing of CPN knows that the rate has to be dramatically lower or else CPN 
just can't function financially. Why the big cover-up over CPN if there is nothing to hide? I say that both to 
the Attorney General and to the minister whose estimates are now before us, and that is what I didn't have an 
opportunity to say to the Minister of Telephones. 
 
Now, the minister finally says, 'look, give CPN a chance'. I want to give CPN a chance. I hope CPN 
succeeds; I hope your potash take-over succeeds. There comes a day when I stop being a political person and 
then I become a person in Saskatchewan; I become somebody who cares about the welfare of Saskatchewan. 
If you guys go into a project for, as I said, birthed in politics, birthed in the snit of the Premier — if you guys 
go into a project where you are the government, then we're in it. We want to see CPN succeed but we want 
to keep some watchdog on that progress because we have that responsibility on behalf of the taxpayers of 
this province, but also on behalf of the taxpayers of this province, we want to see CPN do well. I want to see 
your potash mines do well, now that you have so completely put the future of Saskatchewan in the hands of 
that gamble but that doesn't stop me from, in a political way, continuing to examine why you went into the 
gamble. So do I want to see CPN do well? I certainly do. 
 
I want to see the cable companies do well too because they are now good corporate citizens or good co-
operative citizens of this province. I just say that this cadillac program is a big risk, an expensive risk, a 
foolhardy risk and a risk that was birthed in politics. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, again, this will be my last intervention because I am really ruining the 
ministers . . .by popular demand. 
 
I do want to make one point. I agree with you about the business of poneying up all of the information that 
can be ponied up. 
 
(inaudible interjection) 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, no. Just hear me out. The simple fact of the matter is that, (and I don't know 
what happened at Crown corporations on SaskTel) but you realize that in SaskTel, SaskTel deals with 
customers. They have got a competitor. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Well telecable is a competitor of CPN's. That's an example. Cable Regina is a 
competitor of CPN. We wouldn't receive your credit I don't imagine, if we said, 'here's the telecable rate — 
here's the CPN rate'. We don't. I mean, people who deal with Crown corporations, whether it is in insurance, 
whether it is in power or whether it 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1211 
 

is in the telecommunications area, have a right (if SaskTel has any credibility) to deal with it in some degree, 
of corporate confidentiality. Clearly I, as a politician, have a dilemma here. I don't for one moment mind 
telling you what the rate is. I for one moment wouldn't mind showing you what the financial statement is, but 
you realize (and I'm sure you do in terms of the responsibility of the operation of government) that this can't 
be done. We can't simply say, 'here is the CPN rate' so the competitors can see it — competitors not only 
here against CPN but competitors outside of Saskatchewan. Nor can we give it to the . . . if they want to 
reveal it. If CPN wants to reveal it, that's their business. Because we don't give it for good, I say, corporate 
business reasons, is not a reason to allege a cover-up and that is the same thing with the Co-op Guarantee 
Board and the Co-op Guarantee loan. Maybe this is an overstatement (correct me if I am wrong, officials) 
but I'll bet you that there are hundreds of co-ops in Saskatchewan — hundreds, maybe thousands — I don't 
know. Just the tremendous number that do (and a lot of them are risky) — you've got a big mill or you've got 
some other operation that is involved in some areas of Saskatchewan which is a risky operation. 
 
We don't show the applications and the financial statements. What is the sense of doing that if we are going 
to politicize every kind of a loan guarantee? Then we are in to trouble. 
 
(inaudible interjection) 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I obviously will just have to leave my argument for the (what I 
think is a rational argument) acceptance or the rejection of the members of the House and the acceptance or 
rejection of the public. I think on the rate argument and on the loan guarantee, that's a logical, rational 
argument. You can yell, what am I afraid of, or anything of that nature, but that I guess would be up to you 
people. But that is the position we are in in this area and if you asked us what the rate Saskatoon Telecable 
was paying, we would say the same thing - it is not in the public interest to reveal it. And you would portray 
us as enemies of SaskTel and Sask Telecable and we are not. We would like to see conventional cable 
succeed. I am with you on this 100 per cent of the way. That is the reason and I just wanted to speak to the 
cover-up point, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the member for Wascana says that he is a member of CPN. All he has to 
do is go to a meeting and get all the information he wants. There is nothing to stop you from getting the 
information you want at a CPN meeting, if you are a member of CPN and you said that you were a member 
of CPN. So all you have to do is go there and get the information you want. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Minister, you have indicated that you refuse to supply the monthly statements given to 
you by CPN. Is that correct? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Exactly the same as we would for Regina Cable or any other. 
 
MR. LANE: — The Attorney General has given today a new reason for CPN which seems to make the other 
reasons for CPN no longer operative to use a well-known phrase. Would you now supply us with the 
provisions of the agreement made by CPN and Northland Bank to which you have had access, which specify 
the programming criteria that, today, the Attorney General says exist and are the raisons d'etre for CPN? I am 
sure 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1212 
 

it is part of the agreement. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — We would have some general information with regard to the programming content. We 
wouldn't have the specifics at all. They would prepare some information that would go to the Guarantee 
Board, supporting their financial application and that is confidential. 
 
MR. LANE: — So you are not supplying the programming information, then would you supply the 
information as to the small communities that CPN has committed to supply cable to as part of its 
application? No longer operative, I realize that reason for CPN. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I am sure that wouldn't be in their application in relation to their application for a loan 
to the Northland Bank. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, I am going to make a motion, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson): 
 

That this Committee of Finance request the proper officers of CPN to appear before this 
committee on Monday, next, with all relevant documents. 

 
This is so that we can continue the questioning and get the information. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to speak very briefly to the motion and say I hope that all 
members support it and support it for this reason. 
 
The other day in Crown Corporations and in this House, for the past two or three months, there has been a 
blanket over information regarding cable television in the province of Saskatchewan, a deliberate blanket 
cast by the government of Saskatchewan. People have asked some very serious questions. For example, a 
press release came out yesterday indicating the CPN was cut off the air waves today. I believe as of 12 noon, 
off the channel, and they will be back on April 21 — which would not be bad, approximately in two weeks. 
Then the minister stated there would be only 500 converters available on May 1 out of 10,300. If in a month 
they can only produce 500 — whatever it may be — all I am suggesting to you, Mr. Minister, it says that 
there will be 500 available on May 1. It also predicted that in the interim period, there will be a $100,000 
loss by CPN. I wonder how long it will be before the 10,300 are produced for the requirements of CPN. Is it 
500 every month, 500 every three months? How much money will CPN lose in the meantime? 
 
We heard the member for Maple Creek bring up a co-operative today that lost over $800,000. There were 35 
members in that co-operative. All of us are aware of the disastrous guarantee program of many of the co-
operatives by the Department of Co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan. Some of them have been 
disasters, and any time the government of Saskatchewan or the Department of Co-operatives guarantees 35 
members a guarantee of over $800,000, that is a loss of something like $24,000 (as the member for Maple 
Creek has indicated), per member plus a personal loss of $6,000, plus other creditors loss of $2,000. 
 
Then the Attorney General stands on his feet and says, please, let us give them a chance. The NDP members 
stand on their feet and demand, nationally and provincially, that financial statements of private corporations 
be made available to the general public. They want the records. But any corporation that they deal with or 
that they are involved financially with, you can't get a speck of information out of them. You can’t get  



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1213 
 

anything. They put a blanket over them and as the member for Wascana says, what is it you are trying to 
cover up? 
 
The Attorney General stands up this morning and he says we are going to have a community channel. You 
know what it is going to do? The dilution of the talent and the interest of the citizens of Saskatchewan in two 
community channels will destroy the community channel. There is not enough talent; there are not enough 
subscribers because we are not talking about 900,000 people as a potential in Saskatchewan, and all of us 
know it — east end and the North where in our rural province very small communities exist — you and I 
know that this will not be available even to 900,000. The community challenge and the opportunity to 
provide that service will be for a very restricted number. My goodness, Toronto cannot even provide more 
community channels than what you are trying to offer. We are diluted to such a degree that it will be useless, 
and the biggest problem we have today in talent in Canada, on community or what is called 'local content' is 
that we do not have the talent and we do not have the market to produce it at top quality and top calibre. As 
soon as the talent goes across the line they do very well because of the market availability. 
 
All I am telling you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there is absolutely no reason that the CPN financial 
statement should not be made available to the citizens of Saskatchewan with the kind of risk that is going on 
and the kinds of things that are happening in the cable television program in Saskatchewan. As the member 
for Wascana says, you seem to have thrown a complete blanket over the entire operation of cable television; 
excuse, after excuse, after excuse is provided. I say to you, Mr. Chairman, it is time to stop the cover up; it is 
time to put the facts on the table, all of them, and then, Mr. Speaker, let the people of Saskatchewan do an 
evaluation. I think it would be doing CPN a service cause boy you go and talk to a subscriber and a person 
on the street; they talk about being cut off, they talk about pirating; they do not know which is which, and so 
forth. Cable Regina had the biggest influx of sign ups in the last week than they have had for a long long 
period of time, even though they know they are months and months away from being able to hook up all the 
prospective customers they have. It is because of the uncertainty in the minds of the citizens of Regina about 
CPN. Turn around and lay the facts on the table; tell them when you expect to have converters in and a 
complete service on. Tell them exactly what SaskTel is charging them, when they will recover the money, 
whether they are not to be provided a cheaper rate, whether or not the taxpayers are subsidizing it. Put the 
facts on the table and it will benefit CPN — if there is a benefit to be had. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Chairman, let me only say one thing further. I believe what we have here is a 
situation where the government refuses to recognize that there is a problem and as a result of refusing to 
recognize there is a problem and take some corrective action, CPN may go down. As I said earlier, that is not 
something I would like to see happen, not when they go down with Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars; Cy 
wouldn't like to see that either. (Inaudible interjection) . . . No, he doesn't think there should have been two 
and I agree with him but now that we have two at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer . . . (Inaudible 
interjection . . . now that you have made a mistake, we would like to see them both succeed and do well and 
flourish. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, I say particularly to the Attorney General. This is a time when he has to get into the 
thing and solve the problem. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What problem? 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1214 
 

MR. MERCHANT: — The problem is that CPN is probably going to go under unless you tell people what's 
going on, be more candid with the future that they face. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I've told them. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — Oh, you've told them everything! Every week we get another promise that CPN will 
be sorted out a week later. You have got to face the problem that you maintain those expectations and you 
keep dashing their expectations. Everybody thinks CPN is about to be on the air and then those expectations 
get dashed. You know you haven't solved the engineering problems and you are not even close. You have a 
little cottage industry that is producing these converters. I don't know, maybe the Minister of Telephone's 
mother is making them in her garage at $500 a month. 
 
Now tell people when CPN is going to be able to get the thing going. Be honest about where you stand. 
Admit that there is a problem and say, but this is the way we are going to solve the problem and we are going 
to bail CPN out. Now the only reason you don't do that is because that's kind of an unpleasant political 
experience for you, to say, yes, I guess we acted a little too quickly. We made a deal with the CRTC about 
dates and we couldn't keep our deal. That's what the government did. The government made the deal about 
converters and you couldn't keep your deal. Then the government made a new deal with the CRTC and you 
couldn't keep that deal either. 
 
Now what are you doing to the people who are the subscribers to CPN? What are you doing to their 
expectations? The member for Indian Head is correct when he says that Cable Regina has an influx of 
customers, because people now are writing CPN off. You've allowed their expectations to be dashed three or 
four times. Face the problem, or else, I say regretfully, that I think CPN will go down and go down at very 
considerable expense to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. I would like to see CPN succeed now that you've got us 
into it and I say to you that as long as you take a head-in-the-sand attitude you are not even admitting that 
there is a problem to solve so that you can get in and help solve the problem. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — When your head is down your other end is someplace else you know. 
 
MR. MERCHANT: — You know, Mr. Chairman, the old saying is very applicable — there are none so 
blind as those who refuse to see — and the government is refusing to see that they have a problem here that 
could cost us a lot of money. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Chairman, just some comments on the motion. 
 
The government's inconsistency and inability to decide what it is doing with CPN I think has become evident 
again this morning. The Attorney General gave a great impassioned plea about new programming. He 
ignores the very fact that the conventional cable have programming or channel capability for community 
programming. The only selling technique that CPN is giving (and we all see the ads) are Raquel Welch in 
the American movies. That is all. So I very deliberately asked the minister responsible to give this Assembly 
the programming details and what the goals and objectives of CPN were with some specifics. He doesn't 
have them. We asked for other reasons that government give us some specifics, the small communities that 
were going to be serviced. In fact, the government doesn't have them. Every single reason given by the 
government opposite for the existence of CPN has been thrown out, tattered and thrown away and in fact 
proved today to be non-existent. There has to 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1215 
 

be another reason and I suggest that it is right back to what we started in day one that this government lost 
control of the conventional cable and had to come out with another outlet. It has become known on the 
streets that CPN is Blakeney's folly and I am sure that today it is being proven true that there is nothing in 
CPN to guarantee delivery to the small communities, there is nothing in CPN to guarantee local 
programming, that in fact it is a high-risk venture as the Premier said. We are going to lose a lot of money. It 
is so bad that the government is refusing again and again and again to give the financial information of its 
commitment to CPN and the financial operations of CPN, information which the public has titled Blakeney's 
folly. I think it is a very kind phrase to indicate the mess that CPN is in and I say that the government is in as 
a result of its activities in this area. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members of the Legislature, it gives me 
great pleasure today to introduce a fine group of students from the Alvena High School, Grades 10, 11 and 
12. They have travelled a long way to visit the Legislature. They are led here today by their school teacher 
Mr. Ernie Kalynka and Mr. Wally Berzowski. I want to say, I hope this trip will be an educational one. We 
are going to have dinner after while. I know they will enjoy that, they are pretty hungry. I sure parliament this 
afternoon will portray exactly what it is. I also want to wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt): — Mr. Chairman, if I may, I too, would like to join with the 
member for Kinistino in extending my personal greetings to the students from Alvena. I was born in Alvena 
and therefore have a bit of feeling for the community. I get up there once in a while, I still have many 
relatives up there, our family does. The students who are here invited me to speak at their graduation this 
spring; unfortunately because of other commitments I was not able to accept the invitation. It is a real 
pleasure to have them here. I hope they will enjoy their stay. 
 
The Assembly resumed the Committee of Finance — Department of Co-ops — Vote 6. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Just in reply to the member, I think he will understand that they can speak as often as 
they like in Committee of the Whole or Committee of Finance. No one closes it. 
 
Item 2 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister some questions in 
respect of this item. The first one is that I have noticed in the Public Accounts that are published that there 
are under this vote and the past, a number of grants that have been given to a number of individuals. They 
are small amounts but they total something like 200. Can you tell me what those items are? Are those grants 
of some nature being made to individuals and for what purpose? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — You want the names of the organizations or just the numbers, the amounts or what? 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1216 
 

MR. CAMERON: — First, Mr. Chairman, I merely want some explanation for how the 150 or 200 people 
that are listed as having received amounts of money are arrived at? What do those figures mean? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I think what the member is referring to are the lists of names of people related to the 
ARDA program. These people attended conferences with respect to grazing co-operatives and they were paid 
for attending those conferences. The sums of $133.35, $158.25, $123.75, I'm assuming that those are the 
things you are referring to. There about 150 people on that list. I think you are referring to a group of people 
who attended conferences. These were either conferences related to grazing co-operatives. There are about 
150 people listed and the amounts are small like $133.35; $158.25, $123, $139, $121 etc. I think those are 
the ones that you are referring to. These people attended those conferences and were paid their expenses to 
attend those conferences. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Where do these conferences take place? How do these people make application to get 
paid? How many of these conferences are taking place? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It is a cost-sharing arrangement with ARDA. There are 10 or 12 seminars held. These 
people would attend those seminars. It is a cost-sharing arrangement with us. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Are these people employees? Where do these people come from? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — They are farmers attending these conferences on grazing co-operatives. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Well, how many of these things have you budgeted for this year? How many 
conferences? Where are these conferences being held? How many people are you going to make grants to in 
these amounts of about $150 to $200 to attend these conferences? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — We have none in the current year, because we have no arrangement with ARDA for the 
current year. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — O.K. let me ask you as well. In the past, you have from time to time made grants to 
co-operative day care centres. May I ask you, how does a day care centre, in the structural sense, have to be 
incorporated to qualify for a grant from your department? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — A lot of them are societies, then they can get a start up grant from the department. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — If they are incorporated simply as a private society, not as a co-operative as such, are 
they entitled to apply and have a grant or do they have to be incorporated as a co-operative? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — A lot of them were societies that incorporated as co-operatives and then applied for 
grants to the department and they are entitled to a grant on that basis. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Do I assume from that, that in order to qualify for a grant, the day care centre has to 
be incorporated as a co-operative? 



 
April 7, 1978  

 

1217 
 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, that is not necessarily true. A society could apply for a grant to the Department of 
Co-operatives for a day care centre. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — You have some limitations on the number people that have to be involved. For 
example, I notice that occasionally there will be a grant made to a co-operative day care centre that is called, 
for example, M. Fisher Co-operative Day Care Centre, which would lead one to conclude, superficially, that 
there is one person involved in setting up that day care centre on a co-operative basis and presumably that is 
the person who is actually providing the service and drawing a salary for it. And that is the person that sort of 
gets a co-operative organization incorporated and then qualifies for the grant. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It is simply a name they choose. They have six or more people. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Now, I am right, I guess, in assuming that some of these day care centres, and there 
are several now being funded, qualify for funding from the Department of Social Services under its 
regulations in the regular way. And then if you happen to be a co-operative incorporated as a co-operative 
day care centre, you can qualify for funding also from the Department of Co-ops. Is that correct? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Yes they can, but ours is only a start up fund. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — I have a couple of additional questions. There were some grants made in the past to 
some of these cubing co-operatives and so on, like Porcupine Cubing Co-operative Limited and some of 
those. Are you continuing to make grants to some of those sort of corporations? Have some of those gone 
out of business? Which ones have gone out of business in the last year or two? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Two of them got grants in the initial stages to enable them to get seed to sign up people 
who would then put acreage into the required crops for the dehydrating operation. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Could you identify those? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Hudson Bay Dehydrating and Porcupine Cubing. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — My question is, have those co-operatives gone bankrupt or are they still in business? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, they are both in business. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Can you tell what the strange one is that I have noticed? It's the Magpie Symbiotic 
Food Co-op Limited. What is that? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It's a health food co-op in Saskatoon. I don't know why they chose that name, but they 
choose their own names. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed. 
 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development Vote 6 Agreed. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I think there is a vote under Vote 64 — Loans Advances and 
Investments. 



 
April 7, 1978 
 

1218 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes, that's a separate one. 
 
Vote 64 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Chairman, is this the vote that is set up to provide a 
portion of the funding for these co-operative seed-cleaning plants in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, we have bought some shares in some of those seed-cleaning plants. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — The one I am thinking of is the amount of the capital expenditure up to a maximum 
of $300,000. The 30 per cent, is that agriculture? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — That's agriculture. 
 
Item 1 agreed 
 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development Vote 64 agreed. 
 
The Committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:50 o'clock p.m. 
 
 


