



















































Hansard: March 16, 1978


371 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

March 16, 1978. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 

to the other members of the Assembly, 20 students from Sheldon Williams Collegiate, Martin Collegiate and 

some exchange students from Sidney, Montana who are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 

accompanied here today by their supervisors, Marnie Crosby and Larry Kitson. 

 

I hope that they will find this afternoon’s deliberations interesting, enjoyable and educational and I hope to 

meet with them later in the day. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Leader of the 

Liberal Opposition in welcoming the students from Montana. I understand Martin Collegiate in my 

constituency is one of the schools that is involved in this exchange program. I hope you people have a good 

time when you are in the city of Regina and that you enjoy yourself this afternoon. I look forward to meeting 

with you a little bit later. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn):— Mr. Speaker, I would like on behalf of the member for Bengough-

Milestone, Mr. Lange, to introduce to you and through you to the members of the House, a group of students 

sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, who I understand are from Yellowgrass. They are accompanied by their 

parents, Mrs. Perrett, Mrs. Youngset, Mrs. Cadrain and Mrs. Saipp. There are 12 of them in number; they are 

Grave VII students and I am sure that I am expressing the wishes of all members of the House when we first 

say, welcome to them and that we hope that their journey here has been pleasant and will be educational, as 

well as a safe journey home. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MR. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Buena Vista):— Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and to 

the House, a group of 45 Grade VIII students from Churchill School. They are seated in the west gallery. I 

had an opportunity to meet with the whole school just before Christmas (in fact I think it was the last week 

of school before Christmas) because we enjoyed a half-hour of Christmas carols when I was there. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to meet with the students a little later and answer some questions that they 

may have of proceedings in the House. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale):— Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with my colleagues 

in introducing a group of students from my constituency. This is St. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

372 

 

Mary’s School; I think that they are here in the west gallery. There are 27 Grade VIII students and they are 

accompanied by Mr. Greg Seipp. I was at St. Mary’s a few weeks ago and had the pleasure of presenting the 

Queen’s pictures and the Mary’s picture of Prince Philip. St. Mary’s is one of the oldest and best schools in 

Saskatoon, so I welcome them to the Legislature. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

LICENSING OF FARM TRUCKS 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Agriculture. You have received copies of several resolutions that have been sent to you, Mr. Minister, from 

the various District Agricultural Extension Boards. I am referring to the resolutions which deal with the farm 

licensing of the three-axle farm trucks. In each of the resolutions that you have received basically what they 

are asking for is that the farm trucks with the three-axles be eligible for licensing and eligible to use farm 

fuel, as well as to be classified as Class F on their licences. 

 

Has the Department of Agriculture, in consultation with the other branch of this government, given any 

serious consideration to a very legitimate request, which at the present time appears to these people to be a 

discriminatory measure? 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture):— Mr. Speaker, that request is a fairly long-standing 

request which has been brought forward by many agricultural areas and one which is receiving discussion 

within our departments. I think one of the considerations that has always been in this particular decision was 

whether we should be licensing large trucks, which are in competition with commercial trucks. Very often 

these larger tandem axle trucks are used in competition with commercial trucks. It is a question of whether 

they should be licensed as farm trucks or not. I know that there are a much larger number of three-axle trucks 

now in use and I think it is something which we will have to give real consideration to. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to hear the minister make reference 

to the fact that there is a growing number of the three-axle trucks and these three-axle trucks, in fact, are 

owned by farmers as independent trucks as the distance for hauling increases. I wonder, Mr. Minister, at the 

present time if you cannot make the move or persuade other departments, such as the Department of 

Revenue, to give some recognition. Is it possible then that you could take a look at the provincial tax, which 

now exists on diesel fuel for these trucks, which is at the present time 26.5 cents a gallon which I am told is 

the highest in Canada? Could some consideration be given to the farmers in getting their goods to market 

and getting their goods from the cities out, some consideration? If you can’t go one way could we be assured 

that you will work at the other end of it in bringing down the taxes in the fuel? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Speaker, you know the reasons that there is a higher tax on diesel fuel than on 

gasoline is because a diesel truck is more efficient and, therefore, there is less fuel burned and the concept, of 

course, is that trucks pay on the basis of the number of miles they travel rather than on the amount of fuel 

they consume. So a diesel truck paying 26 cents a gallon would be probably paying the same amount of tax 

as a gasoline truck at 19, or whatever the price is. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

373 

 

BRYANT REPORT 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— Mr. Speaker, when the Attorney General, a week ago, brought in 

the Bryant Report and the memorandum for the Director of Criminal Justice, he indicated that the 

government would not be undertaking further inquiry, nor lay any charges. Now apparently as a result of 

comments by the Leader of the Conservative Party in the Assembly last night, the Attorney General is now 

considering further inquiry. I want to ask the Attorney General, is that not a very clear indication that the 

Attorney General is permitting political considerations to arise in the administration of justice as we have 

been suggesting in the last week? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, for two or three weeks or more the Leader of 

the Conservative Party was taking the public position in this Legislature that no wrongdoing had been 

committed certainly by his party with respect to Pelly. Yesterday he took the position that all parties had 

committed wrongdoing and all parties should have been prosecuted, which, to put it mildly, was a very 

strong reversal of position. 

 

It’s neither here nor there. This has nothing to do with my position. My department has recommended that 

there be no prosecutions. With that legal judgment I totally concur. However, with the call of the 

Conservative Leader that in fact charges should have been laid it seems to me that what in fact he is saying is 

that there needs to be a full-scale inquiry into this matter. At least that is my interpretation of it and I am 

giving very serious consideration to that. You put your own judgment as to whether that’s political or not. I 

think the question of the decision of charges is certainly non-political. I stand by the report of the director 

and by the report of the chief electoral officer (I am talking about the charges). The question of the political 

inquiry (the public inquiry) is another question which you will have to make your assessments on. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the Attorney General’s ground is shifting as a 

result of the comments of the Leader of the Conservative Party last night, I fail to understand how that isn’t 

taking into account political considerations in making a decision in your capacity as the Attorney General 

which ought to exclude political considerations. 

 

But let me ask you in addition, are you prepared, or have you given consideration to referring this matter to 

the Privileges and Elections Committee of this House to deal with? 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— I think, Mr. Speaker, all options in that regard are to be left open, especially if the 

decision that I make is that there should be a further look at this. There may be no charges in terms of The 

Election Act, but if a full hearing is what the members of the House are calling for I think that the option has 

to be kept open. I have indicated to the press that as far as I am concerned I have asked the department 

people to consider the propriety, the possibility of establishing a full-scale public inquiry into this matter. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— We have an additional supplementary. May I ask the Attorney General when he made 

the request to his department to consider a full public inquiry? 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

374 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, when the matter was originally submitted to the department and the 

subsequent report that I got from the department, the major thrust of the report dealt with the prosecutions. I 

don’t know whether the report made a mention of a public inquiry or not but in my statement to the House I 

believe I indicated that a public inquiry was likely not warranted. 

 

In the light of the comments, I believe it is important that we consider the requests of all the parties, which 

appears to be the case. I asked the deputy as of last night to take a look at the question of whether or not 

public inquiry could be set up. 

 

RECREATION IN CORRECTIONAL CENTRES 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Question to the Minister responsible for Social Services — I raised, last 

week, the matter of the golf program for the PA (Prince Albert) Correctional Centre and the inmates therein. 

The minister has been subject to some criticism for that particular program. Have you now had an 

opportunity, in light of my comments to you, to reconsider and restudy the recreational program in our 

correctional centres’ program which, I think the minister will agree, is in fact a play program and not a work 

program for the inmates? 

 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services):— Mr. Speaker, let me say that before the question 

was asked by the member in the House last week we had given consideration to this program before the riot 

occurred in June of 1977 and had made the decision, at that time, that the programs would no longer be 

continued. The member opposite is a little bit behind in his questioning on the golf and canoeing program. 

The decision was made well over a year ago and I have no further comments to make. 

 

MR. LANE:— By way of supplementary, I have two comments. First of all, I have a letter I received on my 

desk in this Assembly yesterday, Mr. Speaker. This is my supplementary and it is a letter purporting to come 

from an inmate in the Regina Correctional Centre wherein he indicates: one, the programs are continuing and 

two, that there are other programs like tours of hockey teams out of the city and around the province. He 

goes so far, Mr. Speaker (before I ask my supplementary) to say "I wish to thank Social Services in the 

provincial government for the nice winter holiday I have received." 

 

RANCH EHRLO – PAYMENT OF EXPENSES 

 

MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie):— Yesterday in your statement you said that the government would be 

paying Ranch Ehrlo the legal fees and disbursements during the inquiry. Some members of Ranch Ehrlo and 

staff have incurred a number of travel expenses due to their efforts to ensure that the committee could get as 

much information as they required. Will these expenses be included? 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— At the present time my thinking is No, they will not be included. 

 

MISS CLIFFORD:— Does the Attorney General not agree that the Ranch’s name has been cleared and it is 

the responsibility to right all wrong against them and is it not now time to quit playing politics and give them 

all the money that is their right. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

375 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, this is not a court of law, public inquiry. If damage has been sustained 

by Ranch Ehrlo, the damage is recoverable by Ranch Ehrlo in the civil courts against those who they will 

claim are responsible for this. Our principle is that we will look after the payment of fees and disbursements, 

the precedent is the Moore Inquiry in the Prince Albert riot where we looked after the legal counsel and the 

disbursement fees. If there is a damage to individual reputations or to an individual society, the courts are 

available for a solution in that regard, not us. 

 

MISS CLIFFORD:— Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you leaving the door open so that you will 

take the responsibility and pay a good portion of those funds that are required to open the camps when the 

Ranch feels it is desirable to open them again? 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer that question at this particular time. So far as I 

know, the appropriate officials such as DNS and Social Services and elsewhere are looking at the policy of 

reopening in the light of the Maher Report. It may very well be that there is some sort of a financial 

consideration which will assist Ranch Ehrlo in getting re-established again in the North but I can’t give the 

member that kind of an answer. All that I can say, again, to the member is that the damage, if any, was not 

the instance of the government in this regard. The damage, if any, lies elsewhere and the remedy which is 

available to Ranch Ehrlo is the remedy which is available to any other party in our society, I suggest, and that 

is to the civil courts. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I will take the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

SEDCO – LOAN TO GOLDEN ACRES MOTEL 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of 

SEDCO. The minister may recall in the last session of the Legislature that he was questioned on various 

occasions pertaining to a SEDCO loan to one Golden Acres Motel which was since placed under the control 

of a receiver-manager. The minister, on at least one occasion, indicated that SEDCO would recall their 

lawyer from Hawaii and ultimately dispose of the matter. Would the minister be prepared to tell this 

Assembly today exactly how the matter has been resolved and exactly how much, if any, money has been 

lost to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce):— Mr. Speaker, for the hon. member’s 

information, the place is now in the hands of SEDCO. I think we should have by now, if were able to get into 

the Land Titles Office, the title cleared and it is now being advertised for sale. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The minister, upon being questioned in the 

last session of the Assembly, indicated that personal guarantees had been taken on the original SEDCO loan. 

The minister is also on record as saying that such personal guarantees and all records as such, pertaining to 

the Golden Acres, would be tabled in this Assembly — I think forthwith was the term that he used. I would 

like to ask the minister — some time has gone by, Mr. Minister, and I would like to get something definitive 

from you. When can we expect the tabling of the documents that you promised? 

 

MR. VICKAR:— Mr. Speaker, I think the statement that I made was that I would table that document of the 

private guarantors if it was in the interest of SEDCO. I have since found out that SEDCO does not allow 

those names to be made public. However, if the hon. member in question would like to get some information 

on the individual guarantors as 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

376 

 

a private member, maybe we can do something about that to help him out. 

 

EDUCATION LEGISLATION 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek):— Question to the Minister of Education. There seems to be some 

feeling that there is a possibility that the minister is not going to be re-introducing his education bill at this 

sitting of the Legislature. Would the minister please indicate whether or not he will be introducing this bill at 

this sitting of the Legislature? 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Education):— As I told you several days ago, Mr. Speaker, the answer is, 

Yes. 

 

MR. STODALKA:— Mr. Speaker, when will we be seeing this Bill? The minister is aware that it is a 

controversial bill and it is going to need a great deal of study. Can the minister assure us that we are going to 

see it within the next week? 

 

MR. FARIS:— In due course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

RECREATIONAL CENTRES 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— A question to the Minister of Social Services. You have just indicated in a 

previous question that in fact these programs were supposedly cancelled a year ago. I have before me a 

transcript of the evidence of one Mr. Robertson, who is a social service worker at the Prince Albert 

Correctional Centre. His evidence given September 1, wherein he refers various times that the golfing 

program, the canoeing program, the fishing program were all done within a week of the Prince Albert riot, 

which completely contradicts the statements which you have just made to this House. I suggest, Mr. 

Minister, and I request this House, Mr. Speaker, that the minister come clean with his statements. In fact, tell 

us when he is going to review the recreational . . . 

. 

MR. SPEAKER:— What’s the member’s question? 

 

MR. LANE:— My question is when is the minister going to start telling us the truth about the recreational 

program and when in fact is he going to admit what a tragic mistake was made? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order, I will take the member for Wascana. 

 

SPORTS COMPLEX FOR NATIVES 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Mr. Shillington the 

Minister of Culture and Youth. Mr. Speaker, last night the minister in answer to questions at a meeting 

concerning a sports complex for natives in Regina said, and I quote: 

 

I never intended to say ‘no’ with finality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he was referring to his rejection of that concept and I ask the minister whether he would not 

agree that it has long been a principle to help the underprivileged with sports facilities to avoid delinquency 

and I ask the minister whether he would not now reconsider his previous (with finality) rejections? 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

377 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth):— Mr. Speaker, I admit to the hon. 

member opposite and to the House and to yourself that recreation must be a prime concern of governments 

which work with natives in the cities and we are indeed trying to develop recreational programs and fund 

facilities for these people. I am not convinced (as I said last night) I am not convinced that a recreation 

facility at this point in time is what is needed. I am not convinced that that will bring recreation to the native 

people in the best and the fastest possible way. So I don’t know if that answers the member’s question or not, 

but that is my position on it. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that this underprivileged 

group deserves special treatment. It constitutes one-fifth of the population of Regina and I ask whether the 

minister will not agree that the Indian and Metis population in Regina has not been receiving from the 

provincial government the kind of attention that it deserves and that the sports complex would be the kind of 

special program that would assist them and assist with the problem in general? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— You asked about four questions, as is usually the case with the member for 

Wascana. Yes, I agree that the problem is serious. Yes, I agree that it deserves special attention. No, I am not 

convinced that a large recreational complex is what is needed. No, I do not agree that the province has been 

delinquent in this regard. 

 

I might point out to the hon. member for Wascana that what they are complaining about is an inability to get 

facilities. Most of the facilities which they want in this city are in fact under control of the city and it is not 

entirely within our hands. Those I think are the four questions the member asked. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— One final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I will take a new question — I will take the member for Estevan. 

 

KEY LAKE HOLDINGS 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of Sask Minerals. 

Inexco Oil Company of Houston, Texas, have announced planned sale of uranium holdings in Saskatchewan. 

I would like to ask the minister if Inexco is one of the partners in the Key Lake project with the government 

of Saskatchewan, and is your department or the Department of Mineral Resources negotiating with Inexco 

right now? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— I take it, Mr. Speaker, that the member is 

directing the question to the Minister of Mineral Resources not the minister responsible for Sask Minerals. If 

that is correct I will undertake to answer his question. 

 

Inexco, yes, is a partner in the Key Lake Holdings. They know that due to federal law, legislation, that they 

will have to divest of some of their holdings, if not all of them. They have for quite some time, and I think it 

is knowledgeable to, at least, the uranium trades in looking for someone who might be interested in 

purchasing their share including, perhaps, the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. I have no 

further information in regard to whom they may have as an interested buyer. I have not talked to either 

Inexco or the interested buyer or anyone representing them. 

 

HOUSING FOR UNDERPRIVILEGED 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

378 

 

Mr. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

in absence of the Minister of Finance where I think probably the question should go. 

 

The Minister of Social Services, a moment ago, indicated that recreation insofar as our Indian Metis 

community is not maybe a special need, but I am sure everyone would agree that housing and employment 

are. I want to ask the minister, why it is that Saskatchewan is one of two provinces that did not join in the 

federal program, the 44 1B program to provide special housing assistance to those who are underprivileged? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs):— Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House that 

discussions are underway now between the province and the federal government with respect to 44 1B. The 

reason for not joining, up until this time is simply because we had other priorities so far as we were 

concerned. 

 

Programs under 44 1B involve provincial subsidy, as the hon. member well knows. Our priorities in housing 

with respect to ongoing operating subsidies have been in the field of public housing, in particular the field of 

senior citizen housing. I think the work that has gone on in this area is an indication of that priority and I 

think the fact we are now seeing that particular situation getting into hand, we can look at the 44 1B 

proposition and that is going on now. 

 

MR. PENNER:— Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. There is no question that I would agree with the minister 

that there is a high priority regarding housing for our Indian community, both in Regina and Saskatoon. Can 

the minister give us an indication when he will be able to announce agreement insofar as his government is 

concerned in joining with the 44 1B program and getting that much needed funding into the province. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY:— Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I can’t respond as to when an announcement might be 

made. I can only report to the hon. member that when I was responsible for housing, I was in discussion with 

the federal Minister responsible, Mr. Ouellet, with respect to the broad range of housing programs that we 

were involved in here in Saskatchewan. Since that time, of course, Mr. Smishek has assumed responsibility 

for housing. I think with respect to any kind of specific time, you would have to direct your question to him; 

whether it will be involved this year or not, I can’t make that prediction, although I can indicate that we’re 

moving in that direction with respect to 44(1)b). 

 

MR. PENNER:— Mr. Speaker, having discussed this aspect of the problem, I wonder if the minister would 

be prepared to indicate what plans the government has in train with regard to solving the other serious 

problem which our Indian community faces and that has to do with the employment question? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order. I’ll take the next question. 

 

SEDCO CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEES 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister in charge of SEDCO. It is a 

similar question that has been directed to you today, Mr. Minister, by my colleague the member for Thunder 

Creek. At the present time, Mr. Minister, a similar 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

379 

 

construction with SEDCO financing is taking place in the city of Weyburn. I would like to ask you this 

question. With the construction in Weyburn have you taken personal guarantees on the construction there? 

Also, has a study been conducted for that area as to the feasibility profit/loss operation of that particular 

institution. 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce):— Mr. Speaker, I am not quite clear as to what 

project the hon. member is referring to in Weyburn. However, if SEDCO is involved then they naturally did 

take a survey prior to getting involved. Whether they took personal guarantees, at this time I can’t answer, 

although I can get that information for him. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is it the practice of SEDCO to become involved in 

the commercial enterprises such as motels and convention centres, when in fact by the construction of such 

you become a partner, rather an individual within the business community in opposition against other people 

who are currently involved in that same business? 

 

MR. VICKAR:— Mr. Speaker, SEDCO’s position is to promote and develop, and develop to the extent 

where people will become employed so you can have additional employment. It is not necessarily a fact that 

SEDCO goes into opposition with other places of business in a particular community. If the particular 

involvement warrants SEDCO’s involvement in that project and if SEDCO sees fit that the project has merit 

that is when SEDCO becomes involved. 

 

BRYANT REPORT 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Mr. Speaker, a question of the Attorney General. Following up his indication that he 

now has under consideration a reference to the Bryant Report matter either to public inquiry or to the 

Privileges and Elections Committee. I want to ask him whether he doesn’t see in these circumstances some 

urgency to bring this matter to some conclusion or else the trail goes cold. It has been nine months since the 

Pelly by-election which is a very long gestation period indeed, and we haven’t yet seen any action. Don’t you 

see any urgency on this and when might we have a decision? 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member for Regina South that this matter is important, 

there is no doubt about that. I want to just very briefly state for the member of the House the position of the 

department. 

 

I am charged with the responsibility of determining whether or not — in this particular case and I suppose in 

every case — there is sufficient evidence and the law permits a prosecution or whether it is a prosecutable 

case. Based on what the department saw and based on the Bryant Report conclusion was that there was no 

prosecution. That is the end of that issue. There may very well be something, which, if we decide to go by 

way of privileges or by way of public inquiry which might lend itself to some further action. I don’t know. I 

agree there is some degree of urgency but I have to ask and answer for myself the fundamental question, 

what more would be gained by a public inquiry that we don’t have now? I know the Leader of the Liberal 

Party and you have strong feelings on this but that is a matter that I am trying to look at as objectively as I 

can in the capacity of Attorney General. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Mr. Speaker, by way of supplementary may I ask the Attorney General is it not also 

part of his responsibility of office that when there is prima facie evidence of an offence having been 

committed and further investigation needed to 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

380 

 

gather the initial evidence that would be required for prosecution, is it not your responsibility to launch that 

investigation? 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, the obvious answer to that questions is Yes. But the fact of the matter is 

that the Department of the Attorney General, the Director of Criminal Justice, reviewed all of this matter and 

concluded . . . 
 

MR. MALONE:— . . . .investigation. 
 

MR. ROMANOW:— No he did not. We will look at this when the motion comes up. He concluded that 

even if he were able to get the increased investigation one would still have, he said to me, the problem of 

applying that evidence to the vagueness of the law, the inconsistencies and the loopholes of the law. I take 

responsibility for the law. We drafted it, whatever it is, it’s not just but there is the situation. That is the issue 

I am looking at by way of prosecution now. You wouldn’t expect me as Attorney General to stop a 

prosecution where my Department of Criminal Justice asked for one. Why would you expect me to initiate a 

prosecution where my Director of Criminal Justice said there should not be one? That is the situation . . . 

well, you take a look at that report very carefully and you will see you are wrong. 
 

MOTION 
 

SITTINGS 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— moved, seconded by Hon. J.R. Messer, Minister of Mineral 

Resources, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly do adjourn on Thursday, March 23, 1978 and that it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, 

March 28, 1978. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I might ask the Attorney General whether this is intentional or not, but I recall the last 

time Good Friday occurred, the Assembly adjourned at 1:00 o’clock. That is not in the motion; I gather that 

is intentional — Thursday at 1:00 o’clock. 

 

Motion agreed to 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill 9 — An Act to 

amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to comment on the amendments contained in Bill 9, An Act to amend 

The Rural Municipality Act. Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of the Blakeney government since 1971, the 

declining strength in power of local government in Saskatchewan has been completely turned around. In the 

first term of office we focussed our attention on school boards, giving them resources to regain control of 

what was happening to education in our province. Grants to schools were increased in amounts never before 

recorded. More important legislation was amended to streamline the operation of the educational system so 

that it could function in a spirit of co-operation rather than a spirit of controversy. Capital construction was 

stepped up; operating grants were raised to levels which allowed school boards to remain 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

381 

 

progressive. The burden of school taxes was taken off the property taxpayer and carried to the provincial 

level. School boards, for the first time in years, had the resources and the sense of freedom to manage their 

affairs the way they wanted. 

 

Since 1975 we have begun to concentrate on the local government at the municipal level. We started with 

the reorganization of the Department of Municipal Affairs, dividing it into two divisions, rural and urban, 

each division headed up by its own deputy minister to ensure that the different problems of rural and urban 

government receive adequate attention and recognition. We have opened the way for several new programs 

at the municipal level to meet the needs of the ‘70s and the ‘80s. For the past year we have worked with 

SARM and SUMA to develop a new system of financing municipal government in our province. The system 

has been developed and Saskatchewan now has the first true revenue sharing program in Canada. It has a 

pool of money to be indexed to increases with the real growth in the economy and has a larger percentage of 

the grants paid out on an unconditional basis than ever before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Rural Municipality Act contained in this bill provides some of the 

legislative streamlining needed to keep rural municipal government progressive. Probably the most 

significant amendment in the bill provides legislative authority for municipalities to designate members of a 

new corporate body to control super grid construction and maintenance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will remember that in 1974 the Minister of Municipal Affairs at that time, Mr. E. I. Wood, 

appointed three prominent members of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities; Mr. Everett 

Murphy, Mr. Charlie Mitchell and Mr. Norman Allen, to put forward recommendations for the development 

of a hard surface grid system for Saskatchewan. The Municipal Road Surfacing Commission, as it was 

called, after examining rural needs and after many hours of discussions with rural governments, 

recommended a system of 5,000 miles of primary hard surface grid in the province and 3,500 miles of 

secondary surfaced grid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Commission Report emphasized, however, that an oiled grid system in Saskatchewan 

would rise or fall on the quality of the maintenance that was provided. The Commission recommended that 

government assistance be withheld until satisfactory arrangements for maintenance could be made. The 

Commission felt that this would mean that municipalities would have to own their own maintenance 

equipment, either individually or in groups. 

 

Our government was determined that a surfaced grid system in Saskatchewan should be a municipal system, 

controlled by the people devoted to the area. It should not be a highway system. Yet, surface road equipment, 

both construction and maintenance, is expensive equipment. It is becoming less and less possible for each 

individual municipality to keep its own road building equipment. 

 

Our conclusion, therefore, was that the only way a surfaced grid system could be developed and be 

maintained would be to adopt the co-operative approach, where municipalities co-operatively owned 

surfacing and maintenance equipment, and controlled the super grid roads for their own particular area. 

 

Over the past two years this approach has been discussed with rural municipalities. I am pleased to report 

that 17 areas have already agreed to form maintenance areas for this purpose and discussions are actively 

going on in another ten areas. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

382 

 

This bill provides for each one of these maintenance areas to become a corporate body, with its own powers 

to purchase equipment, to sign contracts and to receive government grants. Each municipality has power to 

designate two members to be members of the maintenance area corporation. The corporation chooses its own 

chairman, its vice-chairman and secretary. Arrangements for auditing are included in the legislation. 

 

Each of the participating municipalities will sign an agreement and then will make contributions toward the 

capital and the operating costs of the corporation according to cost-sharing set out in the agreement. 

 

An interesting aspect of the provisions under maintenance areas in this bill is that a village or town may 

become party to an agreement to become a member of the corporation as well as rural municipalities. A 

village or town who joined a maintenance area would be entitled to two members on the corporation, as are 

rural councils. Towns or villages could then actively work as part of the corporation, obtaining services for 

their people. 

 

It is well known that a good part of our grid system travels through many of our villages and our towns. Of 

course a town or a village that does not wish to become part of the corporation could still contract with the 

maintenance area to do the work on its particular road or perhaps even do some work on its main streets or 

its other streets. 

 

The legislation, therefore, provides the administrative mechanism to develop and adequately maintain a road 

system which I think will become increasingly important over the next 20 years in our province. I foresee the 

oil grid system or the super grid system expanding greatly once we complete the main farm access system in 

our province and we are expected to complete that system in about 1985. 

 

The second most important amendment in the bill deals with a taxation problem that has arisen in rural 

municipalities in the past. Because of the wording of the present legislation, there has been some question as 

to whether or not municipalities have the power to tax mobile homes as separate buildings. This amendment, 

through a clarification of the word ‘building’ will ensure municipalities the power to apply the same 

assessment and taxation rules to mobile homes as they do with any other residence in their jurisdiction. 

 

Thirdly, and also an important matter for municipalities, deals with municipal involvement in recreation. 

Under existing legislation no provision exists for rural municipalities to become involved in a formal way in 

recreational facilities. 

 

This amendment provides that a rural municipal council may, by by-law, acquire, construct, operate or 

maintain a recreational facility if it so desires and may make appropriate arrangements for the financing. This 

is important as municipalities will be called on increasingly, to cost-share recreational facilities at the local 

level. Co-operation will increasingly be needed between all councils at the local level to meet the high costs 

of recreation facilities. 

 

As an example of this kind of co-operation, I can report to all members here my visit to Weldon last 

Saturday, where we opened a fine recreational complex involving a new skating rink and a new curling rink. 

I don’t know what the population of Weldon is but I suspect it isn’t any more than 200 people. Yet we have 

seen co-operation between that village and three or four municipalities in the development of this fine 

recreational 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

383 

 

facility. 

 

The remaining amendments may be classed as housekeeping but they will help individual councils and 

council members to do, more effectively, their work. Current legislation provides that, in the case of an 

emergency, an individual councillor may authorize an expenditure of up to $100. An amendment to section 

41 raises the ceiling to $500 in order to more accurately reflect the reality of today’s prices. 

 

Also, the limit in current legislation for per diem in mileage rates to be paid to agricultural committees 

appointed by the rural municipalities is removed. The limit of $25 per day and 13 cents per mile is no longer 

seen to be realistic. The restriction is also removed altogether and rates paid to agricultural committee 

members on municipal business can be set at the discretion of the municipality. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

move second reading of Bill No. 9. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a few comments in relation to this bill and, in general, to 

the Department of Municipal Affairs. In this act, Mr. Minister, to amend The Rural Municipality Act, I 

congratulate you and your department in bringing a number of areas, which are of concern to rural 

Saskatchewan, up to date — bringing them up to the needs of the people in Saskatchewan in many instances, 

as they exist in 1978. However, I do have some observations which I would like to make and I would like the 

minister to share them with me. 

 

Much of the activity here and many things mentioned in this amendment to The Municipal Act deal with the 

financing and legislation, permitting the municipalities to partake in some ventures which were not 

previously possible. I suppose, Mr. Minister, my comments get back to that which is historic this year, as you 

and other people have used the words in the way of the grants, under the revenue sharing, to the RMs (Rural 

Municipalities). 

 

Mr. Minister, looking at the grant structure and doing some research on it and talking to some of the RM 

secretaries involved with the RMs (long time secretaries, I might point out), while on paper it shows that the 

grant structure shows an increase, when they took a look at their program for the summer of 1978 — I asked 

three local RM secretaries if they would do that under the basis of last year’s program, on the basis of last 

year’s grant — there are cases, Mr. Minister, in the province at the present time where we have a negative 

result where, in fact, the RMs would have received more money doing the 20 miles of gravelling and grading 

under the old formula than they do under the present formula. I want to talk to the minister in private about 

some of these things later because I want further explanation for the RMs involved. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we talk about the need of villages and towns to be able to participate in the corporation, 

as you called it, of the establishment of these larger jurisdictions of the cost sharing of a road authority, I’m 

wondering if, in doing so, in fact you are considering granting them further authorization in the control of 

such things as the weight limits on that road at a particular time of the year. I think we previously had that 

type of arrangement and I certainly am wondering if you would like to see, and I’m sure the RMs would like 

to know, what position is going to be taken on the responsibilities they have towards these types of roads. 

 

Mr. Minister, I am sure that you were disappointed in that the number of rural municipalities to date who 

have availed themselves of the opportunity to participate in the super grid program has been indeed very, 

very small. I am surprised, Mr. Minister, 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

384 

 

as I know you are, at the number of people who have reneged; the number of individual councils who do not 

want to get into the super grid program. They have some general concerns and some general fears, Mr. 

Minister, of getting into the super grid program. 

 

At some time I would like, and we will have an opportunity later when we get into Committee of the Whole, 

to discuss some of these concerns and I certainly want to save my comments for that particular time. It is 

disappointing and I’m sure that it is disappointing to you, Mr. Minister, to know of that very small number. 

There is a great concern out there among the people. I am concerned to see the planning — a super grid 

program. 

 

You know, Mr. Minister, we often complain and certainly the Minister of Highways gets up in this House 

and once a year at least and tells us that we have something like 38 per cent of the miles in Saskatchewan — 

of highways in Saskatchewan, with 7 per cent or 8 per cent of the people to pay for it and that is a concern of 

us all. When we see contemplated plans for building a super grid program to run four miles parallel to a class 

highway for a distance of some 15 miles, it concerns not only the rural municipality but concerns people in 

general at the possibility in a given area of being overtaxed or overburdened with the road system. 

 

Mr. Minister, I congratulate you for bringing the Act up to date. I have some reservations which I want to 

discuss in detail in Committee of the Whole about the revenue sharing program and I will look forward to 

that opportunity when we come to the estimates of the Department of Municipal Affairs, to further 

questioning you at that time. 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on Bill 9. 

In talking to many of the rural municipality reeves and councillors and secretaries down at the RM 

convention, many of them don’t really know where they stand on the revenue sharing, Mr. Minister. I have 

been told by these particular people that the total percentage of the revenue sharing in 1977 is much lower 

than the total percentage of the grants were in 1971 under the last Liberal government. 

 

Many of the items in this bill are necessary and needed in rural Saskatchewan. I do however, question the 

need for the setting up of a municipal road-surfacing commission. Any rural municipality that does not want 

to enter into that commission is not given any of the super grid road grants. This appears to be the first step 

in forcing municipalities into larger units and one wonders if the minister isn’t beginning the long feared 

country system in another indirect way. Surely, Mr. Speaker, it should be the right of a rural municipality to 

deal on its own for maintenance grants for roads that lie within the area of its jurisdiction. 

 

Every municipality if it wishes, should have the right to receive grants to build and maintain roads itself 

without being forced to amalgamate with other municipalities. Why does the minister deny rural 

municipalities the right to decide for themselves what they do want? Many rural municipalities presently 

tender all the road construction and in many cases are getting a much better deal for the ratepayers in doing 

this. If the price isn’t right they can often hold off until construction is slow and the people in the 

construction business are a little more hungry. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will be denying ratepayers of Saskatchewan the right to have their elected officials on the 

rural municipal councils make decisions without government interference. This right has been with the local 

government officials since the 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

385 

 

beginning of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Minister, you are taking some of that right from every municipality in 

Saskatchewan. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the minister would be wiser to give the local governments the option of 

not joining the commission if they so wish. 

 

The overall planning of the super grid road system could still be done with either the commission as a whole 

or within the particular municipality that wanted to go in on its own. Rural municipalities should not be 

forced against their wishes should not be forced against their wishes, to join the commission or lose super-

grid grants. I wonder if there could be a trade off on the grants for the super grid and, instead, they make take 

farm access or other benefits if they so wish. 

 

I am pleased to see the half mill limit on recreation removed so that local governments can decide for 

themselves how much they want to spend on recreation in their area. The half mill limit did not give the 

local municipalities enough leeway to properly plan or operate these facilities. 

 

I want to consider the remarks of the minister further and, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Co-operation) moved second reading of Bill 10 — An Act to amend 

The Fuel Petroleum Products Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce Bill No. 10 which consists of amendments to The Fuel 

Petroleum Act. This particular bill deals with two separate issues. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, amendments contained in this bill will permit the transfer of the administration of The 

Fuel Petroleum Products Act from the Department of Finance to the new Department of Revenue Supply and 

Services. This is accomplished by replacing those provisions, which refer to the Department of Finance and 

The Department of Finance Act, with corresponding references to the Department of Revenue Supply and 

Services and The Department of Revenue Supply and Services Act. 

 

The second portion of the bill, which is evidently the more important portion, deals, Mr. Speaker, with 

amendments in the bill which will permit the Department of Revenue Supply and Services and the petroleum 

industry, including wholesale and retail fuel outlets, to collect tax on fuel petroleum products measured in 

litres. 

 

I want to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, to the members of this Assembly that this is not something 

initiated by this government. It is not due to the action of this government, but is due to the action of the 

federal government, in relation to going to the metric system. It is an integral part of the Canadian 

government’s plan to convert measurements in this country to the metric system over an extended period of 

time. I think all members are aware that that is not easily accomplished and they are well aware that we are 

measuring certain things. For instance, we have gone into the measurements of temperature from Fahrenheit 

to Celsius; miles are being changed to kilometres; pounds to kilopascals in terms of pressure; bushels to 

kilograms and tonnes, in terms of grain measurement; acres to hectares and then they change back from 

hectares to acres, so it is going to remain as acres and gallons to litres. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

386 

 

In the early part of this year, Mr. Speaker, we were advised by the Metric Commission of Canada that the 

petroleum industry intends to commence the conversion of service station pumps to metric units on January 

1, 1979. We do not know for certain that it will occur on that particular date, but if it does, we must be 

prepared for it. 

 

If and when the actual conversion occurs, the expression of tax rates in cents per gallon will no longer be 

adequate. The intent of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is to enable the tax to be applied, collected and remitted 

irrespective of whether the unit of measurement is in gallons or litres. 

 

In this bill the current tax rates calculated on a per gallon basis have been converted to the nearest 

equivalent, using the conversion factor recommended by the Metric Commission of Canada. The Metric 

Commission has advised us that it is impractical to effect a conversion in more precise terms than in one-

tenth of one cent per litre. I think I can point that out to the members reasonably adequately, when you look 

at the Estimates. Therefore, there will be marginal differences in the amount of tax paid depending upon 

whether the tax is assessed on gallons or on litres. As I said before, we don’t know for certain that the whole 

thing will be converted to litres by January 1, 1979, although that is the instruction we have from the Metric 

Commission of Canada. 

 

I think members are, perhaps, aware of the fact that one Canadian gallon equals 4.54609 litres and if you 

convert that 4.54609 litres to 19 cents in relation to gallons, you come out with a tax rate of 4.179416 cents 

per litre. That calculation obviously, Mr. Speaker, would not only be totally impractical but it would absurd. 

I know all the members opposite have those figures embedded in their minds for posterity. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, in conformity with the requirements of the Metric Commission of Canada it is our intention to 

convert at the equivalent tax rate, and in this case, will be to the nearest one-tenth of one cent, which will be 

4.2 cents per litre. That creates some problems if in fact some pumps are still on the gallon basis as they may 

well be in ‘79 and others on a litre basis; although as I stress again, the Metric Commission of Canada and 

others on a litre basis; although as I stress again, the Metric Commission of Canada has informed us that it is 

their intention that all of it should be converted as of January 1, 1979. We estimate gasoline consumption in 

the year 1978-79 fiscal year at 348 million gallons, which converted to litres works out to 1,582,039,320 

litres. I am sure the member for Eastview has now got that figure firmly embedded in his mind. 

 

Then you take diesel fuel estimates for the current year are 54 million gallons, converted to litres at 

245,488,860 litres. Then when you take off highway commercial fuel utilization which is aviation gasoline 

and gasoline used for commercial purposes, estimated at 100 million gallons — and I know that you have 

that figure of 4.54609 embedded in your mind — so that works out to 454,609,000 litres. Now converting 

those gallons to litres, as I said, on the basis of 19 cents a gallon, you get a very long figure of 4.1741698, 

therefore, taking it to the nearest one-tenth of a cent, we’re going to use 4.2 cents. That brings some more 

revenue, incidentally, and I think members of the House should be aware of that, slightly more in terms of 

gasoline sales. When we go to the diesel fuels and convert them the conversion works the other way. The 

amount of tax being paid will be slightly less because using the 26.6 cents per gallon and you convert that to 

the diesel fuel, it works out to 5.812476 cents. Because we are converting all this to the nearest tenth of a 

cent, we go back and the tax is slightly reduced down to 5.8 cents per litre. 

 

When you get to the off highway commercial fuels, again the conversion rate works in favor of the taxpayer. 

This is six cents per gallon and when you convert this in terms of 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

387 

 

litres you come out with 1.3241679, therefore, we convert it back to the nearest tenth of a cent and take 1.3 

cents per litre. We will lose some revenue there in relation to both diesel fuel and off highway commercial 

and aviation fuels. What I am attempting to make clear to the members is that we are attempting to get it as 

closely as we can to current revenue flows based on 19 cents per gallon of gasoline and 26.6 cents on diesel 

fuel and six cents on commercial gasoline and fuels used off the highway. The conversion rates then, as I 

previously said, are to the nearest tenth of a cent. The overall effect of these minor changes is a minimal 

increase in revenues of something less than one-sixth of one per cent, because on gasoline we gained slightly 

by using the 4.2 cents per gallon instead of the 4.173819. On the other two, we lose slightly in relation to the 

conversion of 26.6 cents to 5.8 and 6 cents for off highway commercial fuels to 1.3. Mr. Speaker, I take 

pleasure in moving second reading of this very important bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— Mr. Speaker, one never knows at the beginning of a day just 

what the House is likely to have an opportunity to do. The fact that we’ve had an opportunity for a chuckle 

or two this afternoon I think is great. The one thing which I think is absolutely certain in all of this is that if 

anybody is going to know the relationship of a litre to a gallon you have got to have a calculator that has a 

memory — at least some of us need to have a calculator that has a memory. I suppose it is fair to say that any 

time a calculation means that some of us will have to pay less in taxation, then that has got to be good. 

Although I think I would echo the feelings of a lot of people who are beginning to wonder why in the world 

we are getting into this business of the total conversion anyway. It has become so confusing — 

understanding the difference between miles and kilometres, all of the agricultural and weight measures and 

now the liquid measures, and so on. I am sure for the majority of people it is just a matter of being confused 

and hoping that those who actually do the calculating know what the heck they are talking about and do it 

right. We are sure a long way away in Saskatchewan and in Canada from having any kind of grip on an 

understanding of the metric system and the metric conversion. The fact that it is there, the fact that it is not 

something we are likely to escape, means that from our point of view we see what the minister has just 

moved as a facilitating system during the transition period, and have no reason to quarrel with the principle 

from that point of view. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, just a few comments that I would like to make on 

this bill. Although this bill, Mr. Speaker, deals directly with the conversion to the metric system, which 

obviously is going to be of a confusing nature, particularly to the trucking industry in Saskatchewan, I want 

to add a few comments and also place before the minister a bit of a challenge I suppose. 

 

In the amount of tax which is being levied on the diesel fuel used in our transport trucks, converting it to 

litres, no matter which way you want to covert it, Mr. Minister, it is a very, very high rate of taxation. 

 

Mr. Minister, when I spoke in reply to the Budget, I pointed out, and I was surprised that no one in the 

government benches took up the challenge, and I proved that two trucks operating one out of Saskatoon, one 

out of Edmonton, both covering the same number of miles a year, 110,000, both consuming a gallon of 

diesel every five miles (which the trucking industry tells me is the average), with this additional tax plus the 

additional price coming to 20 cents a gallon, makes the difference to transportation in Saskatchewan to one 

single truck, of some $4,400 a year. Mr. Minister, a province 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

388 

 

which is as dependent upon transportation as we are, should not be faced, I repeat should not be faced with 

the highest penalty of any province in Canada. When we come to estimates, I will again show you that it 

costs up to $7,000 a year difference just in the two provinces, and I bring to you the point, Mr. Minister, that 

the people pay for this. Every time a person in rural Saskatchewan goes to pick up groceries, every time a 

farmer asks for fuel to be delivered, every time a load of fertilizer comes out, and you can go on down, the 

trucking industry must directly charge this back somehow to its customers. I think Mr. Minister, whether you 

convert gallons to litres or whatever, a rate of 26.6 cents a gallon (I believe it is) is a direct attack on an 

industry which must flourish in Saskatchewan, and its importance is going to increase in the years ahead. 

 

Mr. Minister, in estimates of course, I will be opening this up; but I place this challenge before you. To deny 

the statistics and to deny the figures which I used in my reply to the Budget speech, I would like to hear that 

denial of those excessive charges against an industry which is trying to operate in the province. Mr. Minister, 

a colleague from Saskatoon Eastview is asking about a conversion. It is very interesting to know when you 

pull up to some gasoline pumps now in Saskatchewan they have a little sign on them that says this is half 

price because the price of gasoline has exceeded $1 a gallon and therefore they have to set there — the 

highest they can go on their calculator is $1 a gallon. It is going to be interesting to see and set up the 

mechanisms for the cost of regulating your pumps to the ledger price. 

 

The cost of this change over, Mr. Minister, has become a very expensive thing and I am sure that your 

department has given some consideration to it. Although it is not part of this bill, Mr. Minister, but it is 

related, the cost of converting the cardboard cartons at one small plant in Saskatchewan from the quart size 

to the metric size, so the manager of the plan told me was $20,000 in itself. I just wonder what it is going to 

cost to convert and change all of the dispensing, fuel dispensing machines that we have for cars and trucks in 

Saskatchewan to the metric and I am sure there are a good many people asking that particular question as to 

why? What advantage is there to the industry in going metric? I know that is a national problem and not a 

provincial problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would hope that you would not take the stand which the Premier has taken, which the 

Minister of Agriculture took today, that because diesel whether it be in cars or trucks is more efficient 

therefore, you should punish efficiency with a higher tax rate. Your colleague announced the other day an 

insulation program for Saskatchewan homes. Why? The obvious thing was to make the home so that with 

more insulation it would take less fuel. Is that not correct? Now, because you get a more efficient home as 

far as heat loss is concerned, are you going to penalize that home with a higher natural gas rate because it is 

more efficient? That argument, Mr. Minister, that I am making is a very, very invalid argument. The 

argument that you penalize an industry because they burn one type of fuel which is more efficient is no more 

a logical approach that it is to penalize a home that is well insulated because it uses less fuel in the heating of 

the home. I will await with great anticipation your denial of the statistics I have given you and I will also 

wait with anticipation the rationale that your government has in placing the highest fuel tax on an industry in 

the province that needs it the most. 

 

MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, I take note of the comments of both the member for Eastview and the 

member for Rosetown-Elrose. I want to point out, although I realize that I think the public isn’t really very 

well prepared in terms of conversion to metric and I know there is a very high cost as members have pointed 

out. I think we are generally aware of that. We simply have no choice. I think the members opposite have to 

admit that this is a ruling in relation to the Metric Commission of Canada from the federal 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

389 

 

authorities and it is standard across the country. We don’t have any choice in actual fact. It is not our 

intention once this bill is passed to proclaim it if in fact they aren’t ready by January 1, 1979 in relation to 

converting gallons to litres. I am certain that just will not happen if in fact they are not far enough along the 

way. 

 

I note the comments of the member for Rosetown-Elrose with respect to the diesel tax. Perhaps we are lucky 

in terms of the conversions because when I said we converted back to the nearest tenth of a cent we gain a 

little bit in gasoline but we lose on diesel and off highway commercial, so at least we are going in the right 

direction in that respect. 

 

I notice arguments with regard to trucking between Alberta and Saskatchewan and of course that is always 

one of the comparisons we have but we also are aware of the fact that Alberta is in a rather unique position 

in relation to the rest of the provinces across Canada. I would point out to the hon. member for Rosetown-

Elrose that the province of Ontario has a higher diesel rate per gallon on its trucks that we have in 

Saskatchewan. They have a higher per gallon charge in Ontario than we have, higher than our 26.6. Their 

gasoline tax is roughly the same as ours but their diesel tax rate is higher than our 26.6 cents per gallon. Now 

you may argue, I suppose, that in Ontario there are other competing forms of transport that give some 

protection to the general public and I am not arguing that it isn’t difficult in terms of costs related to 

transportation of goods in Saskatchewan but I again stress the fact that we in this province have more than 

twice the mileage that Alberta and Manitoba have put together. There are very high costs in relation to 

maintaining the highway system in a province like ours with a relatively small population. It is necessary to 

derive revenue flows from gasoline and diesel fuels and when you take into account the actual mileage 

covered by those large trucks transporting goods on our highways in terms of damage to the highways and 

the needed repairs, 26.6 cents per gallon for diesel fuel is a reasonable relationship to the 19 cents per gallon 

in relation to gasoline. 

 

In fact I can argue, also, that the gasoline tax today is exactly the same as it was seven years ago. It is true the 

diesel one is a bit higher but that’s one of the reasons for it because more and more trucks, semi-trailers are 

using those highways and the cost of maintaining those highways and constructing them in the first place 

rises as a result of that fact. 

 

I want to assure all members of the House that (and I stress this again) that there is a very high cost of 

conversion to metric but we have no choices in this matter. The Metric Commission of Canada has informed 

us that as of January 1, 1979 all the pumps will be converted from gallons to litres and on that basis this bill 

is presented to the House for passage. Again I assure the House that if in fact they are not far enough along at 

that particular time to carry out that process we will simply not proclaim the bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford):— Mr. Speaker, with your consent and the consent of the House I 

would like to now introduce a group of students from the Turtleford constituency. They are seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. They are 35 in number and they are Grade 10 students from the high school in Turtleford. 

They are here in the Queen 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

390 

 

City touring some of the historic sites, including the Legislative buildings. I know, Mr. Speaker, that they 

have made a fairly long trip coming down here, some of which was over highway 26 that the Minister of 

Highways has announced that some construction is going to take place on. 

 

I hope that the students find their trip from the parklands to the prairies an interesting trip, enjoyable and 

informative. Approximately one and one-half months ago I met with these students during some ceremonies 

regarding the Silver Jubilee pins. 

 

They are here in the city with their principal Mr. Dombrowski and I wish to welcome them here and ask the 

members in the Chamber to do the same. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. N. BYERS (Minister of the Environment) moved second reading of Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend 

The Department of The Environment Act, 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity on second reading of this bill to explain why I believe it is 

both desirable and necessary to modify the act establishing the Department of the Environment. I shall deal 

with the proposed amendments in order. 

 

Some of the proposed changes are of a housekeeping nature, while others reflect important changes, the need 

for which has become increasingly evident. 

 

Clause 8 of section 11 needs revision in order to eliminate possible confusion as to the legal authority of 

Boards of Inquiry appointed under this act. In recent years I have commissioned several public inquiries and 

while the major focus of such investigations are environmental, they are environmental in the broad sense. In 

its broader context environmental impact includes the economic, social and other effects of a proposed 

development. These are things the public and particularly the communities and citizens directly affected 

believe that boards of inquiry should examine. The proposed amendment will remove any doubt whether a 

board of inquiry established under this act has the mandate to examine social and economic effects stemming 

from a development project. 

 

From time to time and using moneys approved for the purpose in the budget of the Department of 

Environment, the department makes grants for purposes of enhancing and protecting the quality of our 

environment. The proposed new section 11(a) will simplify the processing of such grants when the amount is 

less than $10,000. Grants in excess of that amount will continue to be subject to approval by Cabinet. It is 

my intent to prepare regulations governing the terms and conditions under which these grants will be paid. 

 

The new section 12(a) is essentially a housekeeping item. The Acts administered by the Department of the 

Environment involve the issuance of many routine approvals, permits and certificates of one kind or another. 

This new section will allow the minister and the deputy minister to delegate certain of these responsibilities 

to appropriate managers within the department. All delegations require Cabinet approval and there is no 

intention to delegate those duties and responsibilities which should properly remain with the minister and the 

deputy minister. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

391 

 

The proposed new section 13(e-A) is the most substantive revision proposed in this bill. We have been 

experiencing a growing number of accidental oil and gasoline spills in the province. In some cases, the 

company responsible takes appropriate and quick action to deal with such accidents. However, unfortunately 

others do not. The present act does not provide the department with authority to ensure that spills of 

dangerous materials are reported or are controlled, cleaned up and disposed of in a satisfactory way. This 

proposed amendment will provide this needed authority. While the prime focus is on petroleum products, 

because most accidents involve such products, the amendment would provide similar departmental authority 

in the event of spills of other harmful substances, including radioactive material. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that these amendments will improve this Departmental Act and I accordingly urge all 

members to support these proposed amendments. I move second reading of the bill to amend The 

Department of the Environment Act. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley):— Mr. Speaker, I suspect that . . . (interjection) . . . I am sorry to 

wake you up . . . I suspect that the bill is going to be dealt with at some great length in Committee of the 

Whole. The minister has opened up some questions here that are of particular concern to me, both in 

philosophy and in the practical application of sections of the bill. I had the opportunity, not too recently, to 

debate with a member of the other two parties in Saskatchewan on television the application of the inquiry 

process of a tool by which governments could help come to decisions on controversial problems. One of the 

things that I think we sort of came to a consensus about at that time was the question of public inquiries and 

whether or not they should be given an open-ended ability to determine their own terms of reference of their 

own mandate. I think we did reach a consensus that probably that would not serve the function of the inquiry 

as it was initially set out to serve. Here we see a section of the act that is amended and if I read correctly, 

would give any inquiry or hearing struck by the Department of the Environment the ability to set its own 

terms of reference in terms of inquiring into economic, social or political impact of any particular project. I 

would like to pursue that matter with the Minister of the Environment, to some degree further, when we 

meet in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Some of the other things that I am going to be pursuing with them, that I am not particularly comfortable 

with at this time are the question of the grants. Now it’s possible that I’m merely not familiar with the 

historical use of grants by any department on a general basis. This explanation for this section says that it’s a 

new section and it will enable the department to make grants of up to $10,000 etc. and anything over 

$10,000 by Order in Council. Well obviously it raises questions in the minds of members here. What 

purpose will those grants be used for; under what circumstances does the minister see that grants might be 

handed out; obviously a concern of ours and we’ll be pursuing that further. 

 

As well I have some questions about the section 4(12a), I guess, or (12a). The first thing that conjures in my 

mind is that the Department of the Environment is, at least in spirit, interested in setting up a force of 

environmental officers who in my vivid imagination might serve in the range of a traffic officer or 

conservation officer. Obviously if that is what is intended by this section — I suspect the question will be 

resolved in Committee of the Whole as well — if that is what is intended, it raises quite serious questions of 

procedure and responsibility in the minds of the members of the Legislature. Let me say with respect to the 

last section dealing with environmental concerns, accidental spills 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

392 

 

or pollution by solids, petroleum or otherwise, obviously anything that this government would like to 

undertake to do to either prevent the accidental pollution of our environment; any steps you would like to 

undertake to help prevent those sorts of things or to deal with them once they have happened within, of 

course, reasonable limits, will be supported by this caucus. 

 

I suggest perhaps the legislation is geared as much towards the potential danger in uranium development as it 

is with anything else if that happens to be the case. It’s an interesting aside that you’re writing into 

legislation your ability to deal with that situation long before the Bayda Inquiry has decided on which 

approach the government of Saskatchewan should take. It could be an interesting part in the jigsaw puzzle 

that’s been developing with respect to uranium development, another cog in the wheel. You’ve heard 

members on this side of the House say that we feel that your government is committed wholesale to 

continuing with the development of nuclear energy and uranium development in Saskatchewan, regardless of 

what the Bayda Inquiry says or any other conservative group. You heard me say the day before yesterday in 

the Attorney General’s absence that every time this subject is mentioned to him he gets dollar signs ringing 

up in his eyeballs. I say only for your interest’s sake, Mr. Attorney General, that this amendment may very 

well be another cog in that wheel towards the development of uranium in Saskatchewan, regardless of what 

other environmental concerns say. 

 

So, my points in summation then are simply that nothing in this act at this stage is conclusively disturbing to 

me, certainly. But until we get some further answers in Committee of the Whole I can’t be completely 

satisfied that this act is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan; we’ll be pursuing it in Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— I just have a few comments and I’m going to beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn debate 

on this bill for a number of reasons. I’m interested when the minister talked about the inquiry process. There 

are a number of questions of course which can only be answered when we get to Committee of the Whole. I 

am not too sure of one area which I would like to pursue, Mr. Minister, if it would more properly go to the 

Department of Health than the Department of Environment and that’s in the whole area of pollution. I’m not 

talking about pollution of the streams or the pollution of the air, I’m talking about something else which 

perhaps crosses over into the field of Public Health. It is something which has become an extremely 

interesting topic and some jurisdictions in North America are now taking a very serious look at it and that is 

sound pollution. I think we have a problem within our society at the present time and I am not sure, Mr. 

Minister, if it would be best dealt with under the Department of Environment or not. 

 

I want to do some more study; I have some research that is presently coming on that. I would like, therefore, 

to beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. N. BYERS (Minister of Saskatchewan Telecommunications) moved second reading of Bill 14 — An 

Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments on this bill which should be almost self-explanatory. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

393 

 

All hon. members will know that the Department of Telephones has paid maintenance grants to rural 

telephone companies amounting to about $2.50 per subscriber per year. In addition, the Department of 

Telephones has paid what is known as circuit grants to assist rural telephone companies in the cost of 

installing buried cable and wire. In November of 1976 the government announced a policy whereby rural 

telephone companies would transfer their assets to Sask Tel. The response to that program has been 

excellent. About 500 companies have now transferred to Sask Tel, which leaves in the order of 200 rural 

telephone companies that are still independent, with approximately 16,000 subscribers. Last year the entire 

staff of the Department of Telephones was transferred from the department to the Crown corporation. There 

is, therefore, no staff in the Department of Telephones and there is a deputy minister who works voluntarily. 

The only staff in the department is the minister. It is a rapidly vanishing department. 

 

However, because there are only a few rural companies left, in the order of 200, in the case of some of those 

200 companies they have completely installed buried cable. Therefore, there will not be the need to pay 

grants to them and we expect that they will either remain independent or transfer to Sask Tel within the next 

five years. 

 

There are some companies which will continue with their own buried cable program, either because they can 

install cable more quickly than Sask Tell will be able to do it under the buried cable program and, therefore, 

because the pay-outs in grants for buried cable and maintenance will be relatively small sums it is therefore 

proposed to transfer the responsibility for paying these grants to rural telephone companies from the 

Department of Telephones where there is no staff to the Crown corporation Sask Tel where the staff is 

situated and where it has been situated really for many, many years. I don’t know what the numbers would 

be, the exact sums would be. They are certainly well under $100,000 and probably close to $50,000 

involved. 

 

We think this makes sense. We don’t think it will make much difference to the rural telephone companies 

who get these cheques whether it has the Department of Telephones or Sask Tel on the cheque. They will 

welcome it either way and they will both be good. 

 

I move second reading of the bill and urge all members to support it unanimously. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments 

pertaining to this bill and I concur it is a very simple bill, relative to the telephone system in the province of 

Saskatchewan, but I would be very concerned about the principle being established here of a Crown 

corporation making grants to any organization in the province of Saskatchewan. I would think that the entire 

granting structure in our province should be done by the departments which are under the direct control of 

the minister. Certainly the same kind of system with regards to the staff of Sask Tel could be done by the 

staff of Sask Tel working under contract for short periods of time for the Department of Telephones, for 

example, so you could accomplish the same end by an administrative change rather than by a legislative 

change and perhaps the principle as being established by this bill may be wrong and it could set a precedent 

for the government that could see, for example, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan making grants to 

various communities, various competitors, various suppliers where Sask Tel or Sask Power could make 

grants to other kinds of organizations in the name of administrative efficiency. Mr. Speaker, I would like 

time to contemplate this particular situation, so I beg leave to adjourn debate. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

394 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 11 — An Act to amend The Land 

Titles Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, most of these amendments have been initiated by the master of titles and other 

officials of the Land Titles’ Branch, for the express purpose of improving the operations of the branch, for 

the benefit of users. 

 

A number of these amendments are directed at solving a problem which has troubled the Land Titles’ Branch 

for quite some time, many years, namely, the problem of writs of execution and similarity of names. 

 

At the present time officials of the Land Titles’ Branch carrying out their duties under The Land Titles Act 

are required to place a writ of execution against land, not only if the name on the execution debtor is exactly 

the same as that of registered owner but also if it is merely similar to name of a registered owner. Given the 

present requirements of our present legislation, the normal state of affairs is that the Land Titles’ officials 

don’t have enough information to conclusively determine if the owner and the debtor are, or are not, the 

same person. So, in an increasing number of cases the officials have to make judgment calls. They do so, 

erring I believe, on the cautious side of placing the writ against the name which is similar. As a result, over 

years, many registered owners who, solely because their names were similar to those of execution debtors, 

have been confronted with writs of execution placed against their lands. Quite obviously this has not been a 

satisfactory position for although real hardship has seldom resulted from such writs, their presence has 

nevertheless proven to be an irritating matter to the innocent landowners involved, who, in many cases, are 

required to expend time, effort and money to have their titles cleared. 

 

We believe that the procedure set out in the amendments, sections 91(a), 180(2), 207(f) will, in the long run, 

alleviate the situation without in any way lessening the protection given to execution creditors. 

 

The amendment to section 91(a) requires that the full name and address of the transferee be given in all 

transfers. 

 

The amendment to section 180(2) places the onus on the creditor to get the complete and correct name of the 

debtor before any legal steps are taken which result in writs of execution. 

 

The amendment to section 207(f) denies liability of the assurance fund for merely similar names and limits 

such liabilities to names which are the same. This is, I think, a further incentive to the execution creditor to 

get the correct name of the debtor at the start of the legal proceedings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the combination of these three amendments we believe, at least I hope, will go a long way to 

reducing some of the problems in the Land Titles’ Office arising from the similarity of names and writs of 

execution. Quite clearly, the problem can’t be solved, or won’t be solved, immediately. And quite clearly, 

there will probably always be similarity problems for some of the more common names but these steps in the 

long term should reduce the number of such problems to a minimum. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

395 

 

A number of the amendments, specifically to sections 2, 83(2), 180(3A) and section 241 are designed to deal 

with ambiguities arising out of the wording of the present legislation. Although mines and minerals are 

separate terms, over the years the word ‘minerals’ has been taken to refer to and, in fact, to mean both mines 

and minerals. For a number of years it has been the practice of the Land Titles’ Branch to cancel mines and 

minerals titles completely when there was a forfeiture of minerals alone. This amendment will dispel any 

ambiguity which might exist in the meaning of mines and minerals and will, as a result of section 16(3) of 

the amending act, legitimize a long-time practice of the Land Titles offices. 

 

The amendment to section 83(2) shows that the act requires two separate publications, one week apart, in 

cases where duplicate certificates of title are lost. 

 

Section 180(3A) defines the phrase "from the receipt of." The day of receipt is the date upon which the entry 

of the document is made in the instrument register and the document’s priority (these are the other 

documents) is determined by its position that register. 

 

Amendments to section 241 spell out the results when one of the joint tenants is a company and that 

company is dissolved. The addition of subclause (i) to section 71(b) merely brings The Land Titles Act into 

line with section 25 of The Oil Well Income Tax Act, 1978. Some members in this House may remember 

that bill which makes all taxes, interest and penalties payable under the act a lien, charge and encumbrance 

in favor of the Crown, on the entire estate of the taxpayer, in priority to every lien or encumbrance to any 

other person. 

 

In the operation of the Land Titles System, Mr. Speaker, it’s a fairly common occurrence for staff to be 

moved temporarily from one office to another. Illness, holidays or an unusual workload often make it 

necessary for registrars or deputy registrars to be moved about from their normal, permanent posts to meet 

the challenges and the problems in other offices. 

 

The inclusion of section 16A will ensure that the registrar or deputy registrar, who has been moved and is on 

temporary assignment in another Land Titles Office has the authority to carry out his duties in that office as 

is required. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the amendment to section 22 is, to a certain extent, an economy measure which will save 

both time and material by permitting our Land Titles officials to give copies of portions of large instruments 

when only such portions are required. 

 

The procedures contemplated by sections 124A and 124B provide a service to the general public in those 

cases where the former lessee can’t be found, or refuses to provide a surrender, by creating an inexpensive 

way of clearing the title of lease memorandum which would otherwise collect over the years to clutter up the 

various titles. The amendment provides for protection of the rights of existing lessees and former lessors. 

 

The amendment to section 159 is in response to a resolution of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. At the 

present time the party, normally the registered owner, who questions a caveat and requires caveator to file a 

judge’s order providing for its continuance, is not informed when the required judge’s order is filed. This 

amendment ensures that he would be so informed. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

396 

 

The amendments to the forms are as required by the other amendments contained in this bill as I described. 

The new section of 164A will require a Land Titles registrar to refuse to register any document transferring 

an interest in farm land or to file any caveat respecting an agreement for sale of farm land unless the 

document is accompanied by a statutory declaration completed by the transferee or purchaser. 

 

Regulations under The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974, will prescribe the form and content of the 

declaration. The declaration will contain all the relevant information to enable the Saskatchewan Farm 

Ownership Board to determine whether or not the transaction results in the transferee or purchaser acquiring 

an interest in farm land in excess of that set out by The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act. The amendment 

provides that the registrar must forward a copy of the declaration to the Board. The Board, presently, has no 

really effective means of monitoring acquisitions of land in this province by non-residents. This amendment 

will significantly assist the Board in properly administering The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974, 

and I would pass in the same closing that the amendment coincide with the amendments being proposed to 

The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this fairly and fully describes the provisions of this bill. I accordingly move second 

reading of Bill No. 11, an Act to amend The Land Titles Act. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make some comment on this act and 

some general comment about the operation of the Land Titles Office, generally. The first change, as the 

Attorney General knows, is to change the words Mines and Minerals in The Land Titles Act to have the 

word Minerals include all mines and minerals and I am going to ask him to go back and re-examine that 

because you are doing it retroactively. There are titles, as I understand it, that are issued separately for mines 

and some issued separately for minerals. Mines is a distinct thing from minerals and under the laws it always 

has been. So that if we pass the section as it stands, I think retroactively we would be confiscating people’s 

mines titles with no compensation to them. So I think you want to re-examine that portion of it. 

 

Section 124(a) provides for a lessee, it gives the lessee the right to change his address when the lease or the 

indication of the lease is registered on the title. I would like to see you include caveators in that. There is 

currently no provision in the Land Titles Office for a person who registers a caveat to file with the Registrar 

of the Land Titles Office a notice of change of address. That leads to some very real problems. Very often, 

what happens is that a caveat may be registered, which is a notice on the title that that person has an interest 

in the land and some time goes by and the person changes his or her address. Then there is a notice issued by 

the land owner calling for the clearing of the caveat and the notice never reaches the person who has the 

caveat on the title and there is no way that the caveator can put in a notice of change of address. That is 

another area you should look at. 

 

I won’t persuade you with respect to this one but the mm Section 164(a) is again another illustration of that 

odious kind of provision that you put before us so often, giving the Lieutenant-Governor the power to 

exempt any person or class of persons from the provision of that section. Now I am going to make a bit of an 

argument again in that respect, although I have made it several times before, that sections of this kind have 

no place in the law. Under The Farm Ownership Act as it stands, that same section appears and I read 

regularly that the Minister of Agriculture is exempting people from the provisions of that act. I don’t think 

that ought to take place. The act itself ought to be so drawn that the power of The Farm Ownership Board is 

spelled out in the act. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

397 

 

When you get into these situations where you are giving exemptions.. I had a series of questions on the order 

paper in the last Legislature, which went by the way and which I am going to reintroduce, in which I am 

really asking for details of all the exemptions that you granted under that act. It isn’t a good power to give to 

the Board, across-the-board power to exempt anyone from the provisions of The Farm Ownership Act. You 

can see, I am sure, the problems that leads to and I wish we would get to the position where provisions of 

this kind weren’t put before us. 

 

By way of final broad comment, with the operation which the Attorney General has indicated, it will solve 

some of the problems of the Land Titles Office. I want to raise with you in some detail the problems that are 

currently occurring with the Land Titles Office in effect shut down. I want to urge you to seek some way, at 

least in the dispute with the Saskatchewan Government Employees Association, to get the Land Titles Office 

reopened. There is a problem in this sense that there are a number of people now who are beginning to suffer 

and who are going to suffer more as the month advances, in the following way. All house transactions now 

in the province which are facing completion dates as of March 31 are stranded. You can’t transfer the title. If 

you can’t transfer the title, the purchaser, on April 1, can’t take possession. The vendor, on completion 

March 31, doesn’t get his money. Very often he is recommitted to another purchase so he is falling into 

default. 

 

Now that affects a great number of people in our province. There is another aspect of that and that is the 

interest adjustment on closing. Who is going to pay for it? As of April 1 we are going to have an enormous 

number of these problems in this province and they are serious problems. They are causing people a loss of 

money; they are causing people to be in breach of their contracts in many cases. Surely there must be some 

mechanism by which we can get the people in the Land Titles Office and the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees Association back on the job, pending the resolution of their salary dispute. 

 

There is another area which is causing problems which again are going to get more serious and that is with 

respect to large construction projects. The owner cannot get a release of funds — the additional advance of 

funds — without a clearance of title. You can’t search the title to determine whether there are intervening 

mechanic’s liens and you can’t get at the mechanic’s liens, so therefore you can’t give a certificate of 

clearance and the contractor can’t get his advance of money. So it is beginning now, for some contractors, to 

run out of money in respect to the project and that means to say that the employees on the job are not getting 

paid. The employees, in turn, have a right, as the Attorney General knows, under The Land Titles Act and 

elsewhere, to file liens for wages that aren’t paid but they can’t get their wage liens in the Land Titles Office 

either. That’s causing problems and it is going to get a lot worse unless we get that situation settled by April 

1. The point I want to make here is that I appreciate the interests of the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Association and what they’re trying to do but their interests are far outweighed by the interests 

of the people that are being adversely affected in the process, those people who are buying and selling homes 

completed as of March 15 and as of April 1, the workmen and the contractors on projects, large projects that 

can’t get their advances and are now beginning to find they are in difficulty financially. And then there is a 

third area and that’s this one. We have just come out of a period recently where the Land Titles Office was 

often six weeks behind in its work which was creating chaos in the same area. We’re now getting to the 

point where that’s getting caught up. I understand that for every day the Land Titles is closed, it’s likely to 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

398 

 

result in two days of delay when it reopens. So we may find, as of April 1 or 2, that the Land Titles Office is 

two months behind. Now, what does that mean? It means for a person who has bought a house effective 

April 1 has got a problem getting his title until June 1. That creates the additional problems of who gets paid 

and when? And who pays the interest in the intervening period? That’s what we’re leading to. I’m told it’s 

likely to be two months before they get back to clean up the problem, unless we get back into the Land Titles 

Office quickly. And what I ask you to do in the process is to sit down with the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees’ Association in the current dispute; persuade them to the fact that their interests which are being, 

by their argument, adversely affected, are far outweighed by the interest of the larger group and the enormity 

of the problems they have and persuade them to get back on the job pending the resolution of their dispute. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):- Just a comment, Mr. Speaker, the Land Titles Office in Regina had finally 

caught up very recently and we were getting two or three days service to turn around some documents. Now 

this strike is obviously causing some pretty severe hardship and I think it will cause greater hardship not yet 

so much on some of the developers as those involved in a great number of transactions although it is starting 

to tighten up, but it’s hurting an awful lot of so-called little people who have their houses for sale and are 

going to be faced with major interest payments that they simply weren’t prepared to make. I probably feel, as 

the Attorney General will state, that one does not want to interfere in the collective bargaining process but is 

it possible and would the Attorney General make a commitment that upon resolution of the labour dispute 

with the SGEA or upon the return to work of the Land Titles’ employees that the government will have the 

number of part-time employees increased in sufficient number to clear up the backlog as quickly as possible? 

It is not as I say, just the developers that are being hurt, it’s an awful lot of people, this is their major asset, 

they’re trying to change as the hon. member says, April 1 or in many cases March 1 and they’re being faced 

with interest payments that they simply weren’t able to handle and I think that, upon resolution of the dispute 

or upon the return to work of the Land Titles employees, it would be fair for the government to say that there 

would be the funds available for the increase in the number of part-time help to get the backlog cleared up as 

soon as possible after the resolution of the dispute. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, first of all, I thank the hon. members for their suggestions and 

comments with respect to this bill and with respect to the larger problem that is before us now, namely the 

SGEA dispute. I will say to the member from Regina South that I will ask the lawyers in the department and 

the people in the Land Titles Office to check into those two points that you make and hope to have 

something ready by way of any answer or an amendment if that’s necessary when we get to Committee of 

the Whole’s clause by clause consideration of the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the matter of the SGEA strike however, is of course a very complex matter. I can of course 

share the concern expressed by the member for Regina South and Qu’Appelle about the hardship which is 

being sustained by literally tens of hundreds of people who are involved in day-to-day transactions (house 

transactions) and so forth. 

 

I am not sure that it is open for me to suggest to the SGEA people that they should in effect, return to work 

without fully carefully considering the implications that that might have to a larger problem of the dispute 

that exists between the SGEA and the Public Service Commission. What I’m saying is that the matter has to 

be looked at very 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

399 

 

delicately lest we compound a problem which already is obviously getting to be tight. Nevertheless, I will 

consider my options in terms of the suggestion made by the member for Regina South; discuss it perhaps 

with the Minister of Labour and see what options are available to us and see what we can do in the next little 

while, if anything. I say in closing to the members of Qu’Appelle and Regina South, we will obviously have 

to do all we can by way of additional staff and money to clean up the backlog once the dispute is complete. 

 

Quite frankly I’ve been reasonably satisfied with the way Land Titles office has been operating. Prior to the 

dispute it was virtually on a 48-hour, 72-hour basis, I’m advised by Mr. Allen Carr, the Director of Land 

Titles, and I think that is an objective that we have got to keep working toward if we can. Perhaps we can 

shorten it down some more. We will do all we can to clean up the backlog the moment the dispute is settled 

and see what options we have if any, during the course of the dispute to get people in if that’s possible, to 

ease the problem now. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 13 — An Act to amend The 

Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act, 1968. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill contains a number of non-connected amendments, some of a housekeeping 

nature and some of perhaps a little more importance. 

 

The amendment in section 2 of the bill is perhaps the amendment with the greatest possible importance to 

the members of the House. 

 

There is a fairly widespread practice amongst persons owning land on which they have granted surface 

leases, to retain the right to the income from those surface leases when they sell the land. One of the basic 

precepts of this act is that the person entitled to the income from a surface lease has an opportunity to apply 

to the Arbitration Board periodically to have the amount of that compensation reviewed. However, the act 

does not presently permit such an application to be made by a person who has sold all of the land, except his 

right to retain the income from the surface lease. The owner of the rest of the land may well have no reason 

to make such an application — obviously he doesn’t. Therefore the intent of the act is defeated in this kind 

of a situation. 

 

The proposed amendment would permit an application on behalf of the person whose only remaining interest 

in the land is his right to the income from the surface lease. 

 

Section 2 of the bill would require a quorum of two members where the membership of the board is three, 

and a quorum of three members where the membership of the board exceeds three. The present membership 

of the board is five. 

 

The proposed new subsection (1A) would for the first time provide for the resolution of the deadlock vote 

situation on the Arbitration Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in dealing with Section 4 of the bill, this would permit the secretary of the Arbitration Board to 

sign documents on behalf of the board in the absence or disability of the chairman. The secretary of the 

board as members may know, is a full-time employee position which requires the secretary to be very 

familiar with the matters in which the board is involved, being as it were the chief executive officer to the 

board. Other than the chairman of the board, the members are all part-time appointments and they may reside 

anywhere in Saskatchewan. Where the chairman is not available to sign board documents, having to call 

upon distant board members to attend at the 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

400 

 

board office to sign documents, this obviously may cause delays to the detriment of all of the parties 

involved. 

 

The Arbitration Board had always interpreted the act to allow service documents on an owner pursuant to the 

act to be by registered mail as is the case for service on operators. However, Mr. Speaker, a recent decision 

of the judge of the Count of Queen’s Bench required service on owners to be personally effected. There are 

many situations in which the owners of the land reside out of the province or perhaps out of the country in 

which case personal service may be awkward, expensive, costly, and time consuming. The proposed 

amendment here would allow service on owners to be by registered or certified mail in line with the 

Arbitration Board’s previous interpretation and to make the requirements for service on the owners coincide 

with those for service on the operators. 

 

Section 6 of the bill deals with a deposit that an operator is required to put down with the Department of 

Mineral Resources. The intent of the deposit is to protect the owner’s right to have the operator restore the 

surface of the lands when the operator discontinues his operation there. 

 

Under the present legislation there is no way in which the operator can recover that deposit, whether or not 

he has adequately restored the surface of the land and in spite of the fact that section 48 of the act only 

allows the owner five years in which to bring an application to the Arbitration Board with respect to that 

restoration. This proposed amendment would allow the operator to recover his deposit where the five year 

period has elapsed and no application has been made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, section 7 of the bill proposes the repeal of subsection 5 of section 51D. This is part of the 

act that was added in 1972 to allow the board to award compensation to land owners in respect to damage to 

the land not covered by a surface lease caused by the operations of an operator on a surface lease. The 

subsection in question limits the board to a maximum award of $1,000 and the board is of the view that this 

unreasonably low limit causes land owners to pursue their claims in other ways rather than bringing them to 

the board where I think it is the best chance of a satisfactory resolution. 

 

Since the purpose of this part of the act is to allow the board to deal with such claims, the proposal is to 

remove the monetary limit to the board’s jurisdiction. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, section 8 of the bill deals with reference to disputes before the Arbitration Board to a 

mediation officer appointed pursuant to the act. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

401 

 

Under the present provisions only the parties of the dispute may make such a reference. The board has no 

control over when such a reference is made and where such reference is made, the proceedings in the board 

are stayed pending the completion of the mediation officer’s attempt to mediate a settlement in the dispute. 

Quite obviously this is not fully satisfactory. 

 

The proposed amendment would, therefore, firstly, allow the board to refer matters to mediation on its own 

initiative, where the parties have not chosen to do so and the board feels that there is some merit in the 

mediation route. 

 

Secondly, the amendment would give the board a discretion as to whether or not to permit the parties to the 

dispute to refer a matter to mediation. There have been, and may be in the future, instances where the board 

views such a reference by one of the parties as being merely a tactic meant to delay the board’s 

determination of the dispute and really not as a bona fide appeal to the mediation process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I have given the members of the House some fairly detailed explanation of the proposed 

amendments here and, accordingly, I move second reading of Bill 13, an Act to amend The Surface Rights 

Act. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments that I would like to direct to the Attorney General in 

relation to this bill. There is one group of people, Mr. Attorney General, in the province that has a great deal 

of concern, which is not covered by this bill and yet it is related to the bill almost directly. I am later on 

going to be asking for leave of the Assembly to adjourn debate so that I can do some further inquiry, not only 

in my constituency but in others. 

 

Mr. Attorney General, there is a problem in Saskatchewan at the present time and I would like to relate that 

problem to you as it relates to this particular bill. There are a number of smaller companies shall we say in 

all cases that I am familiar with, have their head offices outside of Saskatchewan who have, say in a period 

of some five years ago entered into an agreement with the landowner in relationship to trenching and so on 

and the rental fee and what have you. I have personally been involved in the last three years of trying to track 

down these companies and trying to make them honor their commitment to the landholder who happens to 

be, in my case at least, all of them Saskatchewan farmers. I have received assistance from the government 

opposite in that they have provided me with the addresses of the companies, but at the same time have 

informed me that they cannot take action, or there is nothing within the province, to protect the 

Saskatchewan farmer from action that he would like to take against a company whose headquarters are in 

another province. Therefore, it places these people in a very serious position. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Attorney General, there is a letter on my desk today which was delivered and that was the nature of the 

dispute again in which a farmer is claiming that he has rent in the neighborhood, it’s not a great amount but 

it’s an amount that I would like to get a hold of, about $2,400. Yet there’s no provision, none whatsoever. I 

don’t say that in a critical way, Mr. Attorney General. I say that it’s time that somehow we looked after these 

people who have not been honored by the companies. They have not received their rentals on the land. I 

would hope, as the Attorney General of the province, you would take a look at this situation. 

 

Some of my colleagues, Mr. Attorney General, have more to say related to the topic which I have just 

adhered to. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

402 

 

HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 

16 — An Act of Consent respecting the adoption of the Manitoba-Saskatchewan boundary south of 

the twenty-second base line as surveyed by the Manitoba-Saskatchewan Boundary Commission 

during the years 1965 to 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this legislation could probably have been referred to the Non-Controversial Bills 

Committee, however, I will take the opportunity to very briefly provide all members with the background 

relative to the legislation we are seeking. The legislative effect is relatively minor. Through the legislation it 

is intended to standardize the entire Saskatchewan-Manitoba boundary sections which were not accurately 

defined previously. A word of explanation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Up until 1961 a large portion of the boundary between our two provinces was just a line on a map. In 1961 

and 1962, 250 miles of the northern portion were surveyed and monumented. This survey was ratified in late 

1966. This then left three areas with a total of 135 miles where the boundary was not located or marked on 

the ground in any way. In those areas where the monuments were established, defining the edge of the road 

allowance most of the surveys were made prior to 1900. The monuments consisted of wooden posts and little 

evidence remained of their position. Concern was expressed by Manitoba that the monuments defining this 

road allowance were located in Saskatchewan, were part of the survey system of this province and could be 

lands adjoining the boundary and that it did not seem proper that monuments governing interprovincial 

boundary should be disturbed or re-established except under instructions of the proper authority. Although 

455 miles of the southern portion was marked on the ground, both provinces agreed there was a need to re-

trace much of this boundary. 

 

In 1964, an Order in Council was approved enabling the provinces to jointly conduct the necessary surveys 

and report their findings to the Parliament of Canada and to the Legislatures of both Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Surveys were conducted between 1964 and 1971 and since that time work has continued in compiling the 

atlas and report, listing the commission’s activities. Costs for the survey were shared equally by the three 

levels of government and funds were voted annually in the budgets of the three governments. For the 

northern portion, the work was fairly heavily labor oriented with almost 50 per cent of the total labor being 

made to local labor. The major portion of the laborers for this project were recruited from Cumberland 

House. 

 

For the information of all members, I feel it would be useful for me to provide you with information relative 

to the considerable delay between the completion of the survey and publication of the report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is usual to take at least a year from the completion of the survey for finalization of the report, 

examination of returns and clarification of points raised by the examiner. In the case of a survey conducted 

by a staff member from Manitoba, three years ensued before proper clarification was received. It was not 

until 1974 that the decision was made not to re-monument a portion of the boundary, and compiling and 

checking of the report to the satisfaction of all three parties has taken considerable time. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

403 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is intended to clarify those portions of the Saskatchewan-Manitoba boundary 

which in the past have not been properly monumented. I ask for the approval of this Legislature to make 

these proposed changes official. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of Bill No. 16. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I will agree with the minister that this probably 

could have been placed in a bill of a non-controversial nature. 

 

In lighter vein, Mr. Minister, somebody not knowing of the work that had gone on in past years up to 1974 

and appearing for the first time in 1978 could think that you were taking some steps or measures to guard 

yourself from what is happening to the East and West of you as far as the politics of the other two provinces 

are concerned, in making sure that you get the boundary straightened out before any conflict of interest may 

take place. 

 

One of my colleagues, Mr. Minister, has a few comments, not in the way of controversy, I can assure you, 

but a few comments he would like to make with respect to this bill. We have no intentions of delaying it, I 

can assure you of that, but the next time around he has asked me if I would not beg leave to adjourn the 

debate until he has one or two minutes of comments that he would like to make. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

BILL NO. 4 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETIES ACT, 1966. 

 

Section 1 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley):— Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate it if the minister could give us 

another brief explanation about what the act hopes to accomplish. As you might understand we are in a bit of 

a difficult problem with the unexpected absence of our agriculture critic and while I was certainly attentive, 

while you were doing second reading on this, I am not really sure I was even in the building. I would just 

appreciate a quick explanation. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture):— Mr. Chairman, there was nobody over on that side of 

the House that was here when the bill was read the second time. However, I want to assure you that the 

amendments in this act are of a non-controversial nature and most of them are simple administrative 

amendments which have been approved by the Agricultural Societies Association who are the parent body 

dealing with agricultural societies and most of the amendments deal with very minor changes in various 

sections of the act. One deals with the limitations as to the distances between agricultural societies so that we 

don’t have two societies one beside the other, too closely. There are certain changes which deal with the age 

limitations of people who want to become members of the societies. 

 

I think what we should do, is we should just go through the act and as they come up I think we should 

discuss them as they come up. I think there really isn’t much point in 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

404 

 

going through it. They are just administrative amendments. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— Well strangely enough and as surprised as you may be, I do have a question that might 

be distantly related to the act. As a matter of fact it only came to my attention today and it deals with the 

question of whether or not an agricultural organization is serving as a club or an association and it becomes a 

question of funding and this particular case is of an Arabian Horse Club. Now these people are somewhat 

concerned that in their opinion they are not covered by the provincial Department of Agriculture, are not in a 

position to receive funding from them to promote the interests of their club. They are under the impression 

that they are governed by the Department of Culture and Youth. I would like to know just exactly how you 

people approach this subject of the differentiation between an Arabian Horse Association whose prime 

interest might be to try and promote the interests of that breed, either the production and marketing of it, as I 

believe is done by the Provincial Quarter Horse Association, etc., what is the difference between that and an 

organization which is incorporated as a club but which, as well, tries to promote the interests of the 

production and marketing? In this case, these people are having a show. Their club is holding a show but 

they are also holding a sale of Arabian horses in conjunction with it, yet they don’t apparently fit into a niche 

in the Agriculture Department which will provide them with any assistance to put the show on. 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Ordinarily what happens is that the associations such as you refer to (the horse clubs) 

belong to the Horse Breeders’ Associations and they in turn belong to the Saskatchewan Livestock 

Association and there are grants available through the Saskatchewan Livestock Association which can be 

used to promote the well-being of those particular clubs. This is the chain of events which has to be gone 

through in order to get those kinds of grants. They would not be normally funded under the Agricultural 

Societies Association. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— Are they included in your umbrella type responsibility? For example, these people are 

at least somewhat emotionally upset that they are looked after by the Department of Culture and Youth rather 

or do you not because they’re a club which would denote recreation, etc., rather than a primary means of 

promoting the horse organization? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Chairman, I think the dividing line would have to be whether they’re actually a 

recreational club or whether they’re an agricultural activity. If they’re an agricultural activity why they’re 

attempting to market their horses, then I think they would come very well within the purview of our act, if 

they’re simply a recreational club then they may very well not. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— What would you do if it’s 50-50? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— If in terms of technical information and technical expertise that they may want, we 

would certainly provide that from our department and if there’s any promotional efforts required they would 

come under the purview of the Saskatchewan Livestock Association and through that mechanism they would 

be able to get some kind of assistance but it would have to be through the Livestock Association. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— I have no further hard-hitting questions at the moment. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern):— .. under The Agricultural Society Act is one who is a breeder supposed 

to come through the Saskatchewan Livestock Association for funds 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

405 

 

or are there not other channels through which they are also available? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Well, the only involvement the Agricultural Society would have would be in promoting 

through fairs and exhibitions and so on. The Agricultural Society Association would not be involved in 

providing grants for the breed associations that they would have to do through the Livestock Breeders 

Association. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Are there not grants to fairs where they are involved and so much for each animal 

involved in any fair that’s involved through the Agricultural Society? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Yes, there are grants which they can receive through entering into a fair. If they enter 

into a fair certainly the grants are available to pay prize money. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Do they also not receive through the Agriculture Department and not the 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association as you referred to, the grants for travel and other things, separate from 

the youth and culture portion of the lottery? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— This would normally be done through an application to the Market Development Fund 

if.. or what is the other fund we have? Through the Livestock Association. They would normally get that 

funding through the Livestock Association if they were going to send horses for instance to Toronto Royal or 

something like that. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— What I’m getting to here is, I’m thinking of the applications to the Trust Fund, the 

Horn Fund, the Cattle Check-off Fund, which are societies or groups, for some research but once again some 

of these are covered by the Societies Act that are involved, I believe. Am I correct on that? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— No, if you were to make a proposition to any one of these funds, there are boards which 

determine what these funds are used for, the Cattle Check-off Fund, the Horn Fund and so on. And if you are 

to make a request to them, they would look at that request. The Board would make the decision as to whether 

a grant would be made available to you or not. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Well under the Agricultural Societies Act, I understand that agriculture does not 

recognize some areas, and does recognize other areas. Under this, is there a breakdown? For example, a 

riding club is not covered under agriculture in Saskatchewan. It is not considered agriculture, it’s part of the 

youth and culture section and therefore goes through federation where a breed comes through Saskatchewan 

Livestock. 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Yes, the Agricultural Societies Act allows the agricultural society to enter into a broad 

range of activities. If the Agricultural Societies Association determine that they wanted to get involved with 

some of these things which you are discussing now, they would be in order to do so. But unless they were 

prepared to make a recommendation to that extent they likely would not come under the act. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Well what I am trying to get at is, there is a fundamental problem within the province 

of Saskatchewan on a lot of the breed organizations who breed horses, cattle and so forth versed where the 

government involvement is. Is it through Youth and Culture or is it through Agriculture and The Societies 

Act. In fact that is probably the biggest problem, who do you go to when you want to do something and I am 

hoping that under this section maybe we can figure it out so that people out in the boon docks know which 

way to run. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

406 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Well actually, under The Agricultural Societies Act, we have no involvement with the 

breed societies as such. They deal through the Livestock Breeders Association and The Agricultural 

Societies Act. Any act which we have doesn’t really relate to that. If you want any activity under that you 

would have to come under the purview of these other associations. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Well, as you know, I wear two hats in this one because I am also president of the 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association. The problem that I am getting to is, for example, if a breed of horses 

as the Toronto Royal shipment is involved and the cattle shipment to the Toronto Royal want to go, they 

must make a submission through Saskatchewan Livestock. Yet, if they are going to an equestrian event they 

come through the lottery, which is not agriculture but they are registered through The Societies Act under 

agriculture. There is a mass confusion. Is there anywhere within your department that you will straighten this 

out so somebody will know which way to go? Is that the part of the new man that you have that used to be 

your sheep man, is he hopefully going to work this out as he takes over part of the horse industry? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Well, this is probably a technical problem which we should discuss separate from this 

bill. This bill does not deal with that particular area and I think if you wish to discuss that area we should 

discuss it at a different occasion than this. This deals with the Agricultural Societies Association and that 

deals with a different matter. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— But the problem is that people who are registered under The Agricultural Societies 

Act, in some cases are told they are not recognized as agriculture. One of the prime examples up until last 

year is the horse industry which has not been recognized as part of agriculture until this year, I understand. 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Chairman, these societies are not registered under The Agricultural Societies Act. 

They are not registered under The Agricultural Societies Act. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Are you not conforming to the National Agriculture Societies Act, then? Because you 

have to have a federal jurisdiction as well as a provincial jurisdiction to qualify, for example, the 75 per cent 

shipping rate that the Royal Show receives every year. If you are not covered in both places you can’t receive 

part of the grant for travel from the federal government, which is 75 per cent of shipping. You know, we 

seem to be talking two different things yet with the same mind. 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Chairman, I can’t at this point tell you exactly how they would arrive at the kind of 

grants that he is talking about, the 75 per cent federal participation, but it certainly is not under The 

Agricultural Societies Act. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— I beg to differ with you; the way I understand it is any shipment that goes to the 

Toronto Royal Fair, 75 per cent of the shipping is paid by the federal government and 25 per cent has to be 

raised locally, one way or the other. Now, with that in mind, if you are not a society under agriculture within 

your province and somehow registered through a senior body within the federal jurisdiction, you will not 

qualify for that 75 per cent subsidy. I am asking then, does this act work with the federal act so that this can 

happen? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Well, Mr. Chairman, I am not sure of the process there but as I understand it those 

grants are processed through the Saskatchewan Livestock Association and not through the Agricultural 

Societies. 



 

March 16, 1978 

 

407 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— Well my concern is that we make sure that this Agricultural Societies Act conforms 

with the federal one so that there is no problem at a later date and if you are not sure of the answers, would 

you like to stand this Committee of the Whole until you can get an answer another day and then bring it 

back? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Chairman, that particular area has nothing to do with The Agriculture Societies 

Act. The grants which are received by the Saskatchewan Livestock Association are not grants coming from 

Saskatchewan’s Agricultural Societies Association. They are grants which come direct from our department 

and it has nothing to do with the Agricultural Societies Association. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— But the federal grant has something to do with what is shipped to the Royal and 

without having an agricultural association, you cannot ship to the Royal and the same thing, if we in 

Saskatchewan ask Agribition to be recognized as a prime exhibiting show for Canada which means that the 

federal government will pay for the shipping of livestock from other parts of Canada, 75 per cent of the cost 

from other parts of Canada to Regina for Agribition. I am certain your department is working for that so that 

it’s recognized as a national show. We should make sure that we don’t close any doors by accident. 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Again, you are confusing the situation. The Breeders’ Associations are not part of the 

Agriculture Societies Association; they deal separately and apart from the Agriculture Societies Association. 

The Regina Exhibition Association is separate from that. So any request you have for funding is not through 

the Agriculture Societies Association at all but through another mechanism. This act or any amendments to 

this act will not relate to anything which you are referring to. 

 

Section 1 agreed. 

 

Section 2 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake):— Mr. Chairman, would the minister tell me what 

"apiculture" is? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— It’s the keeping of bees. Have you heard of the keeper of the bees? 

 

Section 2 agreed. 

 

Sections 3 to 17 agreed. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 o’clock p.m. 


