




















































Hansard: May 05, 1978


2423 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

May 5, 1978 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 
 

REQUEST TO SUSPEND NORMAL PROCEDURE 
 

MR. C. MacDONALD (Indian Head - Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask, by leave of the 

Assembly, that we suspend the normal procedure for questions of the day. Yesterday, on the electronic 

media the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) made a very serious accusation against the government of 

Saskatchewan in relation to a personal attack upon his integrity and I think it is incumbent at this time 

that we try to get to the bottom of the situation. I would like to ask, by leave of the House, if we might 

suspend the normal procedure for questions and get a full explanation from the government and get a 

full opportunity for all members on both sides of the House to ask questions about this very important 

matter. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Perhaps the member would prefer to leave the question, that he is asking 

the House to consider, until we get to oral questions? The House has heard the request of the member for 

Indian Head-Wolseley with regard to, it if I understand it correctly, the suspension of the question 

period. 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, what I would like to suggest is that we don’t put a time limit on 

the question period today. There has been a very serious accusation made against the integrity of a 

member of this Assembly and a deliberate political motivation is behind it; we should lengthen out the 

question period, suspend the ordinary rules of the question period in order that we can get to the bottom 

of it. Perhaps the government may wish to make a ministerial statement before hand or else at least let 

the members on both sides of the House be given an opportunity to have a full and lengthy question 

period to solve this very important question of privilege and the integrity of an individual member of 

this Assembly. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I think what I will do is — I can appreciate the member’s concern for 

whatever the subject is he has in mind — but I believe the .Assembly should go down the order paper in 

the order in which they occur: the oral questions, the ministerial statements, if there are any and perhaps 

if there is something of an unusual nature the member wishes to raise in the orders of the day, such as 

privilege or something of that nature, well, it can be dealt with at an appropriate time but I would 

impress upon the House the importance of following the agenda as much as possible. The member has 

asked leave and I will put myself in the hands of the House and ask if leave is granted. 
 

Request for leave denied. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Tax Avoidance Scheme 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Revenue. In 1974 in the Legislature of the House of Commons a tax avoidance scheme known as Merv 

Multi-unit Residential Buildings, which allows the capital cost against personal income, was considered 

by the federal NDP to 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2424 

 

be a system to help the wealthy and the rich avoid paying their fair share of taxes and it meant a 

substantial reduction in federal revenues. Have you any indication at the present time what reduction in 

provincial taxes there were as a result of this particular tax proposal opposed by your federal 

counterparts? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): — The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Mr. Speaker, by way of supplementary, I have before me a copy of the speech 

by Mr. Lorne Nystrom which gave the New Democratic Party position on the tax avoidance scheme and 

I would like the Minister of Revenue to give me his views on the tax avoidance scheme. I will assume 

that the NDP policy is consistent . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I will take the next question. 

 

SGIO Statement of Claim 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Attorney General. 

Yesterday on the electronic media the member for Nipawin made a very grievous and serious charge 

against the government of Saskatchewan. He indicated that a statement of claim filed by SGIO yesterday 

in Saskatoon, and unfortunately I do not as yet have a copy of that statement of claim, very 

unfortunately — he stated that it was a deliberate attempt by the government of Saskatchewan for 

political motivation to file a suit against the member for Nipawin at this time. I want to ask the Attorney 

General if this is true, whether or not the government has at this time delayed this particular statement of 

claim and this real action against the member for Nipawin and has filed a statement of claim because of 

a deliberate intent to attack his personal integrity on the eve of a federal election or on the eve of a 

provincial election very shortly ahead. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely not. The fact of the matter is that in this particular case, 

as I understand it from the minister in charge, independent counsel was engaged by SGIO, not an SGIO 

counsel and not an Attorney General’s counsel. The fact is that cases of this nature have occurred in the 

past and they will probably occur in the future. Because it happens to involve this time around, a 

member of this legislature, has nothing to do with the nature of the law suit, the substance of it, one way 

or the other and any suggestion that this is a political operation I say is a smear against the general 

manager of SGIO and the integrity outside council. I flatly reject that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — A supplementary. Well then can the Attorney General tell me why and tell the 

members of this House why, as I understand it, the performance or the actual lack of completion of a 

project was in 1975 and the default was in 1976? Today it is May of 1978 on the eve of a federal 

election. Can the government tell us why they delayed two and a half years before the statement of claim 

was brought before this Assembly or brought before the people of Saskatchewan? Is there one law for 

Mr. Collver and . one law for the construction companies or are you deliberately attacking Mr. Collver 

at this time? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. Minister in charge of SGIO perhaps could better 

answer these questions than I but, the answer again is, No. There is no two differences of law as the 

member would intimate, for Mr. Collver or for Mr. MacDonald or for Mr. Romanow or for anybody in 

this House. That is the absolute situation. I can’t 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2425 

 

go into the details of the case, that will come out and presumably when the member has his day in court 

and everybody else has his day in court. But I can say this, I am advised by the Minister in charge of 

SGIO that in cases of this nature, there is a time period during which the performance on the bond is 

completed, that is to say whereby the plaintiff carries out certain obligations which, it is alleged, the 

defendants were not able to meet. It takes a greater time for the construction or in this case, the 

construction to complete itself whereby a certain summons can be sent out and a statement of claims so 

that course of action can be made. That is the reason for what the member says is a delay. It has nothing 

to do with the eve of election and I stress that. SGIO has been around for 30 years in this kind of an 

operation. The member for Nipawin is not the first and he is not likely to be the last, that is involved in 

this kind of a situation and for you to suggest (and I urge the member for Nipawin but I won’t . . .) but 

for anybody to suggest that this is a political matter, is simply not playing fair! The facts are not that 

way. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — One week ago, SGIO was before the Crown Corporations Committee. The 

minister then completely stonewalled any questions relating to the bonding practice of SGIO and I am 

going to ask the government and the Attorney General in the as absence of the Premier, if he will assure 

this House that on Tuesday next, the first reading of the Crown Corporations Committee, that SGIO will 

be brought back before Crown corporations so that members of the opposition, the press and the people 

of Saskatchewan can get to the bottom of this thing. Will the Attorney General call the SGIO before 

Crown corporations on Tuesday next? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t give the hon. member that kind of an assurance. First of all, 

Crown Corporations schedule is laid out based on the availability of ministers and the availability of 

officials. I understand, I am not a member of Crown Corporations Committee but, I understand we are in 

the middle of considerations of a Crown Corporation Central. I don’t know what the line-up is for 

Tuesday but I can’t give the member that kind of assurance. As to the questions about bonding, 

forgetting about this matter but as to general questions on bonding, I am sure that the minister is 

prepared to answer any questions related to the general discussion of bonding, keeping in mind his 

obligations as minister in charge of a publicly owned Crown corporation where there is a fairly 

important matter before the courts and keeping in mind that there are parties who have rights in this 

matter, whether they are on the plaintiff’s side or the defendant’s side. So my point is, that when Crown 

Corporations is called and when SGIO is called, in my judgment must be done independently of the 

matter which is the subject question period this morning. There are other factors, as well, which are 

beyond my control so I can’t give the hon. member that kind of assurance. 

 

Golden Acres Motel 
 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I’d like to direct my question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce and 

the Minister responsible for SEDCO. SEDCO has made an investment into Golden Acres Motel, one of 

the shareholders being the member for Moose Jaw North — the NDP member. Has SEDCO now taken 

action on any personal guarantees given by the member for Moose Jaw North and if so, when was such 

action taken on the personal guarantee, given the fact that Golden Acres Motel has been unable to be 

sold 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2426 

 

for some several years? 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I have repeatedly made a 

statement in this House that Golden Acres Motel now belongs to SEDCO and we are advertising it and 

we will not act on any guarantors until such time as we have completed the final sale, at that point in 

time, whether we have to or not, depending on the total sale of property. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, would the minister not admit that 

SGIO’s haste and SEDCO’s delay indicates a flagrant and rank disregard for equity and fairness and 

indicates political partisanship and a political vendetta by SEDCO and a political protection . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I direct this question to the Attorney 

General who says there are parties who have rights. I suggest to the Attorney General that taxpayers 

have rights as well, and I ask the Attorney General whether SGIO holds the entire bond or whether some 

other insurance company has taken on a part of the bond. My question specifically is, do the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers face the likelihood or possibility of losing the entire $1,000,000? 

 

HON. E. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I can clarify a couple 

of things on a couple of comments that were made earlier. The recommendation to proceed was made by 

the General Manager of SGIO, John Greene, an employee of the corporation for 32 years, a lawyer with 

a master’s degree and a man with recognized integrity . . . on the advice of outside counsel and with 

approval of the board. in the best interests of all parties but most particularly the shareholders of SGIO, 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan and on the advice of legal counsel, I regret to say that I’m in 

no position to make any comment on the fact, since that might prejudice the subsequent proceedings. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — A supplementary. Is the minister capable of answering this question? Does 

SGIO hold the entire bonds? Does the Saskatchewan taxpayer face the possibility of losing the entire $1 

million? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I could answer the question on behalf of the hon. minister 

in charge. I will answer it in these terms. It may not be all that satisfactory to the member for Wascana 

but he is going to have to accept the answer. 

 

Clearly, SGIO holds the view that it has a potential liability attaching to itself as a result of certain 

situations which are set out in the statement of claim and they speak for themselves. I don’t think it 

much matters, perhaps it does but if there is somebody else who is attached or sharing that risk, in some 

form or other the plaintiff alleges, rightly or wrongly, to be determined by a court of law, that there is an 

exposure. Now that is the fact of the situation in respect to a statement of claim. 

 

I can’t give him the details of it and I would advise the Minister in charge of SGIO not to give him the 

details of it because that is obviously something which in due course will be resolved. I say to the hon. 

member that he ought not to be raising this kind of a question in this kind of a form. Look, there is a 

statement of claim issued; there will be, presumably, some other legal documentation when the thing has 

run its natural course of events. Let the courts decide on the thing. Don’t get into details of the matter of 

this 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2427 

 

situation. So I’m simply saying to the member and you aren’t going to be happy with the answer, that is 

the answer that we are giving to you this morning. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll take a new question. 

 

Clean-up — Highway Right of Way 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Highways. 

 

One of the scenes which I have seen this spring and which is very gratifying to me and to a number of 

people, is the provisions that you are now making . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m having a little difficulty getting the minister to hear my question. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have engaged in an activity this year which I think is a very commendable activity in 

which you are allowing clean-ups along the provincial highways, the rights of way, and you are 

contracting these out to various service clubs, Boy Scouts, 4H and so on. Now my question is, do you 

have enough funds to do all of the highway rights of way in Saskatchewan or are you limiting these 

funds to just certain highways in the province? 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — No. For the benefit of the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose. This is not the first time we’ve done this. We’ve been doing this for a number of years 

and we are trying to encourage it for two reasons. The main reason is of course to clean up the unsightly 

mess that people, who call themselves human beings, leave along the highways. This is a bit of a 

reflection on our total society and social attitudes which I certainly think all people should take a good 

look at. 

 

Secondly, we have been cleaning up this mess for years with maintenance crews. They’ve been cleaning 

up every spring and we have enough money to do it in the regular maintenance but we’re trying to 

encourage the young people to get out there. Because I’ll wager, Mr. Speaker, that any young person 

who has gone out, whether it’s a scout or cub or whatever, after they have cleaned up a couple of miles 

of highway, they are less likely to be one of the mysterious, who will throw stuff out of the window so 

it’s a two-way street and I thank the member for raising the question. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — I think, it’s not an argumentive thing, it’s commendable because I share the same 

views as you do. My question was, do you have enough funds to do all the rights of way? What I’m 

mainly interested in now is having your department transfer this idea to the hon. member who sits 

behind you, in the way of Tourism and Renewable Resources. Would not this concept be an excellent 

concept as well for our roadside parks, where a local organization could be given a contract each spring 

in the cleaning of the roadside park because we simply do not have the manpower in the highways, who 

are responsible for them as well. So I guess my question then, would you encourage the member behind 

you to do exactly the same thing because you could have exactly the same results. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that some of that is going on. The member, the Hon. 

Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources will answer for himself but for instance, our people clean 

up a number of roadside park sites along the main highways even though they are TRR’s. For instance, 

at Findlater and Rosetown and I believe the 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2428 

 

member is aware and I’m going to be disappointed if this is not a fact but about two years ago a Mr. 

Stevens from Rosetown asked if the retarded group there could get a contract to clean up and I think 

they are doing that. That was a direct approach to myself just accidentally dropping through Rosetown 

on the way to Swift Current. The idea of getting local participation and especially participation from 

young people, I think, is good and I’m glad it is noticed and appreciated and I think it should be 

encouraged. I would say to all members on both sides of the House, if you know of any group of young 

people, any small club, maybe a school club, that wants to take on that kind of a job to please contact 

our local highway management because we’d be very pleased to hear from them. 

 

Charge against the member for Nipawin 
 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — A question, Mr. Speaker, of the Attorney General both as 

Attorney General and House leader, if the member for Nipawin has indicated as is reported, that he is 

being sued by an agency of the government of Saskatchewan for political reasons, I want to put this to 

the Attorney General that on two counts that is the gravest charge that I’ve ever heard in this House. On 

count number one, that would be a gross abuse of the administration of justice. Secondly, it would be a 

breach of the privileges of a member. I want to ask the Attorney General whether he will consider, under 

section 30 of the Legislative Assembly Act, it says: 

 

The Assembly shall be a court and shall have power to inquire into certain things, including, 

under subclause (k), causing or effecting the arrest, detention or molestation of a member of the 

Assembly during a session of the Legislature for any debt or cause whatever of a civil nature. 

 

Is the Attorney General prepared to consider having this question of whether or not there has been an 

abuse of the administration of justice with respect to the member for Nipawin tried in this Assembly 

under that power? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat again to the hon. member for Regina South and I 

want to speak these facts clearly. SGIO in this case engaged an outside counsel. We acted on the advice 

of that outside counsel and on the advice of management, the board of directors presumably did. To 

suggest on those facts that that is an abusive process, that that is a political operation says that the 

lawyers, who are independent lawyers who have codes of ethics and law society regulations, somehow 

are party to an abusive process. We would be saying to a lawyer, you issue a writ even though you don’t 

have a cause of action. Now, that is surely stretching it beyond your wildest imagination of any kind of 

an allegation. 

 

I’m simply saying this, simply because it’s the member for Nipawin or any other member in this House, 

if there is a liability claim by SGIO, it is not a sufficient defence to get up and say there is a political 

operation here. Any one of us might be liable in this kind of a situation. The fact that we are MLAs is 

not relevant, not relevant to the situation. There is the claim, he has his defences like anybody else does 

which will be decided by a court of law and I say that that is a specious argument to say that it is for 

political purposes and I want to just strongly state that. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I have not suggested in my question that the 

government is in any way guilty of the abuse of the administration of justice. I am asking you two 

separate questions here. One is the question of the lawsuit which is a separate question from the one I 

am asking. I am saying to you that our information is 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2429 

 

the member for Nipawin has accused the government of abusing the administration of jus tice in 

his privileges as a member of the Assembly. That affects us all. That is a separate question. Now, 

my question to you is, do you not think that the gravity of that charge warrants inquiry by the 

Assembly under its powers under section 30 of The Assembly Act that I gave you, to consider that 

question, whether or not there was an abuse in these circumstances as he charges and he can clear 

himself if he can. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, No. I’m asked to give a quick response to something which 

just has been told to me. My response is, No, I do not believe that this warrants anything under 

section 30, or whatever section he was looking at of The Legislative Assembly Act. I, frankly, 

have not looked at that section. I don’t know anything about it. I say that it does not warrant it 

because of the facts which are self-evident. Anybody can say anything he wants about an action by 

the government. In the political field, I suppose we’re prone to make those kinds of statements. 

Let’s put those aside. Anybody who looks at this objectively can only come to one conclusion 

whether the claim is founded properly in law or not, that the claim, at least, is motivated or based 

on non-political purposes, non-political purposes. I say, therefore, the section 30 suggestion, I 

would dismiss. Whether the member for Nipawin believes that or not, that’s something that he’s 

going to have to pursue . . . if he wants to pursue. I can tell you on the arguments, even then, I 

would dismiss it. I simply say that SGIO took every step going apparently, by hiring outside 

counsel, getting independent legal advice and acting on the best of the legal and insurance advice 

going. Now, strike out the name, ‘Collver’. Put any other name in there. What do you expect 

SGIO to do under the circumstances? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 

 

MR. LANE (Sa-Su): — Would the hon. Attorney General, please name the independent counsel 

that has been retained by this government to look into the Golden Acres matter?  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like a follow-up 

question. Can the Attorney General tell members of the House what efforts the government of 

Saskatchewan or SGIO has made to settle this out of court? Have all normal procedures been 

carried out? Has there been an effort to settle out of court? Has there been any attempt made to 

negotiate? Can he also tell us whether or not the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are going to lose $1.2 

million or not? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! The member is . . . order, order! I would suggest that the 

member for Indian Head-Wolseley is, first of all, asking a series of questions. He’s allowed one 

question at a time. I would suggest that some of the questions that he appears to be asking, may 

affect the matter which has, as I understand is a statement of claim before the court. Consequently, 

I cannot permit the question that the member for Indian Head has asked. If he wishes to rephrase 

the question or change it I will be prepared to hear it. 

 

Flight of Capital From Province 
 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I would then like to ask the Attorney General, has the 

government of Saskatchewan done anything to prevent the flight of capital from the province of 

Saskatchewan to prevent the government of Saskatchewan or the taxpayers from obtaining the — 

or protecting itself in  the  future outcome of this 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2430 

 

particular case? In other words, has it done anything to prevent the flight of capital from the 

province of Saskatchewan to any other province in Canada to prevent the taxpayers from 

reclaiming the $1.2 million? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, we are taking advice, SGIO is taking advice from outside 

legal counsel and they have internal counsel. Presumably they will do whatever is necessary under 

the circumstances of the case. I do not anticipate that — I do not want to make any comment. I am 

simply saying we take legal advice and act on that advice. Look, a statement of claims is issued. It 

is a public document. It is there and I am not making any comment on it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I believe I will take a new question. 

 

Golden Acres Motel Case 
 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a very simple 

question of the Attorney General while he sits there with his self-righteous halo. Name for this 

Assembly who the independent counsel is whom you have hired in the Golden Acres Motel case. 

Just name him. Put him on the record. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make one comment about this business and that is 

the business of a self-righteous halo. I do not care whether he thinks I have got that but the fact of 

the matter is that I do not relish answering these questions at all. That is a fact. I do not know 

whether there is independent counsel in Golden Acres or not. I will take notice and I will give you 

the answer as to whether there is or is not as soon as I know that, on Monday or Tuesday, or 

whenever I can find that out. You will have that. 

 

MR. LANE (Sa-Su): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would point out to the Hon. Attorney 

General that there is an apparent conflict here. In one case the minister says that they are going to 

dispose of the assets before they proceed with this thing and then they will work with it. They will 

dispose of the assets first. Was that same procedure applied here? The answer is clearly not. When 

you come back with the name of the independent counsel you come back and you name . . . 

(Interjections and noise) . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Ministerial statements. 

 

STATEMENT — Home Care Program 
 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a 

statement re the Home Care Program. I obviously chose the wrong day to make the announcement.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I have today announced the details of our province-wide Home Care Program. The 

program will be under the jurisdiction of the Social Service Department with 45 local boards 

directly responsible for the delivery of services. 

 

A home care directorate has been established in Social Services to supervise implementation and 

program standards. Basic home care will include homemaking, meal service, nursing and minor 

home maintenance. Flexibility in the program allows boards to provide additional services. The 

program will serve anyone who would otherwise require a stay in an acute care hospital or special 

care home. The program will co-ordinate existing services and upgrade these where necessary to 

ensure 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2431 

 

uniformity of standards. As well, the program will ensure the availability of the four basic services 

in every part of the province. 

 

Qualified nurses will supervise delivery of home nursing services for which there will be no charge. 

Boards may hire their own nurses and other staff where this is necessary.  

 

The 45 districts contain an average of 15,000 persons, the cities being much larger. District 

boundaries follow municipal boundaries and reflect existing economic and social patterns. Each 

board will have 12 members. Municipal governments in each district will designate six of these who 

will in turn, choose six others. The only restriction is that boards must have representation from 

consumers, the elderly, the various parts of each district and health related organizations.  

 

I will ensure that each board represents a cross section of providers, consumers and others before 

funding is granted. The current methods of funding existing programs will not change until a board 

is established for the district. While there may be some gradual modifications in ongoing programs, 

in all likelihood those which have proven their value will continue and many of these will be 

expanded over a period of time. 

 

The district board concept is based on the model contained in the consultation document, protecting 

dignity and independence which outlines the three options for the delivery of home care services. 

The consultations which took place in late 1977 confirmed majority support for the district board 

model over the centralized and regional systems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will shortly be sending a booklet outlining the program to all interested groups and 

individuals, including those who took part in last year’s consultation. I firmly believe that delivery 

of home care service through district boards reinforces local autonomy. This decentralization is also 

in keeping with the general policy direction of the government. Local boards are apt to be more 

quickly aware of and respond to, community needs. 

 

I want to stress that this program seeks to build up and support the ability of families to care for 

themselves. This goal is closely related to our intention to strongly encourage volunteer care. It is 

our belief that locally appointed boards can better promote self-care within families with the 

assistance of volunteers. Home care services will enable more of the elderly, disabled, hand icapped 

and chronically ill, to live their lives with dignity and independence, not in institutions but in their 

own homes. Such services can have a dramatic effect upon the ability of our senior citizens to 

remain independent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the program, boards will have four major sources of finance. A basic 

administration grant, a provincial per capita grant averaging about $11 in 1978-79, a small 

maximum charge on all services except home nursing paid by the user. When service usage exceeds 

$20 in any 30 day period, an income test will be used to determine if a further charge will be levied. 

In general, heavy service users with below average incomes will receive a subsidy for all or part of 

the cost of care. Persons with above average incomes will pay for the service they receive. The 

program will cost the provincial government up to $6 million in the first year of operation, however, 

about 80 per cent of which will be spent to existing programs. The boards will set the cost of care 

but these will be reviewed by my department. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, establishment of all four primary services in all 45 districts is  



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2432 

 

expected to be completed in two or three years. The staffing of the home care directorate will be 

completed over the next few months. This will include recruiting a nursing professional who will be 

responsible for setting nursing standards for all boards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the program, as I 

understand it, will have the unqualified support of our party provided that it is adequately funded. 

Frequently members rise and say that sort of thing and then say a ‘but’ that follows and frankly, 

there is no ‘but’ that follows in this case. We approve of the slight modification by which the 

government now proposes to allow some care without regard to earnings. We approve of the concept 

of local boards. We approve of the encouragement to volunteers. 

 

I have only two other things to say. I have raised in the past and hope that the minister is cognizant 

of the pressure that this may place on VON which has received some funding from people who now 

will get care through this program. I am sure that the minister is aware of the problem this may 

create for VON and VON must be encouraged. 

 

The second thing that I want to say, and it in no way takes away from our unqualified support, is 

that we believe that the government should, as a next step, and I can see this as an excellent step, be 

looking at a program by which you would freeze certain costs for people in their own homes — 

freeze the cost of taxes, power, gas utilities, insurance, the costs which are government costs. These 

programs could be guaranteed to them at the cost of retirement. As I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s not an 

exception to the support but we suggest that that’s the next stage to carry on with what the minister 

describes as their aim and certainly our aim that people be allowed to stay in their own homes for as 

long as they are physically able to do so, which we believe is better for the people and is also better 

financially in the long run for the province. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Unfortunately the member missed his chance. Does the member wish to raise a 

point of order? O.K. What’s the point of order? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — On the point of order, the minister made a statement; you then recognized a 

spokesman for the Liberal caucus and the spokesman for the Progressive Conservative caucus stood 

up to give his reply to the ministerial statement. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What’s the point of order? 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Why are you sitting him down now? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Good. I’ll deal with that point of order. I don’t believe it is necessary to have 

further comment on the point of order, I think I can deal with it right now. At  the beginning of this 

period of time when the two opposition parties were tied in the Legislature, I made a point of saying 

that replies to ministerial statements would be recognized first, one opposition party and the next 

time, the other opposition party. Now, we started out that way back on November 25, 1977, and 

everything went all right until January 5, 1978, when the member for the Conservative caucus failed 

to rise and make a statement in his proper order with regard to wilderness challenge camps. At the 

time, I put myself in the hands of the House and the House said, allow the member to reply at the 

time that this would not establish a precedent. Now, since that time, the members of the Liberal and 

Conservative caucuses have replied in turn to ministerial 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2433 

 

statements. The purpose of that is to not allow one caucus, I’m not suggesting that this might 

happen, but not allow the opportunity for one caucus to make an answer to a ministerial statement 

and get behind the member of the other caucus. Now, when the ministerial statement was done 

today, I looked at the Conservative caucus and watched it for a considerable amount of time; no 

one rose. Then I accepted the member for Regina Wascana. Unfortunately the Conservative 

caucus has passed their opportunity to reply. 
 

MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — A point of order. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — What’s the point of order? 
 

MR. LARTER: — Yesterday in the ministerial statements by the Minister in charge of SPC, he 

announced a land sale. You permitted both Mr. Merchant and myself to speak. I was the second to 

speak. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — That’s not really a point of order because that took place yesterday. If the 

member thought that was wrong yesterday, he should have brought it up yesterday. If the member 

is relating that to what happened today, then the Conservative member should have risen first, 

today, to respond. Unfortunately, . . . I wonder if the member for Nipawin could make his points 

of order on his feet. Then I could deal with him. I can’t deal with him if he makes them o n his 

seat. The member for Estevan suggests that because they were second yesterday, they should be 

first today. I agree 100 per cent with the member for Estevan. I sat and I watched the Conservative 

caucus today. Nobody rose. Then I recognized the member from the Liberal caucus. It’s 

unfortunate that nobody rose. That’s not my problem. 
 

MR. MERCHANT: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker, I, of course, was looking to them, as well. 

But might I suggest, Mr. Speaker because it would be easier then for the Conservative caucus, if 

you would send them a sheet of paper and you can put, ‘first today, second tomorrow, firs t today, 

second tomorrow’ . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think that’s not a proper point of order.  
 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — A point of order . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a new point of order? 
 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — First of all, a rather flip comment of the member opposite. I think that it 

is incumbent upon you, when these ministerial statements are recognized, we happen to be 

discussing our reply at that particular time. I looked over and saw the member on his feet already 

and out of courtesy I waited for him to speak. Now, if you’re suggesting that, in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’m not going to put myself in the position that the member for 

Qu’Appelle suggests I should put myself in. When a ministerial statement is made in the House, 

there should be at least two members rising on this side of the House to respond. There will be 

problem from that point on. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — It’s not a point of order but I would like to make a suggestion to the 

House. Could we have an agreement to waive that informal arrangement or that statement you 

made which acknowledge is to be the case. I think your ruling is correct but can we agree to waive 

that and give the PCs a chance to make a statement on this 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2434 

 

issue? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I draw the member’s attention to the fact that before this situation was 

waived, and it happened to be with regard to the same member for Qu’Appel le and at that time it 

was stated that it wouldn’t be a precedent. Now, we have the member for Qu’Appelle rising again 

wishing to make a statement and it looks like . . . to me . . . as if we’re establishing a precedent. I 

put myself in the hands of the House, if you want to allow the statements to occur in any order 

whatsoever, that’s fine with me. I’ll put the point that the Attorney General raised. Does the House 

wish to hear from the member for Qu’Appelle? 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, Mr. Speaker, and through you 

to the House, I would like to introduce 90 students from the Yorkton Composite Junior High School. 

They’re in the city to visit the Legislative Assembly and to tour the city. I’m looking forward to 

meeting with them afterwards. They are accompanied by a chaperone, Mrs. Sharon Ward and two 

bus drivers, Mr. Melvin Neaday and Carol Wantonk and also by three teachers, colleagues of mine, 

Gordie Gendur, Tony Mazur and Richard Burback and I hope they have a very interesting stay and 

have enjoyed themselves in the Legislature today. It’s been very lively, I know. I hope you’ll all join 

me in wishing them a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I would like to direct a question. I would still like to ask the Attorney 

General or the Minister in charge of SGIO, if he’s going to make a ministerial statement on behalf 

of the claim issued by SGIO . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think the member is too late for . . . we’re dealing with the 

introduction of bills. Ministerial statements is past . . . we’ve only had one. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill 63 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Act, 1973. 
 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to take a few moments at this time to explain what the 

amendments to The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Act are all about and what they will do. This bill 

will provide legislative authorization for the employment of dental nurses by dentists in private 

dental offices. Until now dental nurses have been employed only by the Saskatchewan Dental Plan 

and by the Department of Continuing Education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Act was passed in 1973 to prepare for the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan Dental Plan for children in the following year. It was necessary 

at that time that the requirements for the dental nurses of the dental plan itself and the Department of 

Continuing Education for the training program would receive first priority. It was also concluded 

that the needs of the public program should be met before dental nurses could be made available for 

employment by private dentists. Mr. Speaker, these conditions have been satisfied and we are now 

in a position to allow additional employment opportunities for dental nurses. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2435 

 

I would like to explain that The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Act as it now stands does not 

explicitly prohibit dental nurses from being employed by private dentists. The act is silent on the 

issue of private dental employment of dental nurses and does not give power to the College of 

Dental Surgeons to regulate dental nurses employed by private dentists, a power the College would 

need if dental nurses are to be employed by them. At present, the College of Dental Surgeons may 

make regulations governing dental auxiliaries. Dental auxiliaries are certified dental assistants and 

dental hygienists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the making of regulations under this bill will clearly enable dental nurses to be 

employed by dentists in private practice. This bill will also effectively extend the powers of the 

College of Dental Surgeons to make regulations governing dental auxiliaries to include as well 

dental nurses employed in private dentist practices. These latter regulations are subject to the 

approval of the Minister of Health under amendments now before the Legislature to The Dental 

Profession Act. 

 

I would like to explain why we want to allow dental nurses to work for private dentists. Mr. 

Speaker, as I have said, the dental plan and the Department of Continuing Education’s needs for 

dental nurses in the training program have been met. There are three main reasons why the supply of 

dental nurses has improved in relation to our needs. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, during the past two years, the rate at which dental nurses employed by the dental 

plan have dropped out of the labor force has been lower than during the first two years that the plan 

was in operation. As a result, the dental plan’s annual requirements for new dental nurse graduates 

are lower than they were initially. We expect this situation to continue for the next few years.  

 

The second reason, Mr. Speaker, involves the success of our dental plan in meeting the treatment 

needs of Saskatchewan children. During its first years of operation, the dental plan was treating 

large numbers of children who had had little or no previous dental care and who consequently 

required extensive treatment. As dental nurses have cleared up this backlog of dental disease, the 

percentage of children enrolled in the plan who require a great deal of treatment has declined. The 

productivity of dental nurses has consistently increased in terms of the number of children that each 

nurse is able to treat annually. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final reason has to do with the province of Manitoba. The government of Manitoba 

has had an agreement with Saskatchewan since 1975 for the training of dental nurses. In the fall of 

1975, 20 Manitoba students were admitted to first year; in 1976 this was increased to 33. In 

February of 1977 Manitoba formally requested a five-year agreement for an annual intake of 45 

Manitoba students into the first year of the two-year program commencing in the fall of 1977. Forty 

students were actually admitted this fall. The Manitoba government had requested this training 

agreement because it needed a steady supply of dental nurses to staff its own children’s dental 

program. I would like to explain to the House that training agreements of this kind are commonly 

made between provinces as a means of introducing efficiencies and reducing duplication in health 

manpower training programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present Manitoba government has now announced that it is freezing its children’s 

dental program. We all know what that means. It has also served notice that although they will 

honor the commitment to pay for the training of the current students through their second year in 

1978-79, no new intake of Manitoba students will be funded in 1978. Since Manitoba has 

announced the freeze on its children’s 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2436 

 

dental program and has cancelled any further training of dental nurses, Saskatchewan’s Dental 

Nurse Training Program is not capable of producing graduates to meet the projected public service 

requirements and to supply dental nurses for employment by private dentists. 

 

As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba is the only other province in Canada where dental nurses 

can be employed at the moment. Because of the uncertainty surrounding the future of Manitoba’s 

Children’s Dental Program we expect that a number of Manitoba dental nurse students who will 

graduate this year and next and a number of dental nurses who are currently employed in Manitoba 

may be compelled to look for employment in Saskatchewan in competition with our own graduates. 

We should give preference to our own graduates but it is obvious that our own dental nurses are 

going to be competing for a fixed number of jobs unless we remove legal impediments to additional 

employment opportunities. 

 

In its three years of operation our dental plan has achieved its objective to improve the dental health 

of young people in Saskatchewan by providing comprehensive dental care to children. This care has 

been provided by teams of dentists, dental nurses and dental assistants in clinics which have been set 

up in elementary schools and special clinics across the province. 

 

Over 83 per cent of eligible children are enrolled in the program and most of these children are 

receiving dental care, both preventative and treatment which was not available to them prior  to the 

establishment of this plan. 

 

It is well-known that the number of dentists in the province is far short of the need and that they are 

almost non-existent throughout rural Saskatchewan. Further to this, the costs of dental treatment are 

extremely high, another factor in prohibiting the dental care so much needed by Saskatchewan 

children. 

 

This plan, using dental nurses, has met this problem, has dealt with it and it has solved it. High 

quality care is available to all children between the ages of four to eleven years in 1978. 

 

In 1976, a study was conducted to evaluate the quality of care provided by the Saskatchewan dental 

nurse. Three dentists from outside the province, one a specialist in children’s dentistry, and two 

specialists in restorative dentistry made a study of this provincial plan. It is of some interest to note 

that the results of the study show that overall restorations were rated as follows, between dentists 

and dental nurses: 

 

Unacceptable — 21.2 per cent by dentists and 3.7 per cent by the dental nurse. 

 

Adequate — 62.4 per cent by dentists and 48.6 per cent by the dental nurse. 

 

Superior — 16.5 per cent by dentists and 47.7 per cent by the dental nurse. 

 

The study showed that only after two years of operation the dental nurse of Saskatchewan was 

providing basic restorative treatment at a high level of coverage and quality. With this irrefutable 

evidence it is hard to understand why the opposition parties constantly attack the dental plan and it 

is almost unbelievable that the Conservative government of Manitoba would set out to strangle a 

similar plan in that province. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2437 

 

The Conservatives in this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, have made it clear that they would destroy the 

Saskatchewan Dental Plan, as well enunciated by their leader. Their leader and others have made 

allegations that have absolutely no basis in fact. 

 

I want to issue a challenge in these second reading remarks to the member for Nipawin and give 

him an opportunity to redeem himself. I know he will not do it. He would not do it and he could 

not do it when he and his caucus made false allegations about what they called ‘filthy hospitals’ 

last year. He will not do it now but I challenge him to stand in his place and explain how a 

Conservative government would establish a better dental plan provided in schools by dentists. 

 

He has said that dentists offered to establish a dental program for children and administer it free. I 

challenge him again to stand in his place and to present that offer in this Legislature, that 

proposal, because it has never been made to the government of Saskatchewan. If there is any truth 

in what he says he should prove it by producing the evidence. 

 

Our dental plan, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent plan. It provides high quality care for our children. It 

is an efficient plan and the increased number of children enrolled in the program, combined with 

growing efficiency, has resulted in a reduction of the average cost per child from $158 in the first 

year to $83 in the current year, despite the high rate of inflation during this three-year period. 

 

I am confident that if Saskatchewan led the way with the use of dental nurses in the public service, 

it can also lead the way with a dental nurse team in private practice.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move: 

 

That the amendments to The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Act be given second reading at 

this time. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, although I agree with the 

principle of the bill that the minister has put forward, I cannot agree with some of his comments , 

although with the chatter going on in the House I did not hear everything.  

 

The one that I take exception to is the fact that Conservatives in Manitoba may or may not be 

strangling their dental plan. The fact that the Conservatives in Saskatchewan may or  may not be 

doing this or doing that — I do not care what they are doing in Manitoba. Saskatchewan is where 

we are interested. Our only interest is in Saskatchewan. 

 

You say the Tories in Saskatchewan would bring in a better plan than is now existing. We agree 

with that and we support your amendment. If we have any further comments we will be giving 

them in committee and I do not think there will be any problem at all supporting your bill.  

 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, the idea I believe is to take care of some of the people who 

are presently in training and will be graduating from the school of Wascana, is it, one of the 

institutes, this fall may be having a difficult time in finding positions. I suppose there are two 

ways in which these extra people could have been employed. I believe at one time it was the 

government’s indication that they were going to expand  



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2438 

 

the program to include the older children. If there is one weakness in the plan, and I don’t mean to 

be too critical of it, because certainly after the initial growing pains it is working, what I think, is 

rather well at the present time. But as a parent of teenage children and some who are in their 

twenties, I always found that the dental expenses in four family seem to come when the kids get to 

be teenagers, when they got into, their baby teeth weren’t that much of a problem but once they 

started to get thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen and seventeen, this is where the pocket book got hit. 

I would just wonder if the government might have pursued the idea of extending the program within 

the school system, as it operates now, to take care of some of these children in the teenage group. I 

realize, of course, that the idea of the present program is to try to work on a preventative angle. If 

you get the kids when they are young, you hope that you’re going to solve some of the difficulties 

that you might have at a later age. But we still do have this group and to me this should be expanded 

and I hope that in future years we probably will be able to expand this program within our school 

system. As I said, I think it is working rather well. 

 

As far as the students are concerned as to whether or not they are going to find employment, I 

suppose it’s a matter as to whether or not the dentists are going to accept them in this role. The 

future will only tell that, as to whether or not they will be employed and will be taking places in 

dentists’ offices within the province of Saskatchewan and with that in mind and wanting to study 

further what the minister has said, we’ll ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 65 — An Act 

respecting the Establishment of a Provincial Court for Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it has been and is the policy of this government to be concerned with 

improving the court system of this province. Our concern was evidenced by the appointment of the 

Hon. Emmet M. Hall, one of Canada’s most distinguished jurists in 1973 to review the entire court 

structure and system in Saskatchewan. The report of the Hall Commission emphasized the 

importance of substantially improving the quality and status of the magistrates’ courts. By far a 

large part of the judicial work load in this province, as in other provinces is carried  by the judges of 

the magistrates’ courts. Yet, for historical reasons those courts have always been regarded as and 

treated as inferior to the other provincially established courts. The Hall Commission pointed out 

how unsatisfactory it was from the point of view of the administration of justice for these courts, 

dealing as they do with most of those citizens who become involved in court proceedings to be 

delivering what might appear to be an inferior quality of justice. The Hall Report stated, ‘I believe 

that it must be accepted that the average citizen regards the magistrates’ courts as the most 

important courts in the judicial hierarchy. Mention of the word court, immediately brings to the 

citizen the image of the magistrates’ court. It is the court he knows and which in some 90 per cent of 

all court proceedings involving the citizen are heard.’ Later the report noted, ‘with all this 

tremendous load of work and responsibility, the magistrates’ courts are and have been treated 

throughout Canada except in Quebec more as a branch of the civil service than as a necessary and 

important part of the judicial system, an historical outgrowth of the time when it was known as the 

police court and manned by lay justices of the peace.’ Finally, the report concluded, ‘The status of 

the Provincial Court has to be raised in the public estimation. It’s true worth must come, of course, 

from the quality of its work from a bench staffed with competent, knowledgeable judges of high 

personal integrity, with court experience and a knowledge of the law with the ability to apply fairly 

and 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2439 

 

humanely. The judge must have an adequate salary and security of tenor, in other words, judicial 

independence of the same degree as federally appointed judges of the district court.’  

 

The government in general terms is working to the adoption of the conclusion of this Hall statement 

as its basis for policy. Since receiving the Hall Report, just over two years ago, the government has 

acted to implement major aspects of that report by appointing a chief judge, Chief Judge Ernie 

Boychuk, by adjusting salaries upward so that they are now comparable with those of judges in 

similar courts in other provinces, providing the magistrates’ courts with additional support staff, 

although that process is not yet complete, and by encouraging the judges to participate in 

educational seminars. We have also endeavored to find for appointment to these courts, those with 

appropriate professional qualifications, a task which is always difficult, not only for us, but for the 

federally appointed judges and a task which we hope will be made easier by the enactment of this 

present bill which is before you. The major step forward however, I think is represented by this bill. 

It establishes the judges of the magistrate’s court truly as an independent judiciary, along the lines 

recommended by the Hall Report. 

 

There will be, by this bill, one court for the province called the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan,. 

which will handle all of the criminal and civil jurisdiction, at present being handled by the 

magistrates’ courts. Judges to the new court will have tenure until they reach the age of 65, subject 

to removal for cause under a procedure which I shall refer to later. This right of tenure. essential to 

an independent judiciary, will be in substitution for the current provision under which judges hold 

office during the pleasure of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, subject to a cumbersome appeal 

procedure which has never used, to my knowledge. 

 

Also to be established is a judicial council which will have several very important functions. The 

Judicial Council will consist of the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal, the Chief Justice of the 

Court of Queen’s Bench, the Chief Judge of the new Provincial Court, the president of the Law 

Society or their designates from their respective bodies, and two members of the public appointed 

by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. The Honorable Chief Justice Culliton has indicated that he 

would serve as the first chairman of our judicial council. 

 

The Judicial Council will screen and make recommendations to me regarding the proposed 

appointment of any new judges. Candidates for appointments will have to have had membership in 

good standing for at least five years at the bar of one of the provinces, for the period immediately 

preceding their proposed appointment or have had other legal or judicial experience satisfactory to 

the Judicial Council. 

 

The council will consider complaints against judges and where a complaint so justifies, appoint a 

committee of inquiry to determine whether the judge should be removed from office. A judge would 

be removed from office if the committee of inquiry finds that he has conducted himself in such a 

manner as to compromise his ability to perform the duties of his office or has persistently neglected 

his duties, or has become incapable of performing his duties in a proper manner.  

 

A committee of inquiry would consist of the judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench and a judge of the 

new Provincial Court and a member of the bar, with at least 10 years standing. The committee of 

inquiry procedure is similar to that established under The Judges’ Act of Canada, to enable the 

Canadian Judicial Council to deal with complaints against superior and district court judges.  



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2440 

 

The Judicial Council in the proposed bill may also consider and make recommendations for the 

improvement of the quality of the judicial service of the new Provincial Court and review and report 

on matters referred to it by me, as the Attorney General. The new Provincial Court would be a court 

of record, which means that the decisions of the court may be proved in a higher court by reference 

simply to that decision, and that the court will have power to control its own process by citing for 

contempt. 

 

Those are the major principles of the bill. Another aspect of the bill which is not fundamental in 

terms of philosophy but I think is important to what we are trying to achieve, relates to a 

contributory pension plan. A contributory pension plan is established in this bil l similar to that for 

district court judges as recommended by the Hall Commission. Judges appointed before the new 

legislation takes effect will have the right to elect to remain under the existing plan which is 

embodied in The Magistrates’ Courts Act. Judges coming under the new plan would contribute 9 per 

cent of their salaries to a special fund to be kept and invested by the Minister of Finance. A judge 

who retires or resigns after a tenure age of 55, if he has served for at least ten years will be entit led 

at the age of 65, to a pension. The maximum pension will be 70 per cent of salary. Benefits will also 

be available to surviving spouses and children of deceased judges on a basis similar to those 

provided under the plan for district court judges. 

 

There are, Mr. Speaker, transitional provisions in the bill, both with respect to the new Provincial 

Court and to the application of the new pension plan in relation to the judges who now hold 

appointments under The Magistrates’ Courts Act or The Provincial Magistrates’ Act. Also there are 

several provisions which are being carried over from the present legislation, some with minor 

modifications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this legislation will establish the kind of independent judiciary, of quality 

and integrity envisaged by the Hall Commission. It should provide a sound basis for ensuring that 

the quality of justice administered by provincially appointed judges is at a level at which we, in this 

province, can all be proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 65, an Act to establish the Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — First of all I would like to state to the Attorney General that we 

will be supporting the legislation and agree with his aim as to what he is attempting to accomplish. I 

might add as well that the Attorney General, when his reign is over, can take some personal 

satisfaction in his attempts to upgrade the magistrates’ courts of the province of Saskatchewan. I 

think he has done something to his personal credit. 

 

I have some concerns as the Attorney General well knows as to the physical administration of the 

court, the technical administration as opposed to the public form that we see in the changes in the 

court and the Attorney General knows my concerns I think in that regard. 

 

I do have some concerns in the bill that perhaps the Attorney General would take note of and report 

back in committee. I suggest to the Attorney General that by putting the Judicial Council in the 

particular act, it will, in fact, only apply to that particular act. If we are looking at a broad judicial 

council then I agree that there should be one. A separate act so that it applies to all judges and all 

courts would be in order and I think it would be 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2441 

 

welcomed by the citizens, the benchers and the courts themselves. I think that that outlet is needed 

so I suggest to the Attorney General that a judicial council really should be a separate act applying 

to all courts in the province. I think that by leaving it strictly within The Provincial Court Act that 

it is subject to the interpretation that it only applies to that particular court and no other. So that 

interpretation may be placed on it and I would hope that the Attorney General would review that 

and perhaps come back in committee with a response to that particular matter. 

 

Again we subscribe to the aims and goals of the Attorney General with The Provincial Court Act. 

I think that the stature that it gives to, what will be formally The Magistrates’ Court Act, the 

magistrate’s court is long overdue. I think that there will be a benefit as well that the Attorney 

General is aware of and that is by the designation, the public perception of an upgrading may in 

fact make it easier for the Attorney General to recruit judges and I suspect that wil l be the case. 

 

I, therefore, with those few comments and I hope the Attorney General would see fit to reply in 

committee, state that we will be supporting the bill. 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t claim to have any political 

knowledge in this area, but we do and he wants to comment on it later so I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — I would like, through you and to you, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce to the Assembly a group of students from the Whitewood School. They are 25 in number 

of Grade Five students. I am sure that the members of the Assembly would like to join with me in 

wishing them a good day here in the city of Regina and the visit to the Legislature. I wish th em 

well and hope they have a really good day. I will meet with you later in the rotunda area about 12 

o’clock. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Second Readings (cont’d) 
 

MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 64 — An Act to 

amend The Interpretation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in most of the acts of the province where jurisdiction is given to the courts 

we presently call them magistrates’ courts. Jurisdiction is conferred not upon a judge of the 

magistrates’ courts but upon a provincial magistrate. This is because the same jurisdiction can be 

exercised by a provincial magistrate appointed under The Provincial Magistrates’ Act — a person 

deemed to be appointed under The Provincial Magistrates’ Act, a district court  judge and a judge 

of the magistrate’s court. The word is intended that each of these persons has jurisdiction to 

perform a particular act; the words ‘provincial magistrate’ are used and The Interpretation Act 

provides a definition of this term. 
 

The new proposed Provincial Court Act, which I just introduced, changes the name of a judge of 

the magistrate’s court and provides for the eventual repeal of The Provincial Magistrates’ Act. 

Therefore it is necessary to amend this section in The Interpretation 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2442 

 

Act as a consequence to ensure that there is no break in jurisdiction. 

 

I move second reading of Bill No. 64. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — CONTINUING EDUCATION – VOTE 5 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would like the minister to introduce his support staff, please. 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Continuing Education): — Well, I do not like to filibuster too long 

here, Mr. Chairman, but I will start off with my deputy minister to my side here, Alex Guy. In front of 

me, is the Adm for Program Delivery, Lou Riederer. On this side is Frank May, the Director of 

Administration, right behind Alex is Dr. Peter Glynn, Director of the Policy Branch, behind me is Dr. 

David Larder of the University Affairs, over in this corner is Bob Barschel, the Adm for the Industrial 

Programming Area, directly behind is Bob Priebe, Director of Program Development. With the beard in 

the corner here is Morris Campbell, Director of Student Services, beside him is Jake Kutarna, Director 

of Community Colleges Branch, Dr. Katz from the Science Policy Secretariat (in the green suit here), 

Ian Wilson from the archives over on the far side, Lloyd MacDonald from SaskMedia Corporation, Don 

Meadows from the provincial library and I think that is about it. 

 

ITEM 1 
 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman I do not know whether I am involved in an endurance test here of 

some sort or not. Dr. Faris I think has been going since some time about two or three days ago on these 

particular estimates and maybe some time this morning we can wind it up and both take a well-deserved 

rest on this. 

 

The first thing that I would like to comment on is that I noticed yesterday when I listened to your 

proposals, or your estimates I should say, for the Department of Education, you seemed to do a little bit 

better with the treasury people in negotiating a larger increase in the percentage of grants. I think we had 

to sit through the oratory that you went through yesterday outlining how many dollars and increases you 

had for the Department of Education. 

 

If I read your figures correctly here, in the Department of Continuing Education your total grants are 

only up by 4.76. I presume you are going to answer that by referring to the change that was probably 

made in some of the capital constructions and the establishment maybe of the Heritage Fund here in the 

province of Saskatchewan and some of the changes you have in the financing of buildings. 

 

The one area that I would like to refer the minister to is where he has been on the hot spot a couple of 

times this year. One of them was by the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association out on the steps and 

the other one was in the rotunda here of the buildings by the students from the University of Regina. I 

understand the Premier also had sort of a similar reception when he hit the campus in Saskatoon. 

 

The point I would like to make to the minister on this is that, from the figures that I have obtained, we in 

Saskatchewan, for instance the College of Arts of Science, from figures that I have, and I am not quite 

sure whether these are brought up to the precise dates as 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2443 

 

of this year, but we have the highest student fees in the province or in western Canada.  

 

I would like to indicate to the minister, that if we had continued to have the level of support that we 

had a number of years ago, for instance, in 1971, we had about 25 per cent of the entire Budget of 

the province of Saskatchewan devoted for education. It was $130 million at that time. Then in 1979 

we have now dropped down to 22.3 per cent of the entire Budget for the province of Saskatchewan, 

which is about $378 million. Really as far as the total Budget in the province of Saskatchewan, we 

have had a drop of about 3.1 per cent for Education. I am talking both Continuing Education and 

Education because at that time they were all within one department. Now that’s a total of $54 

million more that we could be having if Education had received the same level of support now as it 

did then. With that $54 million of course, the grants then to the universities could have been more 

substantial and the students fees would have to be as high as they have been set at the present time.  

 

I have also taken a look at the total amount of money that was collected in 1976 and 1977 at both of 

the campuses as far as student fees are concerned. This is taken from the Annual Report. I believe in 

1976 at the University of Saskatchewan there was approximately $6.2 million collected in student 

fees and $2.1 million here at the University of Regina. In 1977 it was $7.2 million at the University 

in Saskatoon and another $2.4 million here which is a total of $9.6 million. Now that’s a small 

figure in relationship to the $54 million that we don’t receive now, if we had been receiving the 

same support as before. I just wonder if we shouldn’t be moving in to an area, particularly at a time 

in which it is very difficult for students to find employment. I have been talking to a number of 

young people who have left the universities and are really in a very difficult position this summer 

and are going to have a difficult time — that we shouldn’t be giving greater support so that the fees 

to the university would not be high. The region that I happen to live in, of course we compete with 

the universities in Alberta. It is the same distance to Calgary, to Saskatoon, to Regina and if you like 

Great Falls, from the area that I happen to live in. When we have the reduced fees at these 

universities, certainly it is one attraction for the people to attend them, particularly at the junior 

college level, where you have the first and second years offered in the province of Alberta with 

really reduced fees in comparison to what they are at the university level.  

 

Would the minister not feel that probably we should be moving into an area in which we have 

greater support along this line, so that in effect we would be able to reduce the tuition fees at the 

university? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Well I’m glad the member raised this issue, because our government has a very 

good record, a very good record indeed in this area, particularly in comparison with the government 

that people had to suffer under until 1971 . . . 

 

MR. STODALKA: — . . . Going back to . . . 

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, I am afraid we’ll have to go back there again to put things in perspective.  

 

Once again, in this area, this year the government of Saskatchewan gave a higher percentage grant 

increase to our university sector than any other province in Canada. In fact, again it is almost double 

the national average. 

 

In regard to student fees it is quite true to say that our student fees are equal to that of 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2444 

 

 say, the University of British Columbia, that is, if you just take the western average they would be on 

that high level with the University of British Columbia. They are not alone in that regard. In regard to 

percentage increase, again, the percentage increases are the lowest in western Canada this year. In 

Manitoba, the increase in student fees this year is going to exceed 20 per cent. In regard to Alberta, the 

junior colleges, which the member mentioned, our advice is that there is going to be a 25 per cent 

increase in those fees. In regard to the Simon Fraser University, I understand there is a discussion of a 

25 per cent fee increase there. 

 

In regard to the question of what percentage the student is bearing of his cost, again the historic 

comparison is very enlightening. In 1969-70, the last full year of the former government, the students 

bore 22 per cent of the costs of their education, at the university. This year we have got that down to 

about 11 per cent, almost cut that percentage borne by the student to half. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — . . . last year. 

 

MR. FARIS: — Well, those happen to be the facts. Those happen to be the facts that you had two 

students in university in 1970, you would have found them bearing 22 percent of their costs through 

tuition fees. Now they are bearing 11 per cent. The percentage they are bearing is half. This is an 

enviable record and those who compare our situation with that of any other province in Canada can only 

commend the government for its actions this year. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Will the minister indicate what the fees are at the University of Regina, 

University of Saskatchewan, University of Manitoba, University of Brandon. 

 

MR. FARIS: — I am sorry I can’t give next year’s fees for all across Canada because that information 

is not all in, but I can give you the fees across Canada for ‘77, ‘78 Arts and Science. Well, I’ll give you 

this last year’s fees but this will not include their 20 to 25 per cent increases that I mentioned for next 

year. But I’ll give you the current figures that we have because those are not all in. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Which figures from Saskatchewan are you going to give? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I am going to give Regina and Saskatoon for Saskatchewan. I’ll give you everything as 

of last year. 

 

As of last year for Arts and Science, because they do vary from faculty to faculty, this will not include 

the 20 to 25 per cent increases in the provinces which you mentioned. British Columbia $572, Simon 

Fraser $540, Victoria $540, Calgary $558, Lethbridge $500. University of Alberta $500, Regina $584, 

Saskatchewan $572, Brandon $475, Manitoba $450, Winnipeg $425. Ontario ranges from $700 to $750, 

Quebec $600, Maritime Provinces range from $750 to $800 and Newfoundland is $600. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Is it fair to say that out of the three prairie provinces then we have the highest 

tuition fees? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Well, it’s hard to say what the figures will be for next year but last year that was true. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2445 

 

MR. BAILEY: — In a recent statement made by the President of the University of Regina and a 

statement also made by a director at the Moose Jaw Institute, in regard to the employment of the 

graduates, we have a great contrast here. We have, you know, we have Moose Jaw Technical School 

saying, look, most of our people will be receiving jobs upwards to 90 per cent. Whereas the 

graduates from the university at the present time are finding themselves literally with no 

employment whatsoever. I’ll give you one example, for instance. In most cases, say in education  

alone, we’d be turning over something like, in the rural areas, from 25 to 30 percent of the staff. It is 

not uncommon for a turnover in one year. In this particular year, in this particular time when 

recruitment is taking place, I myself am not replacing one in elementary at all, and possibly five, at 

the most maybe seven, which is very low. This indicates, Mr. Minister, a general trend across the 

province. The fact is that the university is not going to be able to put its graduates on the job market. 

There are no jobs for them. There are no positions for them and that’s not unique just to this 

province. Would the minister then not agree that some of the course offerings, some of those things 

which the two universities are offering in duplication are becoming excessively expensive to the 

people of this province due to the market situation of the graduates from the university?  

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, the hon. member is raising a very serious problem and I am sure, as he would 

admit, a problem all across Canada. It’s one we are greatly concerned with because it’s one that is 

very difficult to deal with just in the one province. It has to do in part, for example, with the health 

of the whole Canadian economy. The very low productivity we have here in Canada, the sta tus of 

our dollar, the high unemployment and inflation and that sort of matter which most economists 

would agree are matters which must be dealt with with the instruments of the federal government, 

the whole national economy. That’s part of the problem. In  general, what he says is true, but I will 

say that we perceive at this point in regard to the professional colleges in Saskatchewan that we do 

not have serious problem. There is always some problem, for example, the issue raised of education. 

The latest studies which we have there was a study done from Saskatoon campus on what happened 

to their graduates last year and they compared that to what had happened to their graduates over the 

previous five year period, to see if there was any change in the pattern. Their conclusion was that 

last year there was not. Now, as the member suggests, year to year we have to keep monitoring that. 

We are, indeed, doing that actually in the Department of Education; we have set up a study. We 

have asked Dr. Fred Gathercole, a highly respected educator in this province, to work on this area of 

the supply demand situation in regard to teachers. It is of interest that, in fact, there are more 

teachers in the province of Saskatchewan now than there were seven years ago. Because of  the 

adequacy of funding education, we have been able on that demand site to keep the situation 

somewhat in balance. But relatively the member again is right. For instance, for arts graduates there 

has always, always historically been a problem because they don’t have any direct and specific 

professional training but personally, being a person out of the arts tradition, I have always 

considered that education has a value in itself and I expect that the member would agree with that. 

Certainly in my own educational career pattern, I did not seek my education with an occupational 

goal in mind. I think that education for education’s value will, hopefully, in our society, always be 

valued. I do have a concern about the unemployment situation but I do feel that in  general, it is part 

of the general overall unemployment situation in not only the province but in Canada, and cannot be 

solved just in the province. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Minister, you’re right in your assessment. The only thing I would question of 

course is the end goal. I suggest to you that young people who enter a four or five year program in 

university, do in fact have a goal at the end of the line and that is 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2446 

 

a job. You make reference to one very important part — there are more teachers in the province now 

than there were seven years ago and there are several thousand fewer positions for them in 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

MR. FARIS: — No, excuse me . . . 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Well go ahead and correct me then. 

 

MR. FARIS: — If I correct you on that, what I am saying is that there are more teachers employed in 

the province than there were seven years ago. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — That’s not a very good — there are more people employed than there were several 

years ago. Maybe that doesn’t speak too well for our education economics then because we are down 

several thousands of students. That speaks well for education but maybe not so well for economics. 

 

The point that I’m making is that while you and I may have had a different background and come from a 

different era, we were seeking education maybe for different purposes. I want to suggest to you today 

that I don’t think that is good enough. I think that the people going into university today do in fact, have 

a goal at the end of the line. Now what we find all over Canada, in certain categories of the arts and 

sciences and in education, you have people with four and five years training, and what are they? They 

are lined up at the Canada Manpower Centres looking for positions. In many cases it has nothing to do 

with their training at all — absolutely nothing, and it really doesn’t bear too much for them to the job 

because people are saying, look, we want people who are trained or at least partially trained. For that 

reason, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that it is incumbent upon the educational officials throughout 

Canada that perhaps the time has come — about 25 per cent of the budgets across Canada go to 

education, and are we spending our money wisely to put hundreds and thousands of young people 

through various courses of studies and at the end of their course of studies, there is no job and there is no 

hope of a job for them? Now, do we owe young people something? That is my question. Do we owe 

them something at the beginning of their university career? When people come to me at the present time 

and they say to me that they are interested in a particular career, my advice to them is very simple. You 

had better take a look at the job market in that field and see if there will be any improvement four years 

down the line. 

 

Now the fact is that you have made a very good point. I believe that you used the figure of 11 per cent, 

that students really contribute about 11 per cent of their total university cost, which I might add, is a lot 

better than the first 12 years of years at school. In my particular case we are paying darned near 60 per 

cent or over, and all the rest is from the government. We have a lot of money invested. If you took 

Saskatchewan at the present time and not arguing about their formal education up to grade 12, but if any 

government is going to invest approximately 90 per cent into an individual (I’m not quarrelling with 

that) if we are not going to have productivity from the education they have learned — I don’t want to 

compare it to a factory but I think there are certain connotations we have to have, is that we are indeed 

wasting a lot of educational dollars. That is the point I am making. 

 

Now you don’t get that argument in your technical institutes and I believe that the figure that they raised 

was 90 per cent would be employed. If that is the case and there is a demand in the technical field maybe 

it is our responsibility to steer more people towards the technical field. That is the point I’m making, Mr. 

Minister. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2447 

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, I understand your argument. I do think our society allowing such high levels of 

unemployment is an extremely wasteful society. I’m concerned about that in regard to the university 

graduates. We don’t have employment whether they be from a professional school background or liberal 

arts. You know I think people who have a liberal arts background have a contribution to make in the 

employment economy and that has been demonstrated. 

 

Your basic point is right. There is a tremendous waste there. There is also a tremendous amount of waste 

with our high school graduates. I’m sure that the member would agree that it is tragic for a young person 

graduating from high school to have to go out and sit around on unemployment, which is personally 

degrading to him and can be nothing but destructive. So we share this kind of concern and within the 

Department of Education, Continuing Education. Working with federal Manpower, we are trying to 

strengthen up the career counselling aspect. I am sure the hon. member is aware of some of those efforts 

within the Department of Education. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Just to make one comment. I was listening to the debate between the two 

members and I just had the feeling that you were just a little bit too harsh on the idea of the value of a 

liberal Arts education. I think one of the problems that we really face with some of these young people, 

and I know this is something that happens in our own house, is what happens when you have somebody 

who really doesn’t know what he wants to pursue at the university. For instance, the Arts and Science 

Faculty has enabled people to sort of sort themselves out as around the university campus, the first and 

the second year to get some experience of what university is like, what life is like, what the colleges are 

like, also to, sort of rub shoulders with people that are on the campus and it is then only after some one 

or two or three years in the Arts and Science Faculty that they are able to make a choice. 

 

I agree that you do run into the problem of unemployment at a later date and there is no doubt, of course, 

this has some sort of effect on the people and you could classify it as waste, but certainly I don’t think 

we can ever move to the stage where we have to start directing people and telling them you have to go 

this way, you have to go that way. There still has to be a certain degree of freedom. 

 

I would like to move into a related area and that is the area of last year, for instance, in the College of 

Education on the campus at Saskatoon, there were restrictions put on on the enrolment. I believe they 

used to accept any unlimited number and then this last year they accepted around, if my memory is 

correct, around 450 some students into the College of Education, something along that line. But what 

bothers me is this. They are doing it at that university and I realize that you, as minister, can’t probably 

make decisions on this, but you can make suggestions. It is the fact that they do this on the average of 

the student. Under the present evaluation system that we have in Saskatchewan, when students come out 

of Grade 12, you just can’t compare students from one school to another school. The marking system is 

different. There really is no standardization of marks. For instance, you have High School A, High 

School B. 

 

In A they might just be a little higher standard of marking or more difficult markers as far as the teachers 

are concerned. And when you get to the borderline case, wherever that point is where you have the 450 

in and you now start picking the 451st, or the 450th or the 449th, who it is that is going to be admitted. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2448 

 

It really alarms me to think that we are doing it on the basis of high school marks that are completely, 

almost irrelevant as far as comparison is concerned when you start getting to that level. I wonder if the 

minister would offer some comments as to whether or not he thinks that that is an adequate system and 

what he is doing to elevate that problem? 

 

MR. FARIS: — The member raises a good point and I think it will be of interest to him to know that 

the screening techniques used at the university, screening and counselling techniques, are really at our 

request to try to help these kids wrestle with the question of whether they in fact want to go into 

education. In fact, on the campus there is sort of a self assessment process going on particularly, I give 

you an example, in the elementary education program on the Regina Campus. 

 

But the kind of screening that goes on is not only in regard to averages. There is, obviously, some aspect 

of that, but there is a look at the activities in which the student has been involved. It also involves a 

personal interview and an attempt to do an overall assessment. It is not strictly on averages. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, is the minister suggesting that when a first year student enters the 

University of Saskatchewan at Saskatoon, that he is interviewed? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Those in the sort of marginal group, when you have some sort of quota system as 

universities have chosen to have and various faculties at various periods of time, there comes a point 

when there is sort of a marginal decision-making area. With that group, this is true. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Were there any interviews held last year? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I am informed there were some last year. The program will be fully in place this year 

and there is also, what is described to me by my officials, as a continuous screening program. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Well, certainly that is an improvement and I wasn’t completely aware that that 

was the process that they had begun to follow. The information that was available to me is that in the 

first year — I know there is screening in the second and third and fourth year — but in that very first 

year when you were bringing people into the college, I have been unaware of any of them that have gone 

in and been interviewed. I don’t know if we a had all good students or what. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I want just to zero in on what my colleague for Maple Creek has said. 

To use marks as a yardstick today, is just about the most unreliable yardstick that you could use. Believe 

me, if you ask the various colleges at the university, they don’t like to make these things public, but in 

some of the larger areas they have already drawn up their own yardstick and put their own marks to the 

marks that are received. 

 

Somehow we have some very questionable marks and very dubious marks coming in and there is a great 

deal of controversy going on it and I know that all the colleges don’t like to, because you see, the 

university is an institution which operates so very largely and very heavily on government funds, it is 

somehow difficult for them to be as critical as they would like to be. Now, I really believe and I am glad 

to hear you say you know, that you are moving toward . . . I would think that it is possible, Mr. Minister, 

that every applicant going into the college of education, if it is possible to have that screening 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2449 

 

process take place. Not that you have to be clear cut yes or no, but at least you are going to have some 

guidance. After all, if you look at the other colleges, like the college of medicine and so on, they have a 

very strict screening process and I think the time has come, Mr. Minister, that in backing up what the 

member for Maple Creek has said, let’s not put too much weight on these marks. Let’s go more for the 

individual because in the long run, that is what is going to count and marks are really secondary. I hope 

that is your procedure. 

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, this is an area where I am very pleased to see some strengthening. We are talking 

particularly here about the colleges of education and with the more in-service practical professional 

training that is happening, for instance, in the elementary teacher education program in Regina, those 

students in their first semester are spending, some of the students at least, are spending a half day in the 

classroom. In the second year, they are spending one day a week in the classroom, and then we have 

now in the third year the extended internship of 16 weeks. Built into that is an ongoing counselling kind 

of a program. I am very happy to see that kind of development. I am sure the members are as well. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — I wonder if I could ask the minister a question because I think it has to be asked in 

item 1 because I don’t particular think there is any particular place throughout Continuing Education. In 

co-operation with the universities the teacher training program, along with the school boards across the 

province, we were asked to co-operate in getting the elementary and secondary interns into the rural 

schools. Now previously, I think the minister has to understand that, a person in the third or fourth year, 

first of all does not want to give up his place of residence in the city because if he does he may not get it 

back when he comes back. He does not want to retain it and pay for it and also have the additional 

expense of board and room during his internship, so they ask certain boards to contribute a certain 

amount toward the interns, some went as high as $100 a month, some went higher. Can the minister tell 

me how many of the 60 rural school boards co-operated with the guaranteed fund to the interns on a 

monthly basis? Do you have that information? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I am sorry, I can’t provide that information to the member right now. I believe we 

might be able to get that out of the Department of Education rather than Continuing Education but we 

will undertake to get that information, if it is available. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — I would appreciate that. I want to get into another topic, Mr. Minister. I raise this . . . 

O. K. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — If you don’t mind. Just a related question on this. I have a strong feeling having 

been involved with recruiting teachers that, really what is happening at the colleges of education is, a lot 

of the training, the actual training of the teacher, is taking place (particularly the in classroom stuff) at 

the city level. Now, I don’t know what the percentages are, but of the new graduates who come out of 

those colleges I have the very strong feeling that by far, the vast majority of them are employed by rural 

boards in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t know if you have any statistics and that was my 

question. Do you have any figures which would indicate what percentage of the college graduates, the 

teacher graduates out of the college of education who are employed in rural Saskatchewan, compared to 

the city areas of Regina and Saskatoon and I suppose you might say, the other cities? 

 

MR. FARIS: —Yes. We have asked for the co-operation of the universities in follow-up studies on their 

graduates in regard to this and I believe later this year we will be able to 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2450 

 

get this information together and provide it to the member. I think his general feeling is probably right 

but I am sure he wants more accurate data than that and I will certainly undertake to provide that. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — The reason I made the comment of course because we are moving toward more 

of a different type of approach in our schools in rural Saskatchewan in that we are getting into multiple 

grades within the same classroom and most of the practice teaching that is done in your urban centres 

has the one grade situation and then when we get those young people out into our classrooms, they find 

it very frustrating that they have to handle more than one grade at one time. I know that you have been 

offering incentives to rural board to try to get these people to come out into the rural areas. I would just 

like to speak strongly in favor of a program in which we could probably more adequately train the 

people who are coming into rural Saskatchewan to handle the situations that they are going to be facing 

when they get out there. 

 

MR. FARIS: — I think that’s a good point. and certainly something I intend to encourage to happen. I 

think that is a concern, for instance, the Mid-school Conference which was a very successful conference 

recently held in Saskatoon, the same kind of point was raised, with particular concern about seeing that 

those students go out and teach, not only in the elementary and high schools but get a chance in the 

middle years where again there has been sort of a gap. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, sometime ago I raised a question in the House in regard to the 

concerns which the School of Agriculture had over the offerings of the Wascana Institute. You had a 

delegation from these people from the School of Agriculture. This school, as you know, has served the 

needs of Saskatchewan when its doors first opened in 1912, I believe. In recent years they have not filled 

their quotas, they could have used more students. An examination, Mr. Minister, of the students 

attending the School of Agriculture indicate that because it is held in Saskatoon in conjunction with the 

University of Saskatchewan it is not a geographical barrier. That is, going back and looking at the origin 

of the students you will find that there are as many students from say south of Davidson as there are 

north of Davidson at this college. It has been a very, very popular program. During the past year, the 

Wascana Institute sent a lot of people to the College of Agriculture looking at their programs, looking at 

their curriculum, with the idea as you have now mentioned in your news release, of course, of 

establishing some of these programs on a very similar basis and indeed in many cases, with the exact 

background to offer a type of program in conjunction with Wascana Institute. Now it has raised a lot of 

questions among the agrologists on the University campus in Saskatoon. Their accusation, and I believe 

that there is some merit to their accusation, is that they don’t have a full quota and they would like to 

have an expansion in some of the programs. I guess their concern is basically this: the more similar the 

programs which are held under different institutions, they could be losing some enrolment there. Now I 

read your release, Mr. Minister, in which you attempted to clarify to them their concerns about the 

programs at the Wascana Institute. I am wondering why, Mr. Minister, that you had not made a broader 

statement? Why you had not provided them with more information at an earlier date rather than to 

increase and build up their suspicions as to what the Department of Continuing Education was doing in 

the field of agrology? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I can say that there has been a communication problem. It is my belief that a 

communication problem has existed within the university structure. The agrologists you are talking 

about, most of them, and the ones I met with were also 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2451 

 

people who are employed by the university. The discussions around these new courses and so on, 

have taken place with representation from the university, with the intention that the Continuing 

Education Department, the institutes, the university and so on, would know what is going on. 

Representatives from that department of Agriculture at the university were informed of the kinds of 

proceedings. We deny, and we have denied in our press release — certainly we have discussed with 

the people concerned the differences between these programs — we deny they are similar programs, 

they are greatly different. For example, the Wascana program will not overlap in this point that it 

will be a modular type of programming of two to three weeks of duration. It is not the two-year kind 

of course that they are talking about up there. The programs will lead to specific skills and specific 

job knowledge. The program does not lead to a one-year certificate or a two-year diploma in the 

traditional type of a one or two-year program. Portability will permit these modules to be given 

throughout the province through contacts through the Community Colleges. The clientele is 

different, it is aimed at employees and farmers who are unable to take existing kinds of programs. 

FarmStart clientele, natives and clients beyond the 18 to 24 cohort, are the targets of the new 

program. It’s a different kind of program. Many of the concerns which were raised in discussion 

with me simply do not exist. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Let me ask you this question, Mr. Minister. As a result of the Wascana Institute 

moving into this broad area to which you have just made reference, do you feel that that is going to 

limit the potential clients for the School of Agriculture? Do you think that that is going to interfere 

with this very valuable program that we have had? I am not condemning your program such as you 

have explained it. I disagree with you, that maybe the university knew but I will tell you the people 

involved in the School of Agriculture didn’t know. I am not blaming you for that but somehow they 

didn’t know, or they would never have made the trip to Regina. My question this, is this going to 

interfere in this broad spectrum with young people attending the School of Agriculture? I think that 

has been a very successful program. 

 

MR. FARIS: — We agree that it is a very successful program. It is our understanding, I am 

informed by my officials, that the leaders in the School of Agriculture knew about the differences in 

the program and so on. I can say that as I met with that group I found that they did not know. They 

were asking questions which quite frankly I think they should have been informed about via the 

university structure. We do expect that kind of communication to go on within that community but it 

is our belief that the short kind of course here will in fact encourage people later on to go on and 

take more. This is one of the things we found in the adult education area, that when people get a 

little bit of upgrading and information and so on, it develops in them a desire to have more. It is our 

belief that this will encourage and strengthen development in that very fine School of Agriculture. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I have another area, Mr. Chairman, that I would like to pursue because it is 

interrelated I think with a couple of the other sections in here and I think maybe it would be best to 

deal with it at the present time. That is the area of student loans. I know that you are in charge of 

administering the Canada student loans and you also have your own two programs, the bursary 

program as well as the Saskatchewan Student Plan. 

 

The questions I have are not going to be so much in detail as matters of the principle, I guess you 

might say. We had a considerable amount of discussion and the minister recognized last year that it 

indeed was a problem, the problem where the student has a parent who is unwilling to provide the 

necessary funds when the student wishes to go 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2452 

 

on to a university or a technical institute. 

 

The arrangements under the Canada Students’ Loan, and not only the Canada Students’ Loan but 

also the Saskatchewan Students’ Loan or Student Plan was the same last  year, which was in effect 

that unless the student had resided on his own for one year he would not be eligible for borrowing 

any funds under the Canada Student Loan or the Saskatchewan Student Plan. 

 

I checked through the Hansard reports of last year and the minister indicated that he was having 

some discussions at that time and he was hoping that there could be some sort of an improvement in 

this, whereby we would have one group of people, who were certainly identified as having a 

problem, who would have some relief and there might be some changes made in the Saskatchewan 

Plan if not the federal plan. 

 

MR. FARIS: — Unfortunately the situation is that we have a federal plan which is inadequate in 

many regards. I think many members here would agree with that but we have been pressing, along 

with the other provinces, for the improvement of this plan. 

 

There was a bill taken into the House of Commons to increase, for instance, the maximum student 

loan from $1,800 to $2,240. It was brought to first reading but apparently it will not be implemented 

until 1979, if it goes through. Now that is four or five years in which there has just been no 

movement at all in that amount under that program. That is most unfortunate.  

 

My officials have had a look at what sort of thing would happen if we were to bring in a wide 

ranging kind of program that did not insist on students being dependent on their parents and so on, 

what it would cost the province. The first thing is that if you brought in a program of that nature, 

which the member has mentioned before, it would completely wipe out the federal plan. Why would 

anybody bother to go to the federal plan if they could get into this one? It would cost the province in 

yearly loan something like $14.5 million. We would have to set up a total revolving capital fund of 

something like $80 million to sustain that kind of plan. That is just in this province alone. You can 

imagine the cost to the provinces across Canada. 

 

I think it is most unfortunate that the discussions the provinces have had with the federal 

government have not borne fruit but that is the case. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — In other words, the minister is saying that the answer to the question I asked 

as to whether or not there are being changes made to help this particular group of people is no. You 

know this business of passing the buck from one level of government to the other — I would 

suggest that the Saskatchewan government is probably more willing or able to pay for it right now 

than the federal government. The last figures that I heard, I think they had about an $8 billion deficit 

and it was projected that it would probably even rise higher so I do not know how we can expect 

that level of government to increase their deficit above and beyond what they have.  

 

This is really no excuse for the Saskatchewan plan and certainly you could have some sort of 

controls. I do not know how your officials ever arrived at that cost of how this one group — I did 

not think there would be nearly that many people who needed aid, whose parents were not willing to 

provide it, that there would be that large a group. 

 

Now this is borrowing money. It is borrowing money, money which has to be replaced.  



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2453 

 

It is not granting bursaries and sums of money. 

 

MR. FARIS: — Well the hon. member knows very well that if you open a plan up like that, 

everybody would go to that plan. Why should they not go to that? The member also knows that we 

have increased student bursaries in this province from zero, under the former government, to $1800 a 

year and it is very well received. 

 

We also brought in the Saskatchewan Student Loan Program which covers people who were not 

covered under federal programs so we have a very good record in this area. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I just do not agree with the minister that people would just go flocking to 

borrow money, unless they needed it. You know, you have to pay back borrowed money. It’s not a 

question of giving somebody something for nothing, that everybody would flock and come to. And 

again, of course, your eligibility criterion would be that you have to prove that you needed it. It’s just 

not handing out a pile of funds — I guess we are getting nowhere on this particular argument. Again, 

the minister, of course, could change the Saskatchewan plan if he really felt that there was some value 

to it and he wouldn’t have to be connected with the federal plan. 

 

The other point I wanted to raise. When I got into Regina the other day, I heard on the radio that there 

was a problem with the federal plan of collecting under the Canada Students’ Loan. If I remember, the 

figure was something like $60 million, or something like this, that they were unable to collect from 

people who had borrowed money. In other words people had graduated from university — it indicated 

even in that news report that some of these people had well paying jobs and were refusing to pay the 

funds back that they had borrowed. Now that was the federal plan and the obligation is certainly not 

on your department to collect those funds but my question is, you have also had a plan in the province 

in which you were lending money to students. What is the record of that plan as far as repayment? Are 

you having any difficulty collecting funds from those people who have borrowed money from you 

previously? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, my officials tell me, that the percentage write-off for the Saskatchewan plan is 

less than 3 per cent and that’s lower than the federal plan average across Canada. Most of those that 

are written off are in the cases of death or illness. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Do you mean that there really has not been a collection problem here in the 

province of Saskatchewan then? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Well, we have taken this problem very seriously and follow up on this and try to 

minimize it. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — One final question in the area. I have a strong feeling that probably when 

September hits we are going to be having some problems with students in obtaining money. Now, you 

indicated earlier that the federal government probably isn’t going to be increasing the amounts of 

money that they are going to have available under the Canada Students’ Loan Program. In light of that 

fact and in the light of the fact that these are Saskatchewan students who are going to be possibly 

having trouble this fall, are you planning any changes in the student plans that we have here in 

Saskatchewan as far as assistance is concerned and if you are, will you please outline what those 

changes are going to be? 

 

MR. FARIS: — As a result of this federal action and as a result of our concern that they 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2454 

 

have not raised this amount for four or five years now, we are examining changes particularly to the 

Saskatchewan Student Bursary Plan. This, of course, is a grant plan and when they get that money from 

the province they don’t have to pay it back. So in light of the failure of the federal government in this 

regard we will be examining this and hopefully within the next couple of months we should be able to 

conclude this sort of thing. We were surprised by the failure of this federal initiative and we will be 

announcing changes prior to next fall. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, does the minister have information from the federal authorities of the 

proposed some $60 million, what portion of that belongs to Saskatchewan students? Do you have this 

information as to those who haven’t paid their loans? Do they break it down on a province basis? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I’m sorry we can’t provide the hon. member with that information. That is information 

held by the federal government. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Item 2 agreed. 

 

ITEM 3 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Just one question on this section, Mr. Chairman. You know we have — this is the 

section where you do the graduate analysis of where they are going and to what colleges this is the 

section where we get these forms to fill out, I believe. We get a print back on these. I want to ask the 

question, what co-operation are you receiving from the jurisdictions across the province, do you get 100 

per cent completion of this information this data going in from the local level? 

 

MR. FARIS: — We have had co-operation from every school in the province. We have covered I think, 

covered something like 94 per cent of the students in that study. We have had just tremendous 

co-operation. 

 

Item 3 agreed. 

 

ITEM 4 
 

MR. STODALKA: — The minister indicated earlier that he was going to be doing something about the 

bursary program and I take a look here and I just was wondering if the increase in this portion of the 

budget was great enough to take care of any major change which you are going to be making in the 

bursary program in the province of Saskatchewan. It seems to me that in relation to the total amount and 

the percentage of increase to last year, that you won’t be able to make any significant changes in the 

program unless you have more money in this fund. 

 

MR. FARIS: — We will look after that problem. I assure the member that we have looked forward to 

that sort of matter. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Well, would the minister indicate whether he intends to find more money 

somewhere else? 

 

MR. FARIS: — We feel we will solve the problem and when the change is announced he will see how 

we deal with it. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2455 

 

MR. STODALKA: — My idea of estimates is that the minister is supposed to have an amount budgeted 

in line of what his plans are for the coming year. Now you are telling me you got some grandiose plans 

which you are going to be making changes and you haven’t provided the necessary money for it. What 

is going on? 

 

MR. FARIS: — We are like the wise chipmunk who stores away nuts in May. So we will have 

sufficient money to cover the needs. 

 

Items 4, 5 agreed. 

 

ITEM 6 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, we see here in item 6 Mr. Minister, where you have reduced your 

permanent positions by two. You have an increase of not quite $200,000. Reduction in two people up. 

What’s the rather high percentage of increase in this particular item all about? 

 

MR. FARIS: —The increase in cost there is in centralized computer services which we offer to the 

institutes and the community colleges system. We do it on a centralized basis so they don’t have to 

duplicate the costs. 

 

Item 6 agreed. 

 

ITEM 7 
 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of things I would like to say regarding 

community colleges. I take a paragraph out of the annual report here which indicates, in this particular 

year under the report, that there were 85,653 participants who took courses within the community 

college system within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The whole point of what I am going to say is related to this idea of statistics and how they can be made 

to seem impressive and yet, when one examines the background and what has actually happened and 

starts to question the statistics themselves into the actual meaning that you might find attached to them. I 

asked a question on the order paper you might remember, oh, it was a long time ago — it took me over a 

year to get the answer and then the very last day of the sitting of the Legislature last spring, the night 

before we left, I received the answers to the questions that I had asked. There was one comment in 

which I was a bit, you might say, concerned about and I would just like to relate it. 

 

It was the Cypress Hills Community College that we were talking about and this whole matter of 

statistics and the number of people who actually are enrolled in courses. That year I believe, the 

statistics showed (if my adding is correct) that you had an enrolment of 8,724 people who took courses 

in the Cypress Hills Community College. Now, that sounds pretty great, it’s a lot of people I suppose, 

8,724. And this is how you arrived at these statistics but Mr. Chairman, when you go back and take a 

look at the enrolment in some of those things, some of the courses that were held and how they arrived 

at the 8,724, I would like to read some of the courses that were held. 

 

Number one, there were some films held in the city of Swift Current. There were three hours of films. 

There were 650 people who attended those films for three hours. That’s 650; take a look at that total of 

8,000. Here are 650 people who went to a movie. That’s 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2456 

 

what they did; they went to a movie and they saw the movie. So, therefore, they were enrolled as 

students who were taking a course in the Cyprus Hills Community College and you added it up in your 

total and that’s how you arrived at 85,000 this year. 

 

Now the second thing I’d like to mention is that there was another film. This one was a series of films 

called the Ten Lost Years. This lasted for 36 hours and you had 352 people who attended that series of 

films. So now you take the 352 and you add them to 600 and something so you’ve got 1000, 1000 

people who went to the movies and were called students who had enrolled in the Cypress Hills 

Community College. Then we had a comedy series down there in Swift Current. It was a comedy film 

series. It lasted for 36 hours and they had 687 people who went to those movies. They had 687 people 

who went to that set of movies. So you add up all of those people and my total is we had 1,689 people 

who went to movies. The Cypress Hills Community College had 8,000 and some people taking courses 

but out of that we had 1,689 people who were going to movies. 

 

Now the thing that bothers me about this is they didn’t even pay for their own movies. They had to be 

subsidized. For instance, the first set cost $1805; pardon me, they made a little money on that, they 

collected $2,000 The second series the cost was $682 and the fees were $334. The last one here, this is 

the interesting one, they collected $622 for the First Decade of Sound, I believe it was, $622 in fees and 

the cost of the program was $2,275.80. In other words, the province of Saskatchewan paid 51,600 out of 

taxpayers’ money for these 687 people to go to the movies. Now those are statistics that I have from the 

Cypress Hills Community College. If I have erred in my interpretation, I would like to hear comments 

from the minister. 

 

MR. FARIS: — I am amazed. I can understand, members who are out of touch with Saskatchewan, 

criticizing the community college system like this. But I am amazed that he would take a small aspect of 

the programming and attack the colleges because this is programming which is asked for by the people 

of Saskatchewan and we are simply meeting their requests. For instance, the college activities last year, 

the average hour of courses, estimated average per participant for class was 39 hours. Now that’s a 

serious expenditure of time. I want to run through the entire range of what is offered by community 

colleges and put this into context. For example, adult basic education, adult basic education, in terms of 

hours, 34 per cent of college hours are spent on adult basic education, another 4 per cent on adult 

secondary education, another 9.4 per cent on employment training, another 4.8 per cent on agriculture 

and farm related subjects, another 8.3 on institute related certificate programs, another 3.2 per cent on 

university credit programs. The movies which the members laugh at are part of the fine arts and crafts 

which make up only 9 per cent of the offerings. Physical development related 6.6 per cent, home skills 

related 15.4 per cent, personal development 4.3 per cent, family and community related 7 per cent. It’s 

obvious he has taken a small aspect which people in some communities apparently feel is important, 

even if he doesn’t. If he thinks he can laugh at what the people are concerned about, if he thinks he’s 

much better from his point of view than they are, than what they’re interested in, fine. He can take that 

snobbish point of view. The member for Indian Head-Wolseley has done that in the past and I can tell 

you the people of Saskatchewan don’t appreciate it. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Let’s just put it this way, Mr. Minister, is it a fact that of this year you certainly 

have a set of these answers under question. Is it a fact, that of the total enrolment in the Cypress Hills 

Community College, you have 8,724, that 19 per cent of that enrolment was accounted for by people 

who went to movies? 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2457 

 

MR. FARIS: — Well, I want to say to the hon. member, if he doesn’t understand the community 

college program any better than to undertake this juvenile kind of attack, which the member for 

Indian Head-Wolseley is famous for, then I want to say to him that that community college board 

out in that community met the requests of people in that community. Just carry on with your silly 

attacks. 

 

The second point is this, that those films may in fact have been part of a program. They were not 

necessarily the entire program. There may have been, as I said, fine arts programs built up around 

that. I want you to know that there are programs offered at the university level, which involved 

watching films, and if you want to mock that go ahead and do it. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Minister, my criticism is this. The way you are compiling statistics to 

impress people with the number of courses that are being taken by individuals, that is the criticism, 

not whether or not there should be the programs or whether they shouldn’t be held. Personally, I 

don’t think they should be subsidized by the taxpayer.  

 

The question is, you have yourself used statistics indicating how acceptable the programs were in 

the college and thousands of people who were flocking to those colleges for those programs — and 

that is the criticism, the way you have been running round and interpreting figures.  

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, I have to respond to the invitation of the minister. 

 

I am going to tell the minister something. The Community College Program got a honeymoon for 

about two years from members of the Assembly. And we gave you an opportunity for a couple of 

years to get that program established. The only answer you have is that the people of the community 

asked for it. If the people of a community ask for something scandalous and a waste of taxpayers’ 

money, that is absolutely no defence. There are thousands and thousand of dollars being wasted by 

the Community College Program in this province and the only defence you have is that the 

community asked. 

 

I can certainly get a community in my constituency or in my neighborhood to ask for the kind of 

crap that the member for Maple Creek is saying, and you say that is good, because the people of the 

community asked for it? It is about time that the Community College Program was accountable to 

the people of Saskatchewan and the dollars they are spending. There is a lot of baloney, malarkey 

and programs that have absolutely no value to the people and it is your responsibility to evaluate the 

quality of the program that is asked for by the community, whether it is worthwhile or not, whether 

it has long-range viewpoints, whether it is economically feasible or whether or not it is adding any 

educational value to the community. 

 

You stand up here, Mr. Minister, and you say, well the people of the community asked for it. We are 

not interested. I will tell you that I can get everybody in the province of Saskatchewan, every 

community to say, please, Mr. Minister, come and pay for our shows, our movies and not only that, 

buy us some hotdogs and popcorn while I am at the movies, take me to the ball game. But this k ind 

of nonsense of saying. . . 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Buy me some peanuts and crackerjack. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2458 

 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, buy me some peanuts and crackerjack. 

 

I want to tell the minister I think it is about time that you not only did respond to the community, 

but you did an evaluation, an evaluation of the quality of the programs that are asked for the by the 

community, an evaluation of the dollars that are being spent, and it is about time that you took some 

responsibility and answered to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and improved the quality 

of that program. The concept of the community college program that was set up was a great big, oh, 

just up in the clouds, something of great scenario. When it comes from the people, no capital 

facilities, sounds beautiful, wonderful. We have given you the honeymoon for two years. Nobody 

said anything about it and now it is about time that you stood on your feet and defended that 

program and it is about time that the Community College Program, as a whole, turned around and 

evaluated the dollars that are being spent and the worthwhile projects that are undertaken. Quit 

standing on your feet and making apologies and pointing it back to the communities.  

 

MR. FARIS: — I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that I do not apologize for that program and the 

people of Saskatchewan will evaluate that program and that is one reason why the Liberal 

Opposition looks to be wiped out in this province, because they do not listen to the people of this 

province, in their snobbishness go around and say, oh, what the people want isn’t important. The 

next time they will stand up and say, oh, you people don’t listen to the communities. 

 

Well, we do listen to the communities and there is no other educational program in Canada based as 

closely on the requests of people as this program and we are very proud of it.  

 

In regard to the petty little point about finance, if the hon. member wants to approach the 

Community College out there in Swift Current and ask them about the financing of those movies 

and so on, he may very well find that they made money on those programs, made money on those 

programs. That could very well be the case. That is not what is at issue at all. What is at issue is 

whether the people in rural Saskatchewan have the right to have a Fine Arts Program involving 

movies, perhaps discussions and analysis of those and so on without being criticized by the Liberal 

Opposition in this Legislature. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — Let’s do a little bit of a historical review here, Mr. Minister, about the 

Community Colleges. 

 

Some of the questions asked back in 1975 in regards to Community College and your official policy 

at that particular time, received unanimous support from this side of the House. There is no question 

about that. I remember one statement which you made in particular, that the community has to ask 

for it first. I want to come back to that a little later on. One of the things, which has always griped 

me about this thing, Mr. Minister, and I want to tell you a lot of people in the country are 

disappointed as well, when I have a student attend kindergarten, I know that somehow through 

taxation, I am going to have to pay for about 70 per cent of the cost of having that child attend 

kindergarten. 

 

Now, what people are saying is this, surely if we are going to take from revenue, direct revenue, 70 

per cent of taxation to keep a kindergarten child at school, then maybe adults should pay somewhere 

in the near vicinity to have them at the school, in the various aspects of Community Colleges. I was 

reading in the paper last night, Mr. Minister, where the ad which you see on television , ‘The Family 

of Crown corporations,’ 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2459 

 

won first prize for its television viewers. It won first prize and gives the background and so on. Now 

if there is one thing that the government opposite gets an ‘A’ in continuously, it’s in its ability to use 

every avenue possible to all of the various departments and to all the various sub-departments and 

so on, with the taxpayers’ money is propagate certain issues in the province. You stand first on that. 

I admire you for it, I wouldn’t take a mark away from you. But the people of Saskatchewan are 

getting, just a little bit put off with some of your programming. 

 

When I asked you three years ago about Community Colleges you told me a number of things, that 

it was going to be the extension of the old Adult Education Program, to which I said, amen. I was so 

glad to have somebody take it. You promised that it would not be at that time, you would not get 

into the University Extension Department, but you have. You said that you wouldn’t be interfering 

with student classes at school and you have be slow there but eventually you are moving in that 

direction. The point is, Mr. Minister, and I want to get back to this statement. You said that, unless a 

community asked for a particular program, it wouldn’t be offered. Those were  your very words. 

Now I see in the program from the Saskatoon Community College that you have a program offered 

again on Marxism. Nobody attended it last year. Why is it on this year? Has anybody asked for it? 

You know, Mr, Minister, what is confusing people if you look at the various programs, you have got 

some good programs, some real good programs. There is no question about that. But I question, Mr. 

Minister, when I look at this program and see, belly dancing 1 and belly dancing 2. You can’t do 

belly dancing 3 until you have had belly dancing 2, and you can’t take belly dancing 2 until you’ve 

had belly dancing 1. If that’s culture, O.K. maybe I’m not much of a cultured individual. What I am 

saying here, if a person wants to involve himself in belly dancing, should it be the taxpayers’ money 

that goes to pay the fees for belly dancing? I’m not too sure, Mr. Minister, what belly dancing is. I 

suspect that some would say, looking at my waist that perhaps I could do with some belly dancing.  

 

What I am saying here is the criticism from the people of Saskatchewan is not in your classes which 

deal with the leadership, community, stretch and sew, the arts, the ceramics and so on. But you do in 

fact have to admit that certain classes are not asked for by the community at all. You say we are 

going to offer the classes and you put on a strong educational program to get the class there. You 

know, I have looked through all of the community calendars, Mr. Minister, and I have not seen one 

class dealing with the preservation of the independent businessman or the preservation of the . . . 

(inaudible) I have never seen that. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Nobody has asked for one. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — He says, nobody has asked for that. Yet I see you busy yourself in a great 

advertisement going around knocking the big multinational corporations. That’s a good class, I go to 

it myself. But may I suggest to you, the people out there are not reading it that way and nor they 

should read it that way. 

 

I want to ask you about this class on Marxism again. Was it asked for? No, it wasn’t asked for at all. 

Nobody attended it last year; you put it on the program. Nobody attended it and yet it’s on the 

program. Maybe you can answer some of these questions, as to why that’s such a valuable program 

to be sponsored by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I want to say to the hon. member that his last statement that this course is being 

sponsored by the people of Saskatchewan is absolutely false. This question was advertised because 

the Community Colleges in the cities will advertise courses put on 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2460 

 

by other organizations. This course was sponsored by an independent group, called the Greenwich 

Meridian Society. It has been offered in two other years with an average attendance of seven 

people but this course is entirely at the cost of that organization. There is not one penny of 

government money in the sponsorship of that program, not one cent.  

 

Part of the college function in the cities is to promote or publicize, simply advertise programs put 

on by other groups. The YMCA is another example. But to get down to the other point which the 

member raised on several occasions in this House, about these terrible films being shown about 

multinational corporations. There is a beautiful example of distortion. Those  courses were 

requested at the local level. They were requested in the member’s constituency, in the 

constituency of Beechy and they were attended by 60 people. Those movies, those films were not 

provided by the government. They were provided by the One Sky organization which is funded by 

the Saskatchewan Committee for International Co-operation. I will tell you who are the members 

of SCIC: the Canadian Catholic Organization for the Development of Peace, Canadian Crossroads 

International, Canadian Friends Service Committee, Canadian Hunger Foundation, Canadian 

Lutheran World Relief, Canadian Red Cross Society, Canadian Save the Children Fund, Canadian 

University Service Overseas, Christian Reformed World Relief Committee, Co-operative 

Development Foundation, Foster Parents’ Plan, Leprosy Mission of Canada, Mennonite Central 

Committee, Organization for Rehabilitation and Training, Oxfam Canada, Presbyterian 

Inter-Church Aid, Primates’ World Relief and Development Fund, Disciples of Christ Church, 

Saskatchewan Y International Development Committee, Unitarian Service Committee, United 

Church of Canada, United Nations Children’s Fund, World Literacy of Canada, World Service of 

Canada, the Young Women’s Christian Association, Associate Members, Food for the Hungary , 

Regina Committee for Rural Development, Saskatchewan Cross Cultural Centre, South Africa 

Information Group, World Vision of Canada, Wycliffe Bible Translators of Canada.  

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — I haven’t got a question but I must comment on community 

college. I hope that this discussion doesn’t hurt the effort of the community colleges. I know that 

in my constituency there are a lot of people who have benefited from community college. I can 

remember in 1974 I asked all of the students, how many of them had taken first aid. Out of 300 

there were 5. This year out of about 300 there were 50. Community college had a part in it.  

 

Now, you take arts. We have a lot of people out in the country who have learned to paint and to do 

wonderful paintings. Ceramics, sewing — a lot of people have learned to sew at community 

college. I think trying to knock it and ridicule it is not actually cricket and this is what I want to 

bring to the attention of the House. As far as I am concerned, we should not try to knock 

community college but try to improve it and get a better deal out of it.  

 

MR. FARIS: — Mr. Chairman, I have some further information for the member on a question he 

asked concerning the offering of courses for small business men. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I acknowledge the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Minister, I want to say to the member for Kinistino, Mr. Thibault, 

that we are not trying to hurt the community colleges, we are trying to smarten them up and it’s 

about time. I want to tell you why. For example, I am going to give you 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2461 

 

some of the courses they took; I just went through this list. For example, five people took the 

Norman Bethune play. Now Bethune is what, our socialist hero, but went to China; it performed 

very well. Do you know what it cost those five people to study that play — $1,543. Now, that might 

have looked after two senior citizens in an old folks, home for three months — that’s the difference. 

 

Now the community college program is great on dancing. You know what they do? They have a 

course in square dancing; they have a course in social dancing and they have a course in round 

dancing. They are great on dancing. 

 

You know what they do also? They have a course on bridge — $962 in this one community college, 

to teach a few people how to play bridge. Here is another one. They teach people to play golf — 

$470. Here is another one, they teach them how to decorate Easter eggs; here’s another one, they 

have full gourmet cooking. Here is another one, puppetry — puppetry. Here are some more, cake 

decorating, belly dancing, yoga. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of program, if we are going to justify the fantastic expense of community 

colleges in the province and the multitude of educational programs and facilities in Saskatchewan, 

where high schools and universities are starving for financial assistance and the financial dollars, 

yes — go and ask those students and here all of a sudden now we turn around, and the minister says 

he puts on courses in belly dancing. He puts on courses in square dancing, in round dancing, in 

every kind of social dancing, in golf, in bridge. Is this kind of expenditure supposed to be justified 

because it happens to come from the community? You mean to say we are going to teach every 

community bridge? Are we going to teach every community golf? Are we going to teach every 

community belly dancing, or just those who ask for it? 

 

I am going to say, Mr. Minister, the concept of community colleges in this province is going to be 

destroyed, if the quality of the program is not lifted up so that the expenditure of the taxpayers’ 

dollar is not worthwhile and that is the problem we are trying to get at. If you turn around and just 

say because a community asks for any kind of a program, that we will approve it and we will spend 

taxpayers’ money, despite the ridiculousness of the program or the request, without any evaluation 

and without any concept of priorities as to where that dollar will be spent, then Mr. Minister, that 

community college program will be hurt and not only that, the taxpayers will demand an explanation 

from you and the NDP government. 

 

MR. FARIS: — I wanted to offer some more information to the member for Rosetown-Elrose. In 

fact, the program was requested by the North Battleford Chamber of Commerce for small 

businessmen, and that course was offered. That course was offered. 

 

I find the attack on belly dancing really amusing. I really would enjoy watching the members 

opposite take that course but I can tell you that there is a good number of housewives in this 

province who believe that belly dancing or yoga and things like that are important to their physical 

health. Part of the program of physical activity which was promoted by the Department of Culture 

and Youth and I’ve heard the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley stand up and boast about all 

the Culture and Youth programs which he wants to take credit for. I want to tell you, that under the 

former government those programs were largely a failure because they didn’t have the instruments 

to get those out to the people of 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2462 

 

the province and the same kind of programming which they boasted about and did very poorly, we 

are doing well because we’ve given the people of Saskatchewan a mechanism to ask for courses for 

physical development, for physical well-being, which fits into the Aware Program and the Feeling 

Good Program and so on. We offer them opportunities for arts and culture and I hear the member for 

Indian Head-Wolseley attacking people who want to take a course in the preservation of the art of 

painting Easter eggs. Well, I think that is sick. I think the members opposite are demonstrating red 

neck snobbery and that’s all it is. Putting down the legitimate requests of the people of this province 

to preserve their health, to preserve their interest in the arts and in their cultures. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — It amuses me when we get the minister a little edgy here. What we’re saying 

here, we’re trying to make it very plain to you that in some of the issues, we’re not, we’re not to 

criticize one little bit and then you want to take the blanket opinion at its worst and we oppose the 

community college. It’s not the point at all. What we are saying is that we represent people too. You 

say that the people ask for it all. I can assure you that in the case of potash, if you’d ever put that to 

the people you wouldn’t have gone ahead and you know that too. Members on this side of the House 

represent people. We get all kinds of enquiries throughout the year. They ask, ‘What is going on? 

What’s going on here? Is this really . . . we have all kinds, I’ll tell the minister. 

 

MR. COWLEY: — (aside) Table one. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — If I had time, I would jolly well run upstairs and get one about an enquiry that 

came in from Milton just the other day. I’ll table it if I can find the thing. But the  point is, what 

we’re trying to do here to you, Mr. Minister, is to try to tell you what the people in Saskatchewan 

are saying about the expenses of your courses. That’s what we’re trying to say. Look at the expenses 

in item 7 and 8. You tell me, and I’m looking back at this time, that in some cases you’ll spend more 

money on a course of three or four day duration than I’m going to spend on a kindergarten student 

for the entire year. That’s the question the people are asking. That is the question they are asking. 

They are asking that question. I would suggest to the minister that if you think perhaps that I should 

be involved in belly dancing, whatever it is, I suggest that there is a course being offered and that all 

the members opposite should take it — there is a mini-charm course being offered. I think that all 

members opposite should take that mini-charm course then they wouldn’t be quite so easy when we 

zero in on some of the difficulties which this government is facing in community colleges.  

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, there is one other point that should be made here. When the 

minister gets up so all fired — you know it’s like we could ask the question, do you supply the jewel 

that goes in the woman’s navel when she teaches the belly dancing? But what really is important 

here is do you know how much money you provide to educate a Grade Twelve student for one year 

in the province of Saskatchewan? I think the member asked that question, yesterday. Do you know 

how much you provide for one Grade Twelve student for the total year — I think it is somewhere 

between $1,200 and $1,500. That is from September until June, for a complete year and that 

includes the science and the math and the teaching and the heat and light and the capital facility and 

everything. Then you know what you do, for 20 hours for five people you spend the same amount of 

money. That’s the point, Mr. Minister. You turn around and you provide a course in belly dancing 

and you spend the same amount of money for 20 hours to get some people out for belly dancing or 

square dancing or whatever it may be than you do to educate a Grade Twelve student from the 

beginning of the year to the end of the year. That’s the point that you are failing to grasp and that’s 

what we are trying to say. If you are going to have a community college program in this province, if 

it is going to be acceptable to the people it is going to come 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2463 

 

under closer and closer scrutiny as years go by, particularly if property taxes go up, as the cost of 

education in the elementary and the high school levels are increasing, they are going to then demand 

a greater and a greater accountability of the community college program for the taxes they are 

paying and the dollars being invested in the normal education program. That’s the po int and if you 

don’t understand that point, Mr. Minister, there is something wrong.  

 

MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words in regard to what the 

member for Indian Head-Wolseley said just a little while ago. First of all he said that those were 

ridiculous courses that were offered and he listed a variety of them that are being offered by our 

community colleges. Well, I would suggest that you check on the number of people who enrolled in 

those classes, the only conclusion that I can reach is that all those people, according to what you 

say, who enrolled in all those courses are ridiculous also because you have labelled them as being 

ridiculous courses. What you have really said is that those people are ridiculous.  

 

Another point that I want to bring to the attention of members of this House is a reference made, I 

believe by that same member or was it from one of the other opposition members and that was in 

regard to Easter egg coloring. Well . . . (interjection — inaudible) . . . I do not know who did, but 

somebody did. Somebody made reference to it . . . (interjection — inaudible) . . . O.K., the member 

for Indian Head-Wolseley. Well I want to say that a lot of people in this province associate Easter 

egg coloring with a group of people who are determined to preserve a certain culture . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — In this province and in the culture of mosaic, that is the Ukrainian culture. 

Now I do not really feel that he did that deliberately but I say that when . . . (interjection — 

inaudible) . . . Well, are you suggesting that he deliberately slapped Ukrainians in the face in this 

province? . . . (interjections - inaudible) . . . I am not suggesting that at all but I am suggesting that 

some people may read that from your remarks. 

 

Another point that I want to make is that you are making the fatal mistake of passing judgment on 

these courses. Let the people decide. Let the people decide on the basis of the number of people who 

attend these because I am sure that one of the principles involved here is that if people request a 

course and it is offered and a number of people like it and there is a demand, I do not think we have 

the right to pronounce judgment and say that that is a ridiculous course. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Just one final comment. It seems every time we get the minister cornered he 

has to resort to a little bit of name-calling which I do not think is quite appropriate for this particular 

Legislature. 

 

The point that we are making is this. We should never ever let the Community College system 

become so sacred that their expenses are not questionable. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FARIS: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to make one final point and that is that the average cost 

for the 12 per cent of the adult population of the province who took a course over the year was 

$50.70. That is very very economical. The alternative, which 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2464 

 

the former government had on the drawing board — they had draft legislation to build 

institutionalized campus-type community colleges in four or five locations in the province. The total 

cost of this program for the entire province, let us keep in mind, last year was $4.3 million. That is 

less than half of the interest rate costs on the campus model that the former government had on the 

drawing board. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — One more comment, that just came to my mind as the minister was speaking, 

was this. I do not know whether the minister is aware, but I can tell you that certainly one thing is 

happening. That is that local committees are not often seeking out the demand for courses in the 

province. They are trying to create the demand for courses in the province.  

 

Item 7 agreed. 

 

Item 8 agreed. 

 

ITEM 9 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, could you give us a bit of a rundown as to what these educational 

agencies are? 

 

MR. FARIS: — The number varies here. The first area would be the areas of affiliated colleges — 

St. Joseph’s College, St. Peter’s College, Lutheran Theological Seminary, St. Andrews, Emmanuel  

and St. Chad, Canadian Training College, Western Christian College, Athol Murray College of 

Notre Dame. 

 

Item 9 agreed. 

 

Items 10, 11 agreed. 

 

ITEM 12 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman, I note in this particular item, Mr. Minister, that there has been a 

decrease in the number of permanent positions from 10 to 8 and also a reduction in the amount of 

money being spent. 

 

I find that a little bit difficult to understand at this particular time in our history. I am referring to 

item 12, Mr. Minister. Surely this is one of the areas which I would have expected an increase in 

expenditure and an increase in activity from your department and here we have a decrease in 

activities. I wonder if the minister would explain that to me? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, these two positions are positions that were formerly centrally based and they 

have been decentralized into the Community College system to work with, for instance, Metis locals 

in the formation of adult upgrading programs and so on. 

 

Item 12 agreed. 

 

ITEM 12 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Is the minister acquainted with the federal government’s, what is known as the 

TOJ (Training on the Job) Program? Are you acquainted with that program 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2465 

 

because I want to come back in and tie up the provincial government and your department with that 

program because I have some questions in that general area? 

 

MR. FARIS: — We have no involvement with that program. It is all federal money except 

approving of the training program. The dollars are federal dollars and they flow directly to the 

employer. All we do is approve the programs. 

 

MR. BAILEY: — O.K. Here is the difficulty, as you know some of the prerequisites to the Training 

on the Job Program, the age requirements and so on. Now they have to be unemployed for one year 

and so on and they go into the Training on the Job Program and the salaries go down accordingly as 

the year progresses. 

 

I would like to tell you, Mr. Minister, that this is a good program, good to the point of the number of 

people that you can get in on the program. There are many people you can’t get on the program. 

And many people, the only way in which they are going to learn a skill at all is through the Training 

on the Job Program and here is the difficulty we have, Mr. Minister, and it is simply this.  

 

There are people in Saskatchewan who need a similar type of a program. What we need in 

Saskatchewan is to develop our own Training on the Job Program. Now, I am talking about the 

youngster who is 15 or 16 years of age; his academic background does not permit him in to enter 

into the technical schools simply because his grade level is not significant enough. We have a group 

of people who wonder aimlessly about the province and probably will continue for many years to be 

unemployed. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, these people, probably with a Grade Seven education, and maybe 

that was given to them; they are 16 years of age; they can’t go to the technical institutes; they really 

have no place to go. I would hope that through agriculture, through the various industries, that we 

would get ourselves in on the Training on the Job Program. I really don’t think, Mr. Minister, just as 

like the old work training program in our high schools and we should get hung up too much on the 

labor requirement. What I am saying is, that a young person who is 15 years of age, needs training 

on the job. We haven’t got the facilities for them. There are hundreds of these people. I am saying 

we should put them on that job, sponsor them with good employers so that they are trained on the 

job and if they require further training, they would then be in a position to take advantage of the 

federal government program. But it is a sad sight indeed, Mr. Minister, to see a 15 year old, a 16 

year old, with an academic background which is less than Grade eight, you know, really wandering 

aimlessly because we do not have a program for them and there are many people and there are many 

businesses and I can assure you there are industries which would be willing to co-operate with you, 

to set up (you could call it what every you like) your own program in that field. There is a need 

there, Mr. Minister, I can assure you. 

 

MR. FARIS: — Yes, the feds are developing a new program along that line called the JET program 

and our province intends to co-operate. We do agree with you in regard to the need there. We do 

have apprenticeship programs which meet some of that need at the age of 16 but there is a little 

program. The programs in Wascana, those short farm training programs and so on we discussed 

earlier, they wouldn’t have that kind of requirement and a young person could enter that kind of 

thing. We are aware of the problem and we are trying to work out some solutions.  

 

Items 13, 14 agreed. 



 

May 5, 1978 

 

2466 

 

ITEM 15 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Mr. Chairman. Is the minister aware that this Wascana Institute of Applied Arts  

and Sciences, of the difficulty that the nurses-in-training were having during this past few months? 

Are you aware at all of some of the concerns of the people and some of the requests being placed on 

the nurses-in-training by their supervisors? If not, then I want to get into another area of 

questioning. 
 

MR. FARIS: — No. Our department has not been informed of that. 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Do you know how many people who are now in their second year of training, 

how many people are left in their second year, from the original enrolment, in the two-year nurses 

course? I think the statistics there, if you have those, will bear out the point I wish to make with you.  
 

MR. FARIS: — I don’t know what point the member is making. My officials are having some 

trouble finding the figures. They did point out to me that whatever the figures are there may be some 

difficulty in interpreting them. It is possible for a student between the first and second year to drop 

out of that nursing program and work as a certified nursing assistant. They have that option. That 

doesn’t necessarily mean there is a problem. It’s just an option they have and it would be reflected 

in the figures. The figures may not tell the story that I think the member is trying to acquaint us 

with. 
 

MR. BAILEY: — O.K. Mr. Minister, what I would like you to do for next day is — obviously we 

are not going to finish Continuing Education today, if you would have those figures for me, as to the 

number of people enrolled two years ago as to the number of people that are left in the nurses 

training program? I think you are going to find that those figures are going to reveal a very difficult 

situation which developed over the past two years at the Wascana Institute in the nurses training 

program. I am quite willing to let this item go by until we receive the figures. I want to come back, 

Mr. Minister, with your permission, because a number of these people came and expressed their 

concerns to me. I didn’t know one of them. They brought this to my attention and they told me  of 

their concerns. They told me something about why there was in fact a rapid dropping out in the 

program. I want to discuss it with you. I’ll wait until we get the data from you.  
 

MR. FARIS: — You want to stand this item then? 
 

MR. BAILEY: — Right. Mr. Chairman, I am asking then if we could stand this item and come back 

to it next day, if that’s agreeable? 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is the Committee agreed to stand this item then? 
 

Item 15 stood. 
 

Items 16 and 17 agreed. 
 

ITEM 18 
 

MR. STODALKA: — Mr. Chairman, it’s one o’clock and I think if we open this section up it might 

last considerably past one o’clock. 
 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:03 o’clock p.m. 


