



















































Hansard: March 13, 1978


211 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

March 13, 1978. 

 

EVENING SESSION 

 

BUDGET DEBATE CONTINUES 

 

MR. N. LUSNEY (Pelly):— Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to get up and speak in support of this 

Budget, not because I am a member of the government which introduced the Budget but mainly because of 

the fact that while this country is faced with a troubled economy, this government has seen fit to try to 

stimulate our economy by putting some money into the hands of the people of this province rather than 

giving substantial grants to large corporations who would more than likely invest them in foreign countries 

like INCO did, and do nothing for the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, putting money in the hands of the people will mean an increase in spending, therefore 

stimulating activity in retail trade, in industry, and creating moderate growth and prosperity in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in utilities, this government has stated that it will not allow more than an 8 per cent increase in 

telephone and natural gas rates even though the costs of purchasing natural gas from Alberta have gone up 

from 18 cents per 1,000 cubic feet in 1971 to $1.23 in 1977, $1.36 in February of 1978 and a further increase 

is expected in August, 1978. Mr. Speaker, power rates to residential and farm customers will be frozen. 

Insurance rates will be cut by 5 per cent. This is due mainly to the public acceptance of the seat belt 

legislation and a reduction in serious injury and large claim settlements — a program which the opposition 

has fought and criticized by using scare tactics and misinformation simply for the purpose of gaining a few 

votes, and having no regard to the health and safety of the people of Saskatchewan. Safety ‘77 has worked 

and the 5 per cent cut in insurance premiums proves it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LUSNEY:— In regard to health, Mr. Speaker, this Budget proves that this government, under the 

leadership of Allan Blakeney, is concerned about the people of this province. In times when other 

governments are restraining or halting construction, this government is building three new hospitals and will 

expand others. One of the new hospitals is being built in my constituency, for which I am very grateful for 

this will mean better health care service for the people of north eastern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

Conservatives say that we are cutting back on health care services, and one may wonder what they would do 

to improve health care in this province. Since they haven’t held power recently in Saskatchewan, one can 

only look at the policies they have in other provinces. 

 

Let us take resource and industry-rich Ontario. It can’t be pointed out often enough, Mr. Speaker, that in the 

Budget of this year they introduced a 37.5 per cent increase for health insurance premiums. A family of three 

or more in Ontario will now pay $528 health premiums per year, or $44 per month. At the same time the 

Conservative government of Ontario reduced mining taxes, no doubt as a reward for INCO and Falconbridge 

for shutting down some of their mining operations in Ontario. In addition to the increase in premiums, 

Ontario has increased its funds for hospitals by only 4.3 per cent. This will surely mean a substantial cutback 

in hospital beds in the province of Ontario, and these are Progressive Conservatives of Ontario. Maybe, Mr. 

Speaker, a 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

212 

 

better name would be Regressive Conservatives. 

 

Those are the benefits the Conservative Party has provided for the people of Ontario, and I am certain that 

the people of Manitoba will soon be made aware of the programs and services that they will be losing. Mr. 

Speaker, that is the philosophy of the Conservative Party in the provinces that they hold power in, and I 

would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan that the Conservatives of this 

province are no different, and that we could expect the same kind of regressive policies if the Conservatives 

held power in Saskatchewan. 

 

In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, an industry which almost totally affects my constituency directly or indirectly, I 

am pleased to hear that the livestock industry will receive an increase of some $8 million. Funds for research 

will be increased by $1.3 million; half a million dollars will be spent on marketing and processing; more 

than $4 million will be provided for new programming. Last year we had $1 million spent for improving 

grazing land. This year we have a 50 per cent increase to $1.5 million for improving some 20,000 acres of 

gazing land. However, I do feel that in the future we should be looking at increasing our budget for 

agriculture. 

 

The opposition, Mr. Speaker, criticized this government for not providing enough money in the Budget for 

agriculture, and I have already conceded that, but I do not think that the farmers want to be dependent on 

government grants in order to continue their operations. All the farmer is asking for is parity pricing. What 

the opposition should be doing is directing their criticism at Monsanto, Dow, Green Cross, John Deere and 

Massey corporate and all their other friends which increased their prices anywhere from 100 per cent to 300 

per cent in the last five years while the farmers’ products went down in price during the same period. But we 

are not likely to see their efforts directed in that direction because we know that the only industry either of 

the opposition parties believe in protecting is industry owned by large corporate investors and not individual 

farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about agriculture and farmers, we talked about food — a commodity that is 

necessary to sustain life on this planet and as long as we allow the price of everything to go up, then we all 

have a responsibility to allow the farmer a fair return so that he can continue to produce the items so vital to 

his existence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the senior citizens of my constituency and of this province, I am sure, will also be pleased with 

this Budget. There will be an increase from $500 to $650 for the Senior Citizens Home Repair program. 

Provincial pension supplements will be increased by 25 per cent. There will also be a significant increase in 

the number of level IV beds in Saskatchewan. The total senior citizens package contains added benefits of 

some $11 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LUSNEY:— In addition, we plan to build 1,500 low cost units at a cost of some $8.5 million. Some of 

these units will be constructed in my constituency and I know the senior citizens will be pleased with the 

consideration that this government has given to their needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reduction in personal income taxes will be welcomed by people in my constituency and I 

am certain by people in all Saskatchewan. The tax reduction will mean that a person with 2 dependants 

earning about $13,000 will pay less income tax 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

213 

 

in Saskatchewan than anywhere else in Canada. That, Mr. Speaker, does not take into account that Ontario 

pays $528 per family for health premiums and the high cost of insurance premiums to a driver under 25 years 

of age in Ontario. 

 

On top of the reduction in personal taxes, Mr. Speaker, the increase in the Property Improvement Grant will 

help reduce the tax burden on the homeowners and the increased grants to local governments should prevent 

any increases in property taxes. When we talk about taxes, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that the people of 

Saskatchewan have the lowest tax load, it is not something that happens by accident. It is the result of a 

competent and responsible government. 

 

Both the Liberal and Conservative finance critics say that this government has burdened the public with a 

tremendous per capita debt. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that either both members did not do their 

homework very well or did not intend to give the public the true facts. The facts, Mr. Speaker, are that in the 

New York financial circles, Saskatchewan is considered financially one of the healthiest provinces in 

Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LUSNEY:— Saskatchewan is also considered as having one of the lowest per capita debts of any 

province except Alberta, which is quite solvent because of its vast oil and natural gas reserves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s per capita debt is only about $115 million, which is very low. The major 

borrowers in Saskatchewan are the Crown corporations but the money they borrow is used for capital 

construction projects, like building power plants, expanding our telecommunication services and developing 

our potash resource. Projects like Sask Power, Sask Tel and Sask Potash Corporation are considered as solid 

investments by the money lenders because the capital expenditures that these corporations make will 

generate revenue and pay their own debts requiring no tax money. That, Mr. Speaker, is why Saskatchewan 

has a good credit rating on the world money markets. 

 

Saskatchewan is also in good financial health because our assets exceed our debt, much unlike Conservative-

run Ontario which has borrowed more money than they are worth. Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives promise 

the people of Saskatchewan a real change and if it is anything like the Conservatives of Ontario, or now, 

Conservative Manitoba, I assure you, Mr. Speaker, it would be a real change but not one for the benefit of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This Budget, Mr. Speaker, is designed to stimulate our economy and I am certain it is more apt to 

accomplish that than the Budget introduced in Conservative Ontario. Mr. Speaker, the opposition criticizes 

this Budget and insinuates that the minister and this government are incompetent. My interpretation of this 

Budget would be that this is a people-come-first Budget. When you compare the Budget of Saskatchewan 

with that of Conservative Ontario, which places heavier tax burdens on the people — provides a tax cut for 

large corporations and introduces a budget with a $1.3 billion deficit, it is not very difficult to distinguish 

which government could be considered incompetent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a member of a government that takes into consideration the needs of the 

people and introduces a Budget that is designed for the benefit of the people. Mr. Speaker, my support for 

this Budget is based on the belief that it will move 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

214 

 

us further along the road towards building a better society for all citizens, the kind of society that the New 

Democratic Party and the CCF before it, have struggled long and hard to create, a co-operative and 

compassionate society where the supplying of human needs and the enrichment of human lives are the 

important goals; a society where private profit and corporate power take a back seat to meeting the needs of 

those who are still in want and insecurity; a society where there are decent pensions to allow older citizens to 

live in dignity and good health; where all children get a first-class education to properly equip them for a 

work environment and where there are enough jobs to employ the talents and skills of all people wanting to 

work, including the young. Mr. Speaker, a society where not just the rich and the powerful enjoy a happy and 

healthy life at an acceptable standard of living, but one where everyone is able to share in the good life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget moves us further towards that society and I will be supporting it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment and Telephones):— Mr. Speaker, on rising to participate in 

this Budget Debate, I want to join in congratulating the Minister of Finance for the Budget he presented in 

this House last Tuesday. In a period when the plague of pessimism has penetrated most provincial capitals in 

this country, our Minister of Finance has charted a more optimistic course of continued good service to the 

people of Saskatchewan. While other provincial governments are virtually paralyzed by the economic 

situation confronting them, and respond by increasing taxes, cutting back on services and relying on business 

to stimulate the economy, we on this side of the House are proud of the accomplishments of this government 

and the new trails that will be blazed with this Budget. 

 

I now want to discuss some of the programs administered by the department and Crown corporation for 

which I am responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Environment Department is now five and one-half years old. During its brief history, the 

department has been generally low profile because the department’s role has been, from the beginning, to 

serve primarily as a co-ordinating agency. As a co-ordinator, it has played an important role in research and 

the gathering of data about all kinds of environmental matters. On the other hand, the department is also a 

regulator agency, an important role which ensures that Saskatchewan’s limited supply of water is used 

wisely, ensuring that all manner of pollution problems affecting air, land and water are resolved. Some 

branches responsible for hydrology and water rights, for example, have changed little. Others, responsible 

for air, water and land pollution control, operate within the same mandate as they did when the department 

was created but, through experience, are continuously improving the systems to alleviate problems, while at 

the same time developing methods to prevent future problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, such responsibilities are not necessarily high profile or spectacular, but they are essential in a 

modern industrial society. One such unspectacular effort is the enlargement of training programs for 

operators of municipal water treatment plants and sewage treatment facilities. Each year, the Water and 

Sewage Works Division of the Environmental Protection Service offers courses at which operators can 

upgrade their skills. I’m pleased to report that a good many municipalities and their operators have taken 

advantage of these courses and now have certified operators. The division 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

215 

 

has also worked away steadily at a system of classifying treatment works, establishing operating standards to 

ensure that drinking water is pure and that waste water does not pollute. As I said, work of this type is not 

likely to draw headlines in the newspapers but in another area of concern, Mr. Speaker, the Department of 

Environment has evolved rapidly as experience reinforced the conviction of the government. The citizens 

want, not just development, but responsible development. Saskatchewan’s economy, among the healthiest in 

Canada, is growing rapidly and growth brings pressure to bear on the environment. The policy of this 

government, expressed through this department, is to ensure that the necessary growth does not cause 

irreparable damage to the environment or threaten the health of the Saskatchewan people. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that two years ago this Legislative Assembly approved the establishment of an 

Environmental Impact Assessment Branch. A few months later, Cabinet approved an interim environmental 

impact assessment policy and screening guidelines. The purpose was to ensure inclusion of environmental 

planning by developers, both public and private, in the early stages of projects, along with economic 

feasibility studies, market studies, and so on. Part of the environmental impact assessment policy, which was 

started before this branch was formed, called for public inquiries whenever there was sufficient public 

concern about a proposed development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the number of major issues that have warranted public scrutiny has demonstrated, beyond a 

shadow of a doubt, the necessity and importance of an environmental impact assessment policy. Several 

major inquiries have been initiated by the government of Saskatchewan in the last year through the 

Department of Environment. In each case, this department has appointed the Board of Inquiry, given it a 

mandate to inform the public, to gather reaction, and to make recommendations to the government. The 

implementation of this government’s commitment to the process of examining, in detail, large or significant 

development during the last five and one-half years, is a remarkable achievement. 

 

Prior to the construction of the Gardiner and Qu’Appelle Dams, Squaw Rapids and Boundary Generating 

Stations, and Saskatchewan’s pulp and steel mills, environmental impact assessment was unheard of. Today, 

the assessment of the impact of developments on the land, air, water and people is a part of life in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

During the last year, the people of Saskatchewan have been consulted through boards of inquiry on a number 

of major development proposals. 

 

The Cluff Lake Board of Inquiry, headed by Judge E.D. Bayda, is among the most outstanding and far-

reaching inquiries in the environmental field ever attempted in Canada. The board was asked to examine all 

available information on the proposed Amok Limited uranium mine and mill at Cluff Lake, and its 

environmental, health, safety, social and economic effects. The board was also asked to seek public views on 

the other implications of expansion of the uranium industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of the Cluff Lake Board of Inquiry to date has been $412,270. In addition, the 

government of Saskatchewan provided $100,000 to organizations which lacked financial resources, so that 

they could carry out the necessary research for submission to the board. The board received approximately 

400 briefs or written or oral briefs during its hearings. While we expect the report from Justice Bayda and his 

staff very, very shortly I want at this time to commend Judge Bayda, Dr. McCallum, Mrs. 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

216 

 

Groome and her staff for what I think was a very capable undertaking, a very difficult task in this field. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Churchill Board of Inquiry is another example. You will recall that this board’s 

inquiry was preceded by a three year project to gather information on every aspect of the proposed 

construction of a dam and generating station at Wintego Falls. When the Churchill River Board was set up, 

some people said that the public had had enough of the Churchill River proposal, nobody would bother to 

make submissions. Mr. Speaker, the Churchill Board of Inquiry received 260 submissions. And if that is not 

proof of the support given by the people of Saskatchewan to the impact assessment policy, the faith of the 

people of Saskatchewan in the public inquiry process, then frankly I don’t know what is. 

 

In addition to these major inquiries, the Department of Environment set up the Poplar River-Nipawin Board 

of Inquiry which will be conducting its public hearings in Coronach and Nipawin in a few days. And in 

addition to these large public inquiries, my department, through the Environmental Impact Assessment 

Branch, has distributed impact overviews of a number of other smaller projects, advertised their availability 

and invited submissions. I refer to such projects as the dam and power station on the Charlotte River, the 

SPC proposal to build a power line from Condie to Wolverine, the Cochin Pipeline and additional loops 

planned by Trans-Canada Pipelines Limited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the effectiveness of the environmental impact assessment process and the public support it has 

received have clearly demonstrated the importance of the environmental impact assessment process. 

Therefore, the Environmental Impact Assessment Branch of the Environmental Protection Service will be 

upgraded in status. Starting in the new fiscal year, the branch will become the Environmental Impact 

Secretariat. The executive director will report directly to the Deputy Minister of the Environment. One of the 

requirements is an increase in the staff to five from the present three. But the budget for the Environmental 

Assessment Secretariat will be reduced to $462,970 from $615,410. This reduction is attributable to the fact 

that we do not foresee in the immediate future any public inquiries of the magnitude of the Bayda and 

Churchill River Boards and therefore it is not necessary to reserve funds at this time for the expensive 

process of public inquiries. 

 

I would like to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the continuing program to clean up the radon gas problem at 

Uranium City — a problem, I might add, which would never have occurred had there been an environmental 

impact assessment policy in effect 20 or 25 years ago. The clean-up is cost-shared by the provincial 

government and the Atomic Energy Control Board. The work is being carried out by Keith Consulting 

Engineers under a contract between that firm and the Atomic Energy Control Board. The Department of the 

Environment is co-ordinator of a large portion of the remedial work. Under the terms of the cost-shared 

contract the funds to be voted for expenditure, some $325,000, will pay for the work done in the 1977-78 

fiscal year. Last year was devoted to surveys and detailed investigations of the radon gas problem. In the year 

ahead, a large amount of remedial work will be undertaken. Investigations carried out last year indicate that 

the clean-up and remedial program will continue until 1981. This has been a expensive lesson, Mr. Speaker, 

and I mention it because it is the kind of exercise that need not occur in any future developments in this 

province. They need not occur because we have our environmental assessment policy in place. 

 

Before I outline other major initiatives of my department, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give to the House the 

same assurance that has been given to the Department of 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

217 

 

External Affairs, the United States Department of State, the state of Montana and the International Joint 

Commission regarding the SPC Poplar River Development. That is that my department has made available 

to all parties concerned all data, all assistance requested and will continue to co-operate fully in the future in 

the assessment of the impact of this power plant. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. NELSON (As-Gr):— Thousands won’t believe you. 

 

MR. BYERS:— Well, Mr. Jamieson does. You should argue with him. Among the most important long-

term projects for which my department is responsible is the Qu’Appelle Valley Agreement with the 

government of Canada. This program calls for the spending over a number of years of $33,700,000 to 

improve the Qu’Appelle Valley. To the end of the 1977-78 fiscal year expenditures reached about $8 

million. In the year ahead the share of the Qu’Appelle program that will be borne by the Department of the 

Environment is $649,980 which is an increase of $150,000 from the 1977-78 Budget. Mr. Speaker, when the 

governments of Saskatchewan and Canada agreed to spend about $34 million to improve the Qu’Appelle 

Valley for the benefit of all those who live there and all those who use it for recreation, the two governments 

must ensure that the investment is protected. 

 

I would like to reiterate for the House the remarks which I made recently to the Qu’Appelle Valley 

Development Association, that a few self-serving speculators have led a vocal minority which is criticizing 

the six Special Planning Area Commissions which are responsible for land use planning and the review of 

development of proposals in the Valley. They have misrepresented the facts, but they will not be allowed to 

destroy the land use program and erode its basic principles. The Special Planning Area Commissions are not 

a front for the governments of Canada and Saskatchewan. Each of the commissions has controlling 

representation from local authorities. Each has a special responsibility to protect the future interest of all 

people in each area. These commissions have, in short, the power to change the development proposals for 

the Valley as they see fit. Mr. Speaker, land speculators in the Valley, and supporters outside the Valley 

should know that the Qu’Appelle Implementation plan insists on local action to the benefit of the local area. 

 

Now, I’d like to spend a few minutes outlining some of the more important improvements planned for the 

year ahead in the Qu’Appelle Valley. Various projects are under way or planned to improve the quality of 

water in the Qu’Appelle system. One of the important programs will offer up to 100 per cent of the cost of 

relocating or rebuilding works that control pollution from livestock, such as dykes, drainage ditches and 

ponds. This is a five-year program starting at Buffalo Pound Lake and working down the Valley. 

 

Another major program is disposal of waste from Moose Jaw. The City has decided that effluent should be 

treated and used to irrigate crops, and the department agrees that this is a better way than building an 

expensive sewage treatment plant, and environmentally sound. In the coming fiscal year, design of the 

Moose Jaw effluent irrigation system should be completed and construction started. 

 

Flood protection works for Moose Jaw are proceeding. About $1 million has been spent on the Spring Creek 

diversion system, which provides protection from floods for 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

218 

 

residential and business parts of the city. Some dredging of the Moose Jaw River is planned, as well as 

removal or modification of some structures to reduce the flood hazard. We are also setting aside $230,000 

for the purchase of property in the flood plain at Moose Jaw. This is a program under which property owners 

sell voluntarily, and started in 1977. 

 

Mr. Speaker, improvement of the Qu’Appelle River channel is one of the most important programs under the 

Qu’Appelle Agreement. It is the best key to the future of the Valley and the recreation and tourism 

development. Without control over flooding and lake levels, tourism and recreation in this beautiful Valley 

are in jeopardy. The estimated cost of the conveyance program is $5.25 million, cost-shared between the 

Province of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada. 

 

Work planned for the last year for Round and Crooked Lakes was delayed because it has not been possible to 

reach agreement with Indian Bands in the area for easements. Work will be deferred on these two lakes until 

easements have been negotiated, but other work on the channel will proceed in the year ahead. In the lower 

Qu’Appelle, obstructions in the main channel will be removed, and some loops cut out. And there will be a 

start on channel improvements downstream from Katepwa Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, grants to cities under the Water Pollution Control Assistance Act will be increased in the 

coming year to $500,000 from $75,000 in the 1977-78 fiscal year. As you know, the government is pleased 

to provide some assistance to cities to help them upgrade or improve sewage treatment facilities consistent 

with our water quality management program. During 1978-79, major expenditures will be related to a new 

sewage treatment facility for the city of Yorkton, estimated to cost about $2.4 million, and the remainder is 

largely designated for the city of Regina for construction of their primary sewage treatment facilities. The 

policy under this act is to provide to cities 10 per cent of the capital cost of primary and secondary treatment 

facilities and 15 per cent to advanced or tertiary treatment facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on at least one program under way in Sask Tel communications. In 

November 1976, all hon. members will recall that I announced that the government would act on a promise 

in the "New Deal 75" by launching a voluntary program to assimilate the rural telephone companies. At that 

time there were some 704 rural telephone companies serving 50,000 subscribers. The response to the 

Voluntary Assimilation Program is really overwhelming. In 1977, the first full year this program was in 

operation, 33,603 farmers in 460 rural companies ignored the warnings of the Conservative Leader that this 

government was exercising more control over their daily lives and voted for the NDP Voluntary 

Assimilation Program. Of the 704 Rural Telephone Companies representing over 50,000 subscribers existing 

in October 1976, as of March 1, 1978, 515 companies representing 38,695 subscribers have voted to accept 

the voluntary assimilation program. Just over 200 independent rural companies remain who serve about 

16,000 subscribers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these farmers did not complain of the loss of individual freedom nor the destruction of their 

fundamental liberties as the cable plows in 1977 replaced cracked cross-arms, sagging wires and petrified 

posts with 4,753 miles of buried wire and cable in 77 companies. And in 1978, over 6,500 miles are 

scheduled to be buried under the voluntary assimilation program. The Conservative financial critic for 

Thunder Creek may scold this government for borrowings by Crown corporations like Sask Tel to create 

new jobs and provide a modern communications system. But the farmers of Saskatchewan I think are much 

wiser than the hon. member for Thunder Creek. They 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

219 

 

regard the investment of $8 million in 1977 and $8.3 million in 1978 to rebuild the rural phone system as a 

positive action by a provincial government that is concerned about their needs and desires. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the roar of cable plows on windy hills near acrid marshes may threaten the Conservatives’ 

prospects for getting re-elected, but the farmers do not regard the voluntary assimilation program as the 

government encroaching upon the farmer. They regard this program as a positive action by a responsible and 

responsive government. Responsible by investing today for the farmers of today and tomorrow and 

responsive by investing in the best communications equipment available. Mr. Speaker, there are many other 

programs that will be undertaken by this government in the coming year; we will continue to improve and 

build on. I know, however, there are other members who want the opportunity to participate in this debate. I 

want to say in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that I will be opposing the amendment and voting in support of the 

main motion. 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for Kelvington-Wadena for 

closing down early and giving the rest of the members of the Legislature an opportunity to say a few words 

on the Budget Debate. I am rather pleased that I am following the member for Kelvington-Wadena because 

all I have to be concerned about is the fact that I have buttons on my suit coat. I was a little worried for a 

while that I may follow the member for Pelly because I thought well how would I follow an act like that and 

I thought about it and I thought that the only thing I can do to really adequately and accurately follow that act 

would be to say nothing. And after all, I had put some thought to it and I didn’t want to go to those extremes. 

But, Mr. Speaker, just to make a comment or two regarding the remarks of the member for Pelly, he spoke of 

the Crown corporations and how good they were. Of course he was very consistent with the NDP ideological 

approach of, well, condemning those old multinationals. He failed though when he was speaking about the 

Crown corporations and suggesting that their financing was long term loans and for future projects which 

were going to provide energy and jobs for Saskatchewan residents. The one thing though that the member 

failed to point out was that it’s the people of Saskatchewan that are responsible for those outstanding loans. 

The government has taken on that responsibility and the government is in fact the people, and if he is 

consistent with what he is saying, and I question whether he is when he says "Well, we are the people’s 

party", he should know by now there is only one party in Saskatchewan that is truly the people’s party and 

that is the party of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. He suggested the move towards 

more expenditures on the Department of Agriculture and I think that the Minister of Agriculture should take 

heed because the member for Pelly sitting right behind him, it may be possible that he plans to move up a 

row or two there so I have to agree with the member for Pelly in that regard at least that definitely we need to 

have more spending in the Department of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, if I might get back to the context of my 

comments tonight, I would like to say that it is with great pleasure that I rise today to join in the debate on 

this Budget prepared by the Minister of Finance and presented to the Fifth Session of the 18th Legislature. 

Mr. Speaker, it is also with a great deal of pride that I take the opportunity to present views and concerns on 

behalf of the constituency I represent. The Moosomin constituency has provided for me this honor and 

privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me comment briefly on the constituency of Moosomin. The comments I will have to make 

will very clearly outline to you, Mr. Speaker, why my concerns are of special importance to the Moosomin 

constituency and of course to myself as a resident of the Moosomin constituency and the one my children 

will have for the expansion of 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

220 

 

their opportunities I hope they will have as future residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Moosomin constituency is in so many ways like Saskatchewan as a whole. It contains some 

of the richest farm lands in all of Saskatchewan, it contains the most modern potash mine possibly 

unsurpassed by any other mine anywhere in the world. The town of Moosomin itself is the most progressive 

and conservative for that matter of any town on the Trans-Canada between Regina, Saskatchewan and 

Brandon located in Tory Manitoba. Other towns like Kipling, Whitewood and Wawota are growing and 

vibrant. This constituency is vibrant and alive in spite of this province’s government which is by no means 

by its policies attempting to provide stimulus for growth of individual aspirations of the private sector as it 

relates to small business, secondary industry, or its agricultural industry which is the heart of this 

constituency, as it is for all of Saskatchewan, and of recreational opportunities as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this constituency is rich in natural resources like rivers and lakes — the Qu’Appelle Valley, the 

Kenosee Park and Pipestone Valley which provide habitat for wildlife and recreational opportunities for 

many residents. There are other resources like high quality gravel for road constructions and even moderate 

supplies of oil. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great constituency. I am proud to represent it as representative most parts of 

Saskatchewan and it is one way or another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this and through blind economic times like our province has never known and what do 

we get? — another deficit Budget provided by none other than the $2 billion dollar man and his androids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at the effect of the $2 billion man and his androids, who have been 

programmed for deficit financing, long-term borrowing like we have never known and total expenditures 

like we have never known, for the provision of programs and programs and programs and yet more 

programs. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, in his reply to this Budget Debate spoke of those many programs. He went on 

and on and on and talked about them. Incidentally, I might bring it to the Minister of Agriculture’s attention, 

he did make comment about a program that he had introduced regarding a grain drying assimilation program. 

He might note that about a week before his press release on that I had one that advised that the Minister of 

Agriculture would do just that, to have a co-ordinating program using our agricultural representative offices. 

As the Minister of Agriculture is aware of that I thought he might send me a letter or something, just 

between the two of us and thank me for the good idea. But I might tell you I didn’t get any note from the 

Minister of Agriculture, not even a telephone call. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding) and the member for Humboldt (Mr. Tchorzewski) 

expounded on these many programs when they were ordered to their feet by the mastermind, that of the 

Premier. Some of these programs are worthwhile. Others are designed to help people who have been stripped 

of their incentives by this government — the incentives to help themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will provide the people of Saskatchewan 

with the incentives to help themselves in order that they will no longer be a burden to society, in particular to 

the working people of our province. Mr. Speaker, God helps those who help themselves and this NDP 

government helps 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

221 

 

those who don’t or won’t. A Progressive Conservative government will help those who cannot and I might 

add that as loud as that government whip may yell, he never makes any sense. He can blabber all he likes but 

you know your mouth never gets any smaller so just keep talking. Mr. Speaker, when you read over the 

Budget Address by the $2 billion dollar man, you very quickly see what he has said. He is saying that he and 

his superiors know better what is best for us than we know ourselves. 

 

We in the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan have more faith in the worth of the people of 

Saskatchewan as individuals than does this NDP government. As a Progressive Conservative agriculture 

critic, I find it almost impossible to criticize or commend the government on this Budget since it is obvious 

they thought it unnecessary to take into consideration our biggest industry, that of agriculture. 

 

There is one item of particular significance. The hon. Minister of Finance stated on page 4 of the Budget that 

the enormous stimulus provided through our economy in recent years as a result of unprecedented prosperity 

in the agricultural sector has now tapered off. He also says on page 6 that lower grain prices and rising farm 

costs meant that both farm cash receipts and realized net farm income were down in 1977. While farm cash 

receipts should be higher, farm costs will be higher as well, and realized net farm income may decline. The 

former Minister of Agriculture said basically the same thing in 1974-75, Debates and Proceedings on page 

101, when he introduced the Farm Cost Reduction Program. Our Minister of Agriculture, the member for 

Saltcoats, has discontinued this program. Mr. Speaker, thousands of farmers are asking why. I say, shame on 

the Minister of Agriculture who would strike yet another blow at our farmers who are facing economic peril 

like never before. I say, Shame! Shame on the Minister of Finance, our now famous $2 billion dollar man, 

who would prepare a Budget for Agriculture that is increased by less than $4 million for this budget year 

over last. By taking rising costs, inflation, costs of borrowing, etc., into consideration, the projection budget 

for agriculture is in reality, a decrease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at some of the expenditures projected for agriculture for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 1979. When you go down the items you will see that administration is up. When we look at 

assistance to general agriculture interests, that’s down. Communications, personal and personnel in-training 

statistics — all of these, up. There is one that’s good and that is the amount of money that the government 

has put into planning. It has increased the amount of money in planning and research and we welcome that 

increase. But other items like 9 and 11, direct assistance, those items are down. You go back to other 

departments here there are a number of high positions — 156 in item 13; 31 in Family Farm Improvement 

Branch. All of these are up, but you look at grants for control of pollution from intensive livestock 

operations, this is down, but this is understandable because we don’t have any new cow herds in this 

province. In fact we have three times the kill off of cows in this province of anywhere in this country. When 

you follow through the Estimates that is what you find all the way through. When you get to the end and you 

add it up you will find that about 15 per cent is allotted to positions to pay salaries for people to administer 

the many programs. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— They are good programs. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— They are good programs. Some of them are, yes, some of them are. I have already said 

that. The Minister of Agriculture obviously sitting there and reading and he wasn’t listening because I have 

already said that there are some of these programs that are good. The problem is, of course, that he doesn’t 

understand that we are eating a lot of it up in administration. 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

222 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I arrived in my office this morning I received another letter, one of many, from other 

constituencies. This constituent of Morse was disturbed because there is no pressure being applied to the 

government to pave the way for better returns for agricultural products. This constituent of the Morse 

constituency asked why there was $300 million for potash mines and comparatively no money for 

agriculture, which produces such high returns to government. He expressed concern over high electrical 

rates, high insurance premiums for farm half tons. This man had even more concerns. He asked why the 

heavy oil plant at Lloydminster was not brought into production. He feels it should move quickly into 

production for long-term benefits, energy for the future plus job opportunities. Well now, there is a lot of 

chatting going on over there again. We are talking about the Lloydminster heavy oil plant. Thank goodness 

that the Premier of this province listens to the Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party once in a while. 

When he was telling you people that we should be up there developing that heavy oil plant, the development 

taking place on the Alberta side, sure let it suck our resources out under that imaginary line — oh, you are 

feeling bad there, I know you are — you can chitter and chatter all you like but you know you are losing and 

we know we are winning . . . (interjection) . . . yes, I’ll get to the medicare premiums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this constituent feels that farmers are tired . . . (interjection) . . . Well now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know — I am just going to say something here and I wouldn’t want the government or the Liberal 

opposition, for that matter, to miss it. This constituent says that he feels farmers are tired of feeding the NDP 

and the Liberals with cheap meat and cheap bread. Mr. Speaker, this letter tells the story of the Progressive 

Conservative Party in Saskatchewan. People no longer have trust or faith in NDP and Liberal politicians or 

their policies. The phones are ringing, letters by the sack full, and meeting halls are packed. The Progressive 

Conservative Party in Saskatchewan keeps growing as more and more people turn to us, as the only 

alternative party, to provide a government for the people of Saskatchewan; a government designed to meet 

the concerns and needs of the people; a government we can all trust and one which will not play politics with 

our tax dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to re-emphasize a number of arguments our party, the people’s party, the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, has been making with consistency since 1975. We believe government 

spending must be held in check. They have increased some 12 per cent and yet, over the past two years, they 

have told everyone else to restrict themselves to 7 per cent or less. We disapprove of deficit financing. It 

cannot go on forever. Sooner or later the people of Saskatchewan will have to pay the bill. We believe this 

government’s inability to balance the budget during Saskatchewan’s best economic years provides they will 

never balance it over a period of good and bad years, but will continue to increase the per capita debt far 

beyond any economic hope for the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our only hope may lie in the hope that we are flanked by two Progressive Conservative governments whose 

economic growth rate is better, on projection, than Saskatchewan and very soon the people of Saskatchewan 

will opt for a Progressive Conservative government here as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me take a few moments to drop a few comments for the Minister responsible for Consumer 

Affairs. His speech, from the very outset, in my opinion, was the absolute height of ignorance. He grasped 

desperately for anything to discredit the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. He only brought 

about discredit to himself. The Speaker’s Gallery was full of fresh, young, intelligent minds of a visiting 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

223 

 

class of Regina students. Mr. Speaker, they looked on in awe as the member for Regina Northwest moaned 

on, dealing in half-truths and innuendos — shame on this member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at the subject of health care in this province and the costs there. The minds of 

this NDP government are now so twisted. They are so concerned about the Tory tidal wave sweeping 

Saskatchewan that they cannot see their own hospital costs. They are too concerned with Tories here and in 

other provinces. Mr. Speaker, health costs in Saskatchewan are now approaching $.5 billion. They are $435 

million. When they get to be $.5 billion, that’s going to be $500 for every man, woman and child and I don’t 

think that’s too difficult to figure out, with a population of 1 million. Now then, you’ve got that — I hope 

that you have that in your heads; you’ve got $435 million, you divide it by 1 million, you get roughly 

$400 — okay, $435 for every man, woman and child. Now then, children don’t work; people in prisons 

don’t work; there’s a lot of people — hospital patients — they don’t work; senior citizens aren’t working. 

Now, when you take all the people into consideration that are not working, not earning money that they 

would have to pay taxes on, then what is the figure? What is the figure that Saskatchewan people, the 

working people of this province, are paying for a health service plan in this province? I’ll tell you. 

 

MR. FARIS:— No premiums. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— No premiums, no premiums. Well, I don’t know how the Minister of Education can 

be so dense. I just fail to understand it, Mr. Speaker. There is a man that is all ready, he is just — he is 

conned by his own programs. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Let’s hear a little more. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— Well, I might add that the member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan) looks a little better 

from that side of the House, you know. He is always yapping away over here and I’d rather if he were 

yapping away over there. I could see him better. 

 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan believes that the numbers of people hired and paid by 

our government must be very closely managed. Today, the Premier, in the words of the Leader Post, 

slammed the Progressive Conservatives in Manitoba and I quote: "Premier Allan Blakeney has condemned 

the Progressive Conservative government in Manitoba for laying off several hundred civil servants in 

northern departments." 

 

Let me explain to the Premier, who unfortunately is not here tonight but I am sure one of you will carry my 

message to him, that the lay-offs in Manitoba were, to a large extent, construction contracts that were 

fulfilled and not renewed. There were also extra people on staff that were laid off to avoid a duplication of 

services. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, the former Premier, Mr. Schreyer, in fact, by way of a press release 

in a Manitoba paper only a few days ago, agreed that part of the lay-offs were justified. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our Premier should really get his facts straight, because he sure looks foolish disagreeing 

with the former NDP premier. Once again, I quote: 

 

The Premier spent the bulk of his forty minute speech outlining mistakes of Liberal and Progressive 

Conservative provincial governments across Canada. 

 

Well, there are quite a few Progressive Conservative governments across this country 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

224 

 

but I don’t know if there are an awful lot of Liberals. There’s one or two, I think, left. Three? Is that it is? 

The three smallest provinces. Yeah, that’s fair. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in 1964-71 performance to the Liberal Party, this is the Premier 

speaking again: 

 

The government in Saskatchewan is a major reason why the Liberals should never be returned to power 

here. 

 

Now, why your Premier would show any concern whatsoever of Liberals being returned to power in 

Saskatchewan is beyond me. Well, that’s obvious when you look around. You don’t see too many of them in 

here tonight either, because they don’t want to hear the truth. There aren’t too many Liberals left and the 

Premier knows that the only way that he’s going to save his government is to remove that stumbling block, a 

stumbling block to the Progressive Conservative Party in this province and that’s the Liberal Party. I just 

want to assure through you, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, that he need not worry about Liberals. And he 

knows it and it’s nothing more than a big bluff that he’s playing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Manitoba Progressive Conservative government is attempting to hold the line on 

government spending. That is something this government knows nothing about. Now, I hear that the 

government members over there always saying, "Yes, when you get into office there’ll be massive lay-offs of 

people in this province." And you know, as well as I do, that what a Progressive Conservative government 

does in one province or another is not necessarily going to be what it will be doing here in Saskatchewan. 

We in the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, will assess very closely, how we spend the 

dollars of Saskatchewan taxpayers. We believe business and job opportunities must be created in 

Saskatchewan. The unemployment figures used by this NDP government are far from accurate. People who 

leave our province for employment in the Tory lands of Canada are no longer a part of the Saskatchewan 

provincial statistics and therefore, cannot be counted. We are the only area in North America whose 

population has declined in the last forty years and, Mr. Speaker, I say shame on any government that drives 

people away to other parts of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to say that Premier Blakeney or Prime Minister Trudeau should be returned to power, in light 

of the prevalent economic peril, high inflation and unemployment is like calling an arsonist to put out the 

fire. Our most hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake placed praise on our financial critic, the member 

for Thunder Creek and, Mr. Speaker, I would not like to miss an opportunity to tell this government once 

more that the words of our finance critic should be closely adhered to, words of wisdom, well chosen, sound 

in every way, advice this government will regret in the very near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I want to reassure the people of Saskatchewan that we are committed to reductions of the 

provincial sales tax in order to ease the burden on low income families and encourage growth in our small 

business sector in particular in rural Saskatchewan. Although, Mr. Speaker, the family of Crown 

Corporations is providing a good service to Saskatchewan residents, one sure has a difficult time to see why 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation must increase its net profits by 180.5 per cent in one year. We, in the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan insist that utility rate increases be rolled back, or at the very 

least, be not increased any further. The people of Saskatchewan cannot afford to pay these indirect taxes, 

taxation without representation. Our Crown corporations are yet another area in which a Progressive 

Conservative government would have a most favorable effect on behalf of the people of 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

225 

 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that I could on for hours and hours condemning this government for its actions in 

recent years. There are areas in which you deserve commendation and that would be in the areas of some tax 

cuts. At least you’re not taking all the people’s money. You’re giving them a small pittance back. But the 

fact still remains, this Budget is not accurate in its context. You are taking more from the people, you’re 

taking more from the people than you’ve ever taken before and you give them a little bit back and make a big 

flair about it. You think that’s going to pacify them but I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, and to this government, the 

people I talk to are very concerned and they’re very aware that anything that you as a government give them, 

is their own tax dollars. So the day and age of fooling the people out there, is long gone. It cannot be done 

anymore and since you’ve presented that same kind of a Budget, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you, that I 

cannot support this Budget. I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources):— Mr. Speaker, to begin my 

remarks in this important Budget debate, I wish to do so by congratulating my colleague, the hon. Minister of 

Finance for bringing forward a budget truly reflective of this government’s intent to recognize the economic 

realities within Canada and within our province of Saskatchewan. I also want to congratulate him on the fine 

and effective manner in which he developed his Budget address. The member for Regina North East, our 

Minister of Finance, has very ably demonstrated a clear understanding of how best for a government to 

manage the financial affairs of our province. This management is aimed to give the Saskatchewan citizen the 

greatest value and service for the tax dollar. I have every confidence that the citizens of Saskatchewan will 

recognize this and show their appreciation for it by giving the Minister of Finance and this government their 

full support and co-operation. The Budget before us, Mr. Speaker, did not come by chance, nor is it beyond 

realism. The Budget is a result of sound financial planning and good management of Saskatchewan’s 

resource and taxation revenues. For this to happen, Mr. Speaker, requires good, effective, strong leadership. 

This New Democratic government and the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have this kind of 

leadership in our Premier Allan Blakeney. Not only does Premier Blakeney stand tall as our Premier of 

Saskatchewan but he is one of the tallest in recognition and respect of his leadership by the entire Canadian 

nation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA:— Not only am I proud of our Premier, Mr. Speaker, but I know you are. The people of 

my constituency in Canora, the citizens of Saskatchewan and many Canadians across our nation express their 

interest and appreciation in the able manner Premier Blakeney represents Saskatchewan and Canada at the 

First Ministers’ Conference. Saskatchewan and Canada need the Blakeney leadership because it is 

committed to give Saskatchewan the best it has and at the same time concern itself with resolving the 

problems of Canada in a broad sense, in the interest of Saskatchewan and in the interest of Canada as a 

whole. At conferences other provinces look to Saskatchewan’s position and what our Premier has to say. 

 

The Toronto Globe and Mail, September 20 edition, points out it has been New Democratic Premier Allan 

Blakeney of Saskatchewan who has been in the forefront of working toward the proper response to the 

national unity crisis. To quote from the same 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

226 

 

issue of the Globe and Mail: 

 

In major speeches in Calgary, Toronto, Montreal, Mr. Blakeney has gone further than any other English 

Canadian politician in defining the current dilemma and searching for answers. 

 

Last month at the First Ministers’ Conference in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, it was again Premier Allan Blakeney 

from Saskatchewan who came up with a program to cure the country’s unemployment crisis. 

 

The Toronto Star, February 14, 1978 issue, indicates there was leadership from Saskatchewan Premier Allan 

Blakeney on the vital issue of a program to cure the country’s unemployment crisis. I quote: 

 

He urged Ottawa and his fellow provinces to embark on a massive program of government investment to 

create jobs. 

 

The projects, as Blakeney made clear, make economic sense. They will directly stimulate other productive 

activities and reap considerable benefits for the economy for years to come. Moreover, in the years ahead 

when unemployment is lower it will cost a lot more to build these projects. 

 

In the case of energy projects, delays will mean Canadians will have to find billions of dollars to import oil 

instead. As Blakeney put it, the choice is between ‘jobs today, energy tomorrow’ and ‘no jobs today, no 

energy tomorrow’. 

 

The same news article expresses concern with positions taken by other provincial leaders and Prime Minister 

Trudeau in their solutions to relieve the serious unemployment problem facing Canadians. I quote from the 

article. 

 

It’s important that premiers such as Bill Bennett of British Columbia, Peter Lougheed of Alberta and 

Sterling Lyon of Manitoba, along with Davis and Trudeau recognize this. They are the ones voicing do-

nothing policies. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals and Tories continue to say, let government get out of the way and let private 

enterprise do the job of developing the economy and creating jobs, seemingly totally unaware of the fact that 

50 years ago when private enterprise had a completely free hand, we got into the largest and the worst 

depression of the dark days of the dirty thirties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this New Democratic government approaches financial planning on a long-term basis. In good 

years, money is set aside so that we have something to fall back on when the economy slows down. Since 

1972 Saskatchewan’s economy has been on the upswing. This government foresaw a slow to moderate 

economic growth rate for the previous fiscal year and for 1978-79. These slow growth years are times when 

government makes use of the accumulated surplus cash reserves to continue to expand services without 

having to make general tax increases, as a matter of fact, make significant tax reductions as was done in this 

Budget. 

 

Let us just briefly make a comparison of this Budget and that of Conservative Ontario which was brought 

down the same day. 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

227 

 

Ontario’s health insurance plan premiums increased by 37.5 per cent to $44 a month or $528 per year for 

families and $22 a month or $264 a year for single persons. Funds for Ontario hospitals in this year’s budget 

were increased 4.3 per cent. Last year’s increase was 7.09 per cent and that resulted in cutbacks. I ask, how 

severe will the cutbacks be this year? We will wait and see. 

 

In contrast, Mr. Speaker, we have no health premiums. Saskatchewan’s Budget provides for construction of 

three new hospitals and renovations at numerous others, a large increase in the number of level IV care beds 

for nursing home patients and there is a 25 per cent increase in the provincial supplement to old age security 

benefits. 

 

Ontario’s mining taxes were unnecessarily cut when total government revenues from all sources in Ontario 

amount to only .2 per cent. In sharp contrast, Mr. Speaker, total revenues from all resources amount to 25 per 

cent in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Ontario Mortgage Corporation is being wound up and that eliminates the only positive action that had 

been taken in the housing field. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is doubling the rural housing program from 400 to 800 units for a total cost of 

$7.6 million. We are extending the Home Renovation Assistance Program at a cost of $6 million and we are 

introducing a small builder assistance program. 

 

Regarding municipal grants, Mr. Speaker, Ontario’s transfers to municipalities and school jurisdictions were 

increased by 6.5 per cent — running well behind inflation. 

 

In Saskatchewan, revenue sharing to hold local mill rates will add almost $20 million to local government 

revenues. This represents a dramatic 45 per cent increase in one year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government is deeply committed to preserving and enhancing the quality of life in all areas of 

Saskatchewan — in cities, in towns, in villages, as well as in the rural communities in the South and the 

many settlements in the North. 

 

The government is constantly fulfilling its commitment through the co-operation and participation of 

Saskatchewan communities in various social programs. I speak with confidence when I say the people of my 

own constituency of Canora are appreciative of the benefits they receive from government programs. Let me 

cite a few of the program benefits. Grants are made available for construction and operating senior citizen 

activity centres in ten communities in Canora constituency. Thousands of dollars in grants and commitments 

were made available under the province’s community capital fund to assist with street improvements, water 

and sewer main extensions and street lighting. Neighbourhood improvement programs were undertaken in 

Sturgis, Preeceville and Canora. 

 

The Cultural and Recreational Facilities Grant Program provided assistance to communities for improving 

their local and recreational and cultural facilities. Mr. Speaker, $180,000 was committed for a seed cleaning 

plant in Canora. Over $840,000 went out to farmers in the constituency under the Beef Industry Assistance 

Program. Canora constituency is only one of the many constituencies in the province that benefited from the 

many programs implemented by the government. Community program participation demonstrates that 

government and people can work together in an effort to meet community needs. 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

228 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Renewable Resources and Tourism industries are important aspects of our 

provincial economy. Wise management and development of the fisheries, wild life and forest resources and 

the tourism industry, has over the years provided many social and economic benefits to the people of this 

province. 

 

Through increased tourism promotion, Saskatchewan is moving to the forefront of the travelling public as a 

tourist destination area. The old myth that Saskatchewan is a pass-through province is being dispelled as 

more and more tourists are being diverted off the Trans Canada and the Yellowhead Highways to enjoy some 

extra time in this province. Our tourist promotion programs are enjoying a high profile in a highly 

competitive market despite physical restraints in budgets. As well, the private sector has taken an increasing 

interest in the tourism potential of this province through major initiatives from this government and my 

department. 

 

One of the programs which is especially newsworthy is the Community and Regional Tourism Development 

Program which is in essence, a new approach to the development of the travel industry on a regional basis. 

The purpose of this program is to alleviate a number of problems facing the travel industry in Saskatchewan. 

Essentially, the problems identified were a lack of joint promotional activities and opportunities and a lack 

of local participation in tourism oriented associations, agencies and communities. 

 

The program, Mr. Speaker, which was introduced last summer is in my judgment, developing soundly and is 

receiving support from local and regional tourism interest. During the next year it is my belief that the 

presence of these organized associations will make themselves felt, both in the public and private sectors. 

Mr. Speaker, six regional travel associations are now in place. All employ a full-time manager except for one 

which is in the process of hiring a full-time manager. Five of the associations have been incorporated under 

The Societies Act and all have boards of directors composed of varied local tourism interests such as 

accommodation and foot service facilities, vacation farms, Chambers of Commerce and local government. 

 

Funds are provided through two grants, Mr. Speaker. A matching grant for administrative purposes 

providing $3 for each dollar collected by memberships and other means of support to a maximum $15,000, 

and now a matching marketing grant of $5,000 per region to regions for carrying out a marketing 

promotional program which may include the production of regional travel brochures, exhibits and other 

promotional material. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people who are not convinced that tourism is a very important industry in our 

province. I believe the travel industry in Saskatchewan has a great potential but there is a need for greater 

development of tourist and recreational facilities. We cannot expect development unless we can make the 

business community and the general public understand that the industry is important and that it needs their 

involvement. Currently, close to 80 per cent of the people travelling in Saskatchewan are our own residents. 

The other 20 per cent is comprised of 15 per cent non-resident Canadians and 5 per cent Americans. Our 

concern, Mr. Speaker, is not that we could be crowded out. Our concern is, why is it that there are so many 

Saskatchewanians who travel outside of Saskatchewan and how can we persuade Saskatchewan residents to 

travel and holiday here in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

229 

 

In the past, Mr. Speaker, we have tended to think of tourism as a matter of building and maintaining parks, 

camp grounds and other similar recreation areas. While this is an important part of tourism, the fact is that 

the tourism industry comprises a whole inventory of accommodation and dining services, transportation and 

other related travel services, including promotion which all serve the need of the traveller. Through the 

regional approach, Mr. Speaker, a community is drawing upon its vast number of travel industry resources. 

The Board of Trade, the Chamber of Commerce, the municipalities, business men, recreation sites, museums 

and the various community events. Local people become members of the regional association and become 

involved. They have an opportunity to fully participate in development and promotion of tourism for the 

region. Co-ordination and pooling of efforts will allow communities to take better advantage of the benefits 

of tourism. Local organizations are dealing with local people and hence there is a better understanding of 

what tourism is and what it means to them as part of a community. 

 

What we eventually hope, Mr. Speaker, is to see the development of a regional co-ordinated travel industry 

that will serve first, the region, and second, the province as a whole. There is also a major role for 

government to play in the development of the travel industry and to this end my department has developed 

major programs of promotion and development of the travel industry. 

 

Our information and answering service is one of the most sophisticated in Canada. Including written and 

telephone inquiries, it handles approximately 100,000 inquiries in a year. As well, a computerized letter-

writing program provides for the servicing of all inquiries within 24 to 48 hours. Our distribution program 

sends out about 3 million pieces of literature covering all informational requirements of travellers to travel 

agents, motor clubs, Chambers of Commerce and Canadian government offices of tourism across the 

country, United States and abroad. Along with this, Mr. Speaker, we have attended a number of sports shows 

more than ever before, and Saskatchewan Showcase, a travel display and information trailer, all help to 

introduce Saskatchewan to potential visitors as a holiday destination. 

 

Information centres located on key travel routes encourage travellers to stop and explore Saskatchewan. As 

well, this year for the first time we have attended the Montreal sports show and we have produced and begun 

to distribute Saskatchewan’s first French language invitation. I believe this brochure and its distribution is a 

step forward in promoting travel in Canada in a bilingual way as well as contributing to national unity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the federal-provincial tourism ministers’ conference earlier this year, the Saskatchewan 

government supported increased flexibility of advance booking charters. While the federal government has 

introduced a low cost Canada travel package, Saskatchewan has been virtually excluded from the program 

with the net effect being that most of Canada including Saskatchewan people, have low cost options to travel 

in Canada this coming year. However, with no offering in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Canadians do not 

have the opportunity to visit Saskatchewan. 

 

Major development in Saskatchewan’s travel industry such as a new custom bus tour service offers itinerary 

planning and follow-up detail to senior citizen groups, school classes and many other organized groups. 

 

With this and other initiatives by this government in the tourist industry, Saskatchewan 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

230 

 

definitely has something to offer to the traveller — something that will tie in very nicely with the Low Cost 

Canada Program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my staff reviewed the packages offered on CP Air, VIA Rail and Air Canada Programs. It was 

a great disappointment to us that the only way Saskatchewan is represented is by the VIA Rail overnight stop 

and a reduction rate at the Bessborough and Saskatchewan Hotels. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely disappointed at the way the Tour Package Program was 

developed. There was a complete lack of consultation with my department and yet Saskatchewan people in 

part are contributing towards the $400,000 to airlines for promotion through the Canadian Government 

Office of Tourism. Mr. Speaker, I am making strong representations to the federal Minister of Industry and 

Commerce, Jack Horner, on this pointing out to him the lack of Saskatchewan presence in low-cost travel 

packages for Canada. I am still awaiting the minister’s reply. 

 

I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that I am not opposed to the principle of a Tour Package Promotion 

Program. I believe it is a good idea and I believe that it is one way of giving our tourist industry a boost. But 

my criticism lies in the way the details of the program have been developed. I believe that each and every 

province of Canada is important and each and every province has its special characteristics which could 

contribute more fully to the overall tourist industry in Canada. When we talk about national unity, and then 

proceed to lessen the importance of one province from another, we are working against ourselves and we are 

not going to get the optimum dollar value out of the tourist industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past year there have been a number of innovative programs initiated by this 

government dealing with the fisheries and wildlife resources with emphasis continuing to be on habitat 

protection. 

 

A new Habitat Protection and Development Division has been set up within my department having the 

responsibility of protecting wildlife habitat located on Crown lands. It is also concerned with protecting the 

waterfowl resource from the destruction of wetlands. This new section of the department, Mr. Speaker, will 

provide input into the many faceted programs of the Department of Agriculture and the PFRA with respect 

to development on agricultural Crown land and its relationship to fisheries and wildlife. 

 

During the year, work has been completed on a report of the economic importance of Saskatchewan’s sport 

fisheries in conjunction with the federal Fisheries Department. In the report, some very enlightening facts 

about fishing were brought to light which demonstrate the importance of our fisheries resource to the 

economy of this province. The report is based on 1975 and shows that there were 243,000 active anglers in 

Saskatchewan of which 58,850 were under 16 years of age. More than one-half of the non-residents who 

came to Saskatchewan to fish were from Canada. Most were from Alberta and Manitoba. The balance were 

from the United States. 

 

In 1975, Mr. Speaker, more than 2 million angler days were recorded — an average of 11 angler days per 

licenced angler and they spent more than $36 million on their sport. Mr. Speaker, because of the evident 

economic importance of this resource, the Fisheries Branch undertakes extensive studies to provide a sound 

basis for policies and programs which will ensure continued economic, recreational and social benefits from 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

231 

 

this resource. 

 

The economic importance of commercial fishing is also a major consideration particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan. Where both commercial and sport fishing take place, there is often a conflict of whether or 

not both or one or the other should be considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to properly manage the fisheries resource it is necessary to maintain a balanced harvest. To 

accomplish this we must on most lakes establish a method of harvest that would result in a balanced removal 

of commercial and game fish. If this is not applied, the balanced harvest will not be achieved. We believe in 

the multiple use of the fishery and under proper management there is room for both sport and commercial 

fishing and both can work to the advantage of each other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to take a few moments to discuss the Landowner — Wildlife Assistance 

Program introduced this year to compensate farmers for losses due to deer depredation and to assist 

organizations to help wildlife. 

 

The program is twofold: 

 

1) It will financially assist property owners who are experiencing wildlife damage to agricultural crops; and 

 

2) It will aid organizations that wish to assist wildlife in critical situations during the remainder of this 

winter. 

 

The Property Owner Assistance Program concentrates on damage prevention techniques such as fencing, 

relocation of hay and feed stacks, repellants and scaring devices, and a purchasing of small amounts of hay 

to use as lure crops at alternate feeding sites are also considered. 

 

The amount of money payable under this program is 75 per cent of the value or damage incurred and no 

compensation is paid for claims of less than $100. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Assistance Program provides a maximum of $500 assistance grant to 

organizations that are interested in projects which would help wild birds and mammals survive this winter. 

 

We believe that wildlife in Saskatchewan belongs to and is the responsibility of all citizens. Therefore, all of 

us should share in compensating landowners from having to suffer full financial loss in sustaining wildlife 

throughout the winter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the opposition criticized the program for not going far enough to providing 100 per 

cent compensation and for encouraging organizations to help wildlife survive the severe winter. I want to 

remind the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that the former Liberal government had no such compensation program 

whatever and that this government is doing as well or better than Conservative provincial governments in 

Canada. 

 

The program encourages the landowner to protect his property as much as possible and it encourages the 

initiative or private associations and organizations, particularly wildlife federations, to carry some of the 

responsibility for protecting our wildlife. I would have thought the opposition would support us fully on this 

program rather than 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

232 

 

criticize the government for destroying private initiative. It is quite evident and no surprise that the 

opposition, if they are not sure what side to take, then the least they can do is to play politics with the 

program. 

 

Another criticism, Mr. Speaker, that has come to light is that the conservation officers who are the major 

contacts for the program are not qualified to make a fair and complete assessment of all claims. I would just 

like to say that I have the fullest confidence in the conservation officers to make this judgment. In many 

cases where there is doubt as to the value of the hay and crop that is lost, crop insurance adjusters and 

agriculture representatives are consulted. The combined effort, Mr. Speaker, should result in the property 

owner getting a fair settlement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to now turn your attention to another area of the department which will be 

receiving a greater emphasis in the future — and that is forestry. 

 

Much progress has been made in recent years in industrial development, proper utilization, management and 

restocking of our forests. But new forest developments in other parts of the world are making it more 

difficult for our industry to compete. Reforestation, wood supply, slow growth and transportation costs are 

some of our serious concerns. At the Federal-Provincial Forestry Minister’s Conference held earlier this 

year, Saskatchewan, along with other provinces, made strong representations to the federal government for 

assistance in forest research and protection and in reforestation programs. In Saskatchewan we have stepped 

up our programs to ensure a solid resource base for the forest industry; however, we need increased 

involvement by the federal government in these expanded programs, if we are to realize the full economic 

benefits from our forest resource. 

 

The aspen resource in Saskatchewan is largely unused and it will take some time to overcome the technical 

and economic difficulties in making it marketable. It is my hope that the federal government will provide 

some assistance in this area as well. 

 

Reforestation, Mr. Speaker, is of prime importance. Our forests are harvested much faster than they are 

renewed and this cannot continue. A great deal of progress has been made here. Production at the forest 

nurseries has increased from 2.75 million trees in 1973 to more than six million in 1977. Facilities have been 

expanded at the Prince Albert and Big River Nurseries and new nurseries are being developed near Chitek 

Lake and MacDowall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have slow and difficult growing conditions here is all the more reason for a 

more aggressive reforestation program. All of our forest operators will have to contribute more to the 

reforestation program. It is expected that some 7.7 million trees can be planted by the Forestry Branch by 

1979. Forest nurseries will produce 12 million trees by 1980, and by 1985 17 million will be needed to keep 

up with the anticipated rate of forest harvesting. With increased production of nurseries, Mr. Speaker, 

reforestation will obviously increase. Contract planting will be encouraged to provide opportunities for local 

people to develop business and create local employment opportunities. There is an urgent need for more and 

better research. We need research which would cover improved growth, fibre quality, and greater resistance 

to the elements of nature, if we are to keep pace and remain competitive with the coastal forest areas. Mr. 

Speaker, we must move towards more intensive forest development. In the meantime, we must do the best 

we can with the resources we have. Our objective is to obtain the best possible value from forest production 

through 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

233 

 

efficient cutting operations and elimination of waste. This government recognizes that in recent years there 

has been an increased level of industrial activity in our forests. It should follow therefore that there is a need 

for more field staff to provide the essential management and supervision techniques. I am hopeful that we 

can accomplish this within the next year. 

 

In order to achieve the objective of our forest policy, Mr. Speaker, conflicts within and without are almost 

inevitable. The work of reconciling these conflicts and establishing balance is no easy task. But it has to be 

faced by the industry, and the governments as well, if we are to get the most out of our forest resources. The 

importance of our forest industry in the overall economic and social well being of our province is great. In 

1973, 3,580 people were employed in forest based industries and the value of forest products was 

$74,683,000. In 1977, there were 4,092 employees and the value of forest products increased to $122,484,00. 

The plywood plant, sawmill operations, the pulp mill and treating plant have all produced real value for 

Saskatchewan in terms of jobs and provincial revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the mid-1960's to the mid-1970's visitations to Saskatchewan Provincial Parks increased 

from 1.8 million to 3.5 million. Along with the great number of visitors annually, a definite trend towards 

delinquent and violent behaviour became apparent with consequence deterioration of the environment and 

atmosphere in the parks. Following the 1976 summer holiday season, with damage to park property 

amounting to some $50,000 with 600 prosecutions from Moose Mountain Park alone, and an unprecedented 

number of visitor complaints of lack of security in campgrounds, of noise and lack of control of vehicles in 

parks. My department identified measures required to improve the situation and obtain approval to expend 

up to $900,000 to implement a security program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, initially concern was expressed about the seemingly large number — 16 additional permanent 

positions were requested. However, enforcement of the park regulations requires experience and maturity of 

judgment as well as legal status under The Provincial Parks Act. To implement the program it was necessary 

to revise the park regulations; many sections were amended and some new sections were added to more 

clearly define responsible conduct and provincial park objectives. The more significant changes provided 

for: 

 

(1) Installation of control gates at campground and park entry; 

 

(2) Closure of picnic areas at 10:00 p.m.; 

 

(3) Maximum length of camper stay and other campsite occupancy requirements; and 

 

(4) Control of vehicles and designation of travel corridors. 

 

Throughout the summer a public information program was carried out through press, radio and television to 

ensure that the public was aware of the program being implemented and the reasons for it. 

 

The capital expenditures provided for street lighting, electric control gates, traffic control lights, trans-

receiver and other equipment for patrol units. Specialized equipment such as motorized snow toboggans and 

small patrol vehicles were also acquired to permit greater officer mobility. 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

234 

 

My department does feel that a positive impact of this program has been recognized by many of the three and 

one-half million park visitors as they were able to enjoy their visits in an atmosphere of peace and security 

this past season. Damage to public facilities due to vandalism has been reduced; preliminary estimates 

indicate that such damage would not exceed $20,000 in 1977, down some $30,000 from 1976. Threats to 

personal safety were also prevented. 

 

As with most new programs, we initially experienced some difficulties; some park visitors indicated certain 

officers were over-zealous; however, through training programs we do expect to have a highly acceptable 

program in place this coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to think seriously for a moment about the Budget before 

us. 

 

When one stops to realize the high level of government service which is available to our people, and at the 

same time realize the limited tax base of our province, and a population of less than one million people, one 

should ask — how is it all possible? 

 

Services in the North, our health and education programs, agriculture assistance, government insurance and a 

host of other programs, all cost money. And yet moneys to finance these programs are not derived from the 

imposition of onerous taxation policies. How is this possible? 

 

But this isn’t all, Mr. Speaker. Leadership by this New Democratic Party government has resulted in one of 

the lowest unemployment rates in Canada. Our population is on the upswing. Our economic growth is 

regular and significant and our credit rating rates with the best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all this is possible because we have a commitment to long-range financial planning. This 

government does not work from one election to the next. We are committed to the orderly development of 

this province and our ‘plan of action’ is having positive results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget is part of this plan of action. I would like to repeat by saying, the Budget is an 

excellent Budget. It is the right thing at the right time. I know the people of Saskatchewan support it. I would 

ask members opposite to join this government in supporting responsible fiscal proposals which truly reflect 

the economic and social realities of this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment but I will give my full support to the main motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Good news, Mr. Speaker, as this will take eight minutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I propose to discuss this evening with the House premium savings bonds. This is a concept 

which is a good concept and it has not been adopted in North America. I would suggest to members that it 

would be a useful addition to our current lottery schemes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, premium savings bonds exist in Great Britain, the Republic of Ireland and 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

235 

 

New Zealand in a modified form and they also exist in Norway and Sweden and in some smaller 

jurisdictions. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— . . . socialist plan. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is a socialist plan. Holders buy premium savings bonds in the 

post offices and I am sure that our members, at least, have never even seen them. Bonds are usually small. 

The example I am now showing the members is the 10 pound British bond. New Zealand and the Republic 

of Ireland issue these bonds in small denominations as small an amount as $5. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than pay interest as such to each bondholder the interest is, instead, paid out to a few big 

winners in monthly draws and the draws distribute the interest earned by the bonds and governments, as I 

understand it from contacting the British and Irish governments, and pay about 4 per cent so that the 

government benefits by the low amount of interest. The prizes in some jurisdictions are non-taxable 

improving the real rate of return on the investment. But most important, holders of premium savings bonds 

don’t suffer the loss of their money as do purchasers of lottery tickets. 

 

Members will recall, Mr. Speaker, that I have had a couple of criticisms to make of the lottery system, the 

lottery system which I think has an effect of encouraging people to believe that they are going to win 

something that they are not. But, at least, with the premium savings bond concept it satisfies the win big 

desires of the public and at the same time no one loses their investment in the process. 

 

Premium savings bonds are redeemable at par at any time like Canada Savings Bonds and savings are 

encouraged in the process. I am not, Mr. Speaker, displeased with the operation of lotteries. The money now 

being distributed to support cultural and recreational groups is well used. I think I would maintain those 

lotteries but I believe that it would be useful to supplement those kinds of schemes with the premium savings 

bonds, which could be brought in either at the national level or the provincial level. 

 

There is a risk desire, Mr. Speaker, in us all and I believe that we would be better to use the big win desire to 

encourage more savings rather than to encourage spending, which develops unfounded expectations and to 

some extent builds on the dreams of the disadvantaged. 

 

Britain, with its operation of the premium savings bonds concept and approximately $55 million, has had 

sales since 1956 of some $5 billion and about $3 billion remains in their scheme. The government has the 

advantage of massive savings in interests; savings are encouraged and the government borrows at home from 

its own citizens and doesn’t face the problem of exchange fluctuations when they have to repay the bonds. 

 

New Zealand, with a population of three million, started their premium savings bonds program in 1970. 

Their sales to date are approximately $250 million and about half of that, approximately $125 million is still 

invested. 

 

The Republic of Ireland, Mr. Speaker, has had gross sales of about $200 million and, again, approximately 

$100 million remains in their plan .. Obviously you need some help with this scheme; I wouldn’t wave them 

around as the RCMP will be in to arrest you.. Mr. Speaker, paying about 4 per cent in interest with about a 

quarter of 1 per 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

236 

 

cent of the gross moneys on deposit going to administration (that is approximately the payout and the cost of 

administering this scheme) leaves a very large profit available to Canadian governments and it is a large 

profit that is being earned now by foreign governments. 

 

As members will know bond issues in small denominations, which were found to be practical during the war 

because interest was withheld, are not practical under our current schemes because of the expense in 

administration and the expense in paying out interest. The advertising requirements to sell bonds in small 

denominational amounts also makes those small bonds almost prohibitively expensive in administration. 

 

Premiums savings bonds avoid most of those problems. Few of the bonds are cashed. Interest need not be 

paid to all of the holders but only the prize winners and they largely advertise themselves. 

 

I do not believe that the introduction of a premium savings bond scheme would detract from the present 

success of the lotteries program. I believe it would enhance the earnings of the lotteries and that these 

additional moneys could in part be used in the same way to help support cultural activities. Once a premium 

savings bond program is in place it tends to become a means of raising money that works almost in 

perpetuity. So, for instance, in Great Britain that $3 billion continues to grow and never really disappears 

from its usefulness to the public treasury. It is not, I suggest, in the least far fetched to present this kind of a 

scheme in this Legislature and suggest that it is the kind of proposal that governments should be looking at. 

It is in fact an important part of the financial planning of quite a number of governments and should be 

receiving very serious consideration and in this nation. It is for all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I 

choose in the Budget Debate which is a sort of a free wheeling discussion available to members, to mention 

this proposal in the House as I hope to have an opportunity one day to mention it to the national government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon):— Mr. Speaker, it is with some trepidation that I rise to speak in this 

Budget Debate. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY:— After you have heard . . . 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— That’s true. It is obvious by the Budget that it’s a combination of a re-election budget 

and a budget to prop up you might say a party that knows it’s on the way out and doesn’t know just who’s 

going to take it out. It is very interesting to see the little goodies handed here and handed there, not with 

really an economic sense but only with political sense which I admire. You give 25 here and 10 there. It 

minds me of a sailor out on the night in the brothel region, you know you fill your 10 bucks here and 10 

bucks there. Interesting. ( . . . interjection . . . ) Very true. 

 

The Budget itself, Mr. Speaker, shows that the NDP has never learned much in the years in office. That’s 

true. The increases of this so-called Budget is going to generate such vast amounts of work, all in 

government buildings, all in buildings that really will not supply a continuing type of growth to the province. 

It will be a one shot deal that they hope will get them through the ‘79 election and I doubt that it will. 

 

It is interesting to know, for instance in agriculture, the increase in the Budget is largely 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

237 

 

made up of increases in administration costs, very little in capital spending. It is also very interesting in this 

government that uses the slogan, "jobs today and energy and what not tomorrow", to note that in the 

agriculture budget under irrigation the spending has decreased $300,000. This is doubly interesting when we 

sit with the Diefenbaker Dam in the south Saskatchewan irrigation project being unused. 

 

It seems also interesting to see that we have a government here that it is very interested in purchasing land 

under the Land Bank. It doesn’t increase production, it doesn’t put any more farms in for young people, it 

puts it into government control. We sit on irrigable land in this province, 50 per cent greater than the 

province of Alberta and we don’t develop it. You go west with me in Taber we find young farmers making a 

good living raising potatoes and sugar beets on quarter section farms. We sit here and we don’t develop 

anything and yet this government says it wants to put the young farmer back on the farm. 

 

MR. MESSER:— What is the subsidy? What is the cost? 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Yes, what’s the cost of the government buildings, what’s the cost of the Coronach 

dam that you can’t even build because you haven’t got enough gumption to go down and deal? But you sit 

here but you won’t even go down and deal with the provincial government. What’s the cost of that? It would 

be much better to be putting it into the irrigation project that you could get going, I would say. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— We’re going to send the troops to get you. 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Certainly. We look at this government and we look at its highway budget and we see 

that there is no new highway construction planned except what was already on the order paper. We are 

sitting on a highway system that is old, deteriorated and you haven’t got the guts that the federal government 

has in their improving the rail line system. You are sitting here doing piecemeal, willy nilly work and then 

you prattle on that you want to have the rural area in agriculture booming. You can’t boom much on the 

roads that we are driving on and you can’t get much industry out in the country and you are not going to get 

many people wanting to live there. 

 

MR. FARIS:— Are you running again . . . 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Oh, it wouldn’t be very difficult to beat whatever you are going to put up against me, 

I don’t think, so I might take a crack at it. 

 

The highways are very, very important to the life of our agriculture and small towns. We sit with the 

government who says that it wants to keep our rural areas alive and how well it does it, how well it does it! It 

moves the ag reps in my area into the largest centre, congregates them in Swift Current. We find the SPC, 

the Crown corporation that would never do what a private enterprise company would do and think of profits 

only, moving their DROs into centralized areas, moving in from small towns where it’s important, moving 

operators that have children in school . . . . 

 

MR. MESSER:— Are you for or against? 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— I’m against it, yes, very much against it. I think you should be too, Mr. Minister. You 

would find it is very enthusiastic down in my area to find our operators in an area of 1,200 square miles are 

sitting back at Maple Creek, Shaunavon 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

238 

 

and Swift Current. They are sitting 100 and some miles away from the operator and you’re pulling the 

operator out of Climax. I find that very interesting. I hope you can explain that to the people at that meeting 

because they are very interested in your explanation. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— . . . Those kinds of meetings . . . 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Oh, we’re having one. It was called at the suggestion of the last NDP member, in fact, 

Mr. Kusiak. I think he would enjoy hearing your reason for pulling his DRO (deputy returning officer). I’m 

looking forward with interest, believe me. 

 

MR. MESSER:— You aren’t sure of your position? 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Oh yes, I’m quite certain of my position. I believe in keeping the small town alive in 

the rural area and not centralizing our . . . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— I’m more interested in your position on it, Mr. Minister. I’m very interested in your 

position on having the MCIC pay level IVB care in hospitals. I’m very interested on that, those who want to 

designate . . . . I’m very interested in your compassion for the old aged pensioners in my area who didn’t 

want to live in cities, who wanted to raise their families in small towns and on the farm and now when they 

are dying you are moving them, Mr. Minister, into Moose Jaw, into Regina, into Battleford and you tell me 

that it’s economics. I always thought the NDP was ‘people first’ but I find in your case it is economics first. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— I am very interested in that stand, Mr. Minister, the compassion it shows. I find that 

you are quite willing to put capital expenditure in Battleford, into Swift Current, into Regina, while we have 

pensioners that need level IVB care moved and in the last year the ones that have moved into Swift Current 

from my area in Shaunavon had a life in there of 22 days. You can check that statistic. We are sitting now 

with 50 people who can’t be put into Palliser but the beds are available in our area and this minister says that 

economically we can’t do that, they are numbers, move them, it doesn’t matter. 

 

I’m interested in your stance. I think that your budget that you hope will prop you up isn’t going to prop 

much if you don’t start straightening your act out and getting back into business for the people like you keep 

prattling you’re for. Certainly I’m looking forward to the next election. What you have been doing in my 

area makes it almost easy to get re-elected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— I am interested in the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources who says he has 

such a grand program where he saves 75 per cent of costs to a person who takes 100 per cent loss — who 

says that he won’t pay anybody that’s a small operator and loses less than $100 worth of feed, not this 

minister who is for the small farmer! 

 

I am also interested in this government trying to explain that any organization that has a 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

239 

 

compassion for the wildlife in this province will go out and feed them. But the very government that collects 

hunting licences, that sets the hunting seasons — who knew this hunting season would be cold and fogged 

out? They didn’t get their kill, it’s obvious in their computer print-outs. Now they say, we won’t feed that 

wildlife. If you want to with your compassion go out and get the feed and feed them, we’ll pay you 75 per 

cent of that cost. That’s very compassionate. 

 

I find it very interesting the way you set your drug plan up. Your drug plan causes . . . You could have used 

the Manitoba scheme, it took very little bookwork. You had to bring up some bureaucratic scheme which 

takes a small druggist with a drugstore and he and his wife who are running it have to fill out these blasted 

books and can’t afford to do it. So what happens — you drive the small druggist broke. We’ve had two of 

them shut down in our area because of the administration costs. Wonderful plans! I don’t know where you 

dream them up. I tell you, you better learn if you want to get re-elected or elect members in the rural areas. 

You better get out and see what you are doing to your rural areas. 

 

It’s very interesting in my constituency to find we have no public transportation. We did have years and 

years ago but right now there’s not a bus, there’s not a way of getting out of the area. This government here 

talks about the rural areas, wanting to keep people in the small towns. I’d like to know how you are going to 

keep the people in small towns when you have old age pensioners who can’t drive and you won’t take the 

time to sit down and put in a bus route down there that would put them out. No, it’s economics, 

economically it’s not good. You’re as bad as Bell Canada, the people you battle against. You’re as bad as the 

CPR that you battle against. You are as bad as the private hospitals in the United States, Mr. Minister of 

nursing homes. . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— I find it a little sickening to find a government who ran a platform, ‘New Deal for 

People’. It’s a new deal all right but boy we didn’t think we were going to get that deal. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY:— You know, Sonny, if you had any charity you would . . . . 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— That’s the NDP policy. That’s funny that charity. . . . I find that’s an NDP policy that 

charity should always be on the other guy, no charity for myself. It’s a policy that says we all share with the 

guy down to me but not below. I find that very interesting and very true. 

 

I also find that you are going to put in your Heritage Fund. I would like to give you a few suggestions on 

your Heritage Fund. When you are considering this Heritage Fund I would strongly suggest to this 

government that you remove the royalties on oil, gas and fertilizers that are used in this province. If you can 

collect them as you do all your taxes, Mr. Robbins, then you can give them back by keeping your 

homeowner grant. You don’t have to leave without that. If you weren’t so scared of multinationals you 

would think of that, but you are paranoid. I think that if you set your Heritage Fund and you really mean that 

you want to help the municipalities with your cost-sharing, you better distribute 25 per cent of this fund to 

municipalities with no strings attached — a good place to do it with your Heritage Fund. I think if you 

started using your Heritage Fund what you better learn to do is to invest in businesses that are not now 

operating in Saskatchewan. This has a strange effect of expanding your work base, expanding your income. 

It is much better than buying something that is already there. I know it is a hard thing to visualize, 



 

March 13, 1978 

 

240 

 

Sir, but it is a fact. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY:— . . . should we invest in something that is dead, Sonny? 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Well, you do quite often, I notice that. I can think back when I was a kid of many 

things that are dead and then I find many live things that you invested in that are dead now, too, yes and then 

dying fast. So then it really doesn’t matter that you invest in it because you will kill it pretty quick anyways. I 

really can’t give you much advice there. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY:— O.K. Tell us we are going to invest in the Liberal Party. 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— It might be the best investment you have ever seen, Paul, the way you guys are doing 

it. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that any funds in the Heritage Fund should be used to improve the quality of 

life, certainly in the rural areas. 

 

I suppose that you have gathered by my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that I will not support the motion. I will 

support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn):— Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to participate 

in this debate, because, Mr. Speaker, this Budget reflects a number of principles and important principles. It 

tells the people of Saskatchewan quite a bit about this government and its approach to the affairs of the 

province. For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, it will take me some considerable length of time to complete my 

address, so, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:06 o’clock p.m. 


