



















































Hansard: April 12, 1978


1367 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 

April 12, 1978 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o'clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to the members of this Assembly a 

gentleman who is visiting today in the Legislature on behalf of Speaker Jerome. He is Mr. Ray Stokes and he 

is in the Speaker's Gallery. If Mr. Stokes could rise. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — While I have Mr. Stokes here I take the opportunity to mention to members again that I 

did send information recently to the members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, to the party 

leaders and to the caucus chairmen about Speaker Jerome's plan to use Grade Twelve students as pages in 

the House of Commons from across Canada. Mr. Stokes is here today discussing this matter with me and has 

given me further information should any members wish to consult with me further on the matter. 

 

I would also like while I am on my feet to introduce a group of very important people that are here from 

Bishop Roborecki School in Saskatoon. They are 44 in number, Grade Eight students. Bishop Roborecki 

School is situated in the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount which I have the honor to represent in the 

Legislature. 

 

They are accompanied here today by Mr. Chuey, Mr. Buttinger and Mrs. Serhyenko. I hope all members will 

join with me in welcoming these students to the Legislative Assembly and hope that they have an enjoyable 

day here, an interesting day and a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like as well to introduce a group of 

very important people to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to other members of the House. We have a 

group of some 39 students, I believe Grade Seven students from the Cardinal Leger School in my 

constituency, accompanied by Mr. Frank Hagel and Mr. Dale Bertch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with this group a little later on in the day. I wish to take this opportunity to 

thank them for coming here and witnessing the proceedings. I hope they have a very safe journey home and I 

will take an opportunity later on in the day to meet with you and perhaps answer some of your questions. 

 

HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Dairy Workers' Strike 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1368 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister 

of Labour (Mr. Snyder) and in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) I would like to 

direct a question to the Deputy Premier. I think we are all aware that there have been certain marathon 

negotiations going on over the past evening and this morning about the milk strike. I would ask the Deputy 

Premier if he is in a position to report to us on those negotiations? Furthermore, I would ask the Deputy 

Premier if he is prepared at this time to bring in legislation to end that strike and get the workers back to 

work? 

 

I understand that the Minister of Labour gave a commitment both to the dairy producers and to the unions 

involved that, unless the matter was settled by 2:00 o'clock this afternoon, such legislation would be 

presented to this Assembly. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I can report that negotiations have been 

ongoing, virtually non-stop, I guess now for 24 hours or so. I am advised that some progress has been made. 

The discussions are still ongoing, apparently fruitfully. As a consequence the government has no further 

announcement to make at this particular time. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. It is our understanding that the Minister of 

Labour gave a definite commitment to all parties involved, the dairy producers and those in the unions, that 

unless this strike or this matter was settled by 2:00 o'clock this afternoon, the legislation would be presented 

to this Legislature for approval to get these people back to work. 

 

Now I ask the Attorney General, how much longer are you going to let this matter drag on? If it is not settled 

by 3:00 or 3:30 this afternoon, is it your intention to bring legislation before us? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, while I cannot vouch exactly what the Minister of Labour did say, I do 

believe his words to have been that if a settlement is not arrived at by the appointed time, the government's 

then duty to consider other options rise rather dramatically. I do not believe that there was a statement in the 

terms that the Leader of the Liberal Party words it, namely that there will be legislation by 2:00 o'clock. 

 

The question about how long the dispute is to be dragged out, I think is a very important question. This is a 

very serious matter which I think we all recognize. The government is mindful of this. We are also mindful 

of the process which is ongoing and the best that I can say to the Leader of the Liberal Party is that, knowing 

all the circumstances we do know and all the circumstances we have to consider, our announcement will be 

made in due course. 

 

MR. MALONE: — I wonder if the Attorney General would outline to this Assembly what your other 

options are if this matter is not settled by some reasonable time this afternoon. Furthermore, would you 

advise us whether or not you have a draft bill ready to present to this Legislature, should that course of action 

have to come to pass, and furthermore, would you be prepared to let us have a copy of the draft bill so we 

can be considering it this afternoon? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say again that government policy will be announced in due 

course. I think the Leader of the Liberal Party's question is, I do not mean to say facetious, but it is somewhat 

speculative. We just have to wait and see what 



 

April 12, 1978 1369 

 

1369 

 

happens. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — A supplementary to the Deputy Premier. In the bill being drafted, would 

you give the House the assurance that there are provisions in the bill providing compensation to those 

producers who have suffered losses to date, so that they can be assured as well that all problems are solved in 

the same bill? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I can only give the same answer that I have given the hon. Leader of 

the Liberal Party with respect to this question as well. We will have to see in due course what 

announcements or decisions are taken. 

 

Education Act 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of Progressive Conservative Opposition): — I direct my question to the 

Minister of Education in the absence of the Premier. Yesterday at this Assembly, on the front steps there 

appeared to be some considerable difference of opinion in the interpretation of The Education Act and the 

clauses therein. (Inaudible interjection) . . . not in my view only, as between the president of the SSTA, the 

spokesman on behalf of the Liberal party, the spokesman on behalf of the Progressive Conservative party 

and the Minister of Education. The Minister of Education, quite simply and quite succinctly, proceeded to 

address the people that the president or the leadership of the SSTA was not telling the truth. Now, that was 

the comment. Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is quite simply this, in the light of the very obvious 

difference of opinion, politically, as to the interpretation of the act, why, Mr. Speaker, would the government 

of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan pay for a full page ad in The Leader Post, and I am sure 

that the same full page ad appeared in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix. I said, what . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! If the minister wants to answer, I'll let him answer. 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to deny that I said the president 

of the SSTA said things which were not true. I said that we had a difference of agreement as to what the facts 

were. But I say that the only political speeches that were made on the steps of the Legislature were made by 

you and the member for Indian Head. (Inaudible interjection.) Yes, good old Cy. I suggest to you that we 

have attempted in every way to avoid this kind of disagreement, but we believe that parents do have the right 

to have the facts in regard to this act. I may say that the member for Maple Creek, in his comments on the 

bill, said: 'In numerous areas, more control to local authorities was granted, pupil and parental rights have 

been enhanced and obsolete legislation was eliminated.' I give him credit for speaking the truth. I say to you 

that the parents of this province, the children of this province and the trustees also have the right to have the 

facts which are, as was stated by that member, that in large areas there has been new powers handed to the 

School Boards; there are very clear new powers for parents and for students. Now those are facts and I say to 

you that hon. members may disagree in regard to particular sections but in regard to the whole of the bill, 

that is the general thrust and I say, those are the facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. In light of the fact that the association, the 

SSTA, does not agree with the minister in any way in those particular statements, is it normal, Mr. Speaker, 

that the government of Saskatchewan pays for advertising, to counter what after three years of discussion, 

negotiation and 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1370 

presentation that the people of Saskatchewan are fully aware of. It is the intention of the government of 

Saskatchewan to use the advertising medium to counter the legitimate interests of a legitimately elected 

representative in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. FARIS: — I can only say to the hon. member that he has very clearly not been in touch with this entire 

process during the past years. From the very beginning of the School Law Review Committee, through the 

white paper stage and so on at various points, the Department of Education has attempted to try to clarify 

points and provide the public with the facts and we shall continue to do so. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Final supplementary. Since there is considerable difference of opinion as to what the 

facts are, Mr. Minister, in your own words today — well, that's what he said, Mr. Speaker, — since there is a 

difference of opinion as to the facts and since one level of government cannot possibly afford to present this 

kind of information at this cost to the people of the province of Saskatchewan on a continuing basis, is it the 

minister's intention to continue spending this kind of money to advertise an act that is being introduced into 

this Legislature? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I would just ask the hon. member to tell me what in that material is not factual? There is no 

emotional content, there is no attack on trustees or any group whatsoever. Just read that material. The other 

point is this, that advertisement is exactly the same size of advertisement as was sponsored by the SSTA and 

they put a levy upon their school boards to pay for that, according to the best information I have. That means 

they are using money from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Dairy Workers' Strike 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I see the Minister of Labour has now taken his place and I would like to 

direct a question to him which I directed earlier to the Attorney General. We have been advised, Mr. 

Minister, that yesterday you gave a commitment to both dairy workers, I am sorry, the dairy producers and to 

the union. It was, unless the current dispute was satisfied and completed and resolved by 2:00 o'clock this 

afternoon you would be bringing in legislation ordering the workers back to work. My question to you, Mr. 

Minister, is, did you make such a commitment and if you did, when can we expect the legislation to be 

brought before this Assembly? 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I indicated yesterday when I spoke to the 

group made up of producers, employers and employees, that the government found itself in an untenable 

position because of the circumstances surrounding the dispute. I indicated to them that if a settlement was 

not accomplished that we would have to be forced into looking at one of two available options. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What are they? 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Well, if you'll hang on a moment or two I'll tell you. I was just in the process of doing 

that. I indicated that we would have the option of doing nothing and allow the strike to continue which 

appeared to us to be an untenable position and which should not be allowed to happen. Secondly, we would 

be placed in a position of having to make a move which would bring the strike to a conclusion. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister give us the 



 

April 12, 1978 1371 

 

1371 

 

assurance that if this dispute is not resolved today, before this House adjourns at 5:00 o'clock being a 

Wednesday, that you will bring forward to this Legislature, legislation which will be passed I can assure you 

very quickly as far as this caucus is concerned to resolve this dispute today? 

 

MR. SNYDER: — I can't propose to give the member that kind of assurance because there are other areas 

that may be explored. It may not be necessary to introduce legislation. There are other options which may be 

explored prior to the introduction of legislation to bring the work stoppage to a conclusion. 

 

MR. MALONE: — The minister indicated there are other options to be explored. You told us earlier you 

are either going to legislate or do nothing. I would like to know what these other options are and finally how 

long you are going to wait before such time as these other options are pursued? 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that at this present moment, on the floor below us 

in this Legislative Chamber, discussions are currently taking place. I have some expectation that we will 

reach a resolution to the problem . . . well, all right I grant you that negotiations have been going on for 

something in excess of 24 hours. And there has not been a moment wasted to my knowledge and every effort 

has been made and no stone has been left unturned. I think the member will have to place himself in our 

hands for the present moment until those negotiations either are concluded successfully or else they break 

down. I am confident that there will be a conclusion before too long. Twenty-four hours is a considerable 

length of time but I am still conscious of the fact that there is a very genuine concerted effort being made on 

the part of all parties involved to reach an amiable solution. 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Minister, in light of the comments that you have just 

made which, in effect, appear to be a betrayal of what you have told to the dairy producers, would the 

minister give the dairy producers, who are outside this Assembly right now, one reason since they are now 

going to be forced to dump their bulk tanks down the sewer, could he give them one reason why they 

shouldn't back their bulk tanks up to the stairs of this Legislature and dump it right here? 

 

Education Act 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Education in relation to the topic 

that was raised earlier today by the member for Nipawin. Could the minister please indicate the extent of the 

cost of the advertising program that he has lately taken on with the ads in the daily newspapers. It is going to 

appear in the Western Producer as well and the likes. How long? 

 

MR. FARIS: — I don't know the exact cost but if the hon. member will put the question on the order paper I 

will be pleased to answer it. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that the party 

with which he has the greatest dispute at the present time is with the Trustees' Association and an action such 

as this would probably only add fuel to the fire and therefore decrease any further chance of settlement? 

 

MR. FARIS: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think that giving people the facts of a situation adds fuel to the fire. I 

may say that I heard Mr. Swan on the radio this morning and under questioning and so on he showed the 

positions they previously took. For instance, in 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1372 

regard to the words 'teach' and 'instruct', they are far more flexible than could have been thought of before. 

We are quite willing to and, in fact, intend and are in a process of setting up further meetings, both with 

trustees and teachers, in regard to matters they may have concerns of and those meetings will be held. 

 

CPN Accounts 

 

MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — A question to the Attorney General. In this Assembly on January 6 of this year 

under questioning from myself, you answered with the phrase on page 14-15 with regard to the payment by 

CPN to Sask Tel for the use of the hardware. You state that if Sask Tel provides equipment to a customer, a 

customer being CPN or Conventional Cable, it charges that customer for the provision of that hardware. Has 

in fact, Sask Tel submitted accounts to CPN for the use of the hardware since CPN commenced 

broadcasting, and if so has CPN been making its requested payments within 30 days? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I will have to take notice of that question. I don't know. I don't know if 

Sask Tel has been submitting bills to the Conventional Cable companies for that matter or to CPN. This is in 

effect, a trial test period for all the carriers. 

 

I will take notice. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu'Ap): — A supplementary. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Final. 

 

MR. LANE: — Would the Attorney General not admit that in fact, CPN has not been billing its customers 

for the last two months, and if payments have been made to Sask Tel that it is drawing down the guarantee 

and is in fact being subsidized, or if it is not making its payments to Sask Tel, that this is a further subsidy of 

the government cable operation, CPN, by the government of Saskatchewan, and in fact the cost to the 

taxpayers of this province is going to be considerably greater than any $2.6 million loan guarantee, that in 

fact, Sask Tel or CPN is being heavily subsidized by the government of Saskatchewan with probably very 

little hope of ever recouping the money? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the hon. members opposite and the media of this 

province would want to see CPN fail, but I don't think that we ought to be bound by the words of the 

member today that that indeed will be the case. 

 

The fact of the matter is that Sask Tel may not be charging — I don't know — either the CPN operation or 

the Conventional Cable operation while both are equally lit up. If that is the case as I suspect it to be, 

although I am not sure, one could argue that there is a subsidy given to the private cable licensees such as the 

ones that exist in Moose Jaw or in Saskatoon or that exist here in Regina. I don't know. We have to find out 

the facts. But the fact of the matter is that I could see that happening during a start-up period whereby Sask 

Tel, as a matter of good business practice, would do this and would hope to recapture the cost over the long 

run with subsequent adjustments. 

 

I will take notice to find out what the situation is. 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — For the Minister in charge of Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance. I would like to direct a question to the Attorney 



 

April 12, 1978 1373 

 

1373 

 

General. 

 

Yesterday, the government announced a special advertising campaign to encourage motorists to renew their 

licences early in April. In this advertising campaign, will the citizens of the province be told that if they 

renew in April, they will not receive the five per cent reduction and if they wait until after May they would 

get five per cent reduced from their licence fee? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I will take notice. 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Without all the 

information in this advertising campaign, would the Attorney General consider that this ad would be 

misleading, and in fact, false advertising? Would the Attorney General consider, at this time, that the 

government would announce a five per cent rebate on all licences purchased for use during 1978? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how I can answer that supplementary since it is predicated 

on the first question, on which I said I would take notice and acquaint myself. So I take notice on the second 

question. 

 

Sask Tel Cable Policy 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I would address my question to the Premier, since the Attorney General has just given 

the answer. The Attorney General just a few minutes ago, before the Premier entered the Chamber, 

announced that it was good business practice by Sask Tel, to allow or have a period during the start up of 

CPN or Cable Regina, or whatever, during that start up period of time, to allow them perhaps now not to 

have to be charged for their accounts, or not to bill them that they could get free service. My question to the 

Premier, is that an announcement of a new policy by the government of Saskatchewan with reference to Sask 

Tel, that they would allow new start up organizations to get free telephone service for a period of time until 

they are on their feet? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I will allow the Attorney General to speak for the 

government. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I think that I need not make a big issue out of what I 

believe is a purposeful and deliberate misinterpretation of the words that I said. I think those are clear for the 

record and goes for I simply said, with respect to the cable and closed circuit operation, the situation is that 

we are involved here with a test period where the technology is being tested, where there has to be approvals 

taken by the CRTC and the Department of Communications. This may or may not be the basis of the 

question the hon. member for Qu'Appelle asks. I don't know. I said I will take notice. But for the leader of 

the Conservative Party to misrepresent what I said, surely is unbecoming of him. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — To the Attorney General then. Since he suggests that it would be all right for Sask Tel 

— which he did — it would be all right for Sask Tel to forego its billings and forego its receipt of payments 

while the technology is being tested, even though the technology is there in Alberta, or British Columbia, or 

Ontario, wherever — would the Attorney General then agree that he is announcing a new policy for the 

government of Saskatchewan, that Sask Tel will be able to allow any organization that is developing new 

technology such as the transmission of computer technology over telephone lines 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1374 

which are billed from Day 1 in the province of Saskatchewan. Would he now be saying that the computer 

companies in Saskatchewan would get free telephone transmission of that computer technology while the 

technology is being developed? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again I am awfully tempted to categorize the question as being one 

which is totally ridiculous but I do not want to do that for fear that it will further inflame the hon. member 

for Nipawin. Let me simply say, Mr. Speaker, two points. 

 

First of all, with respect to cable hardware, the Canadian Radio Television Commission needs to have a 

certification or a proof of the calibre of the quality of the technology with respect to the signal. This is 

regardless of the fact of whether there has been cable operating in Ontario or Alberta for years or not. There 

is a period, accordingly, where there is the transmission of the signal, whereby there may be no charge for 

that signal asked by Sask Tel. I do not know if that is the situation or not. I repeat that again. I have to get the 

information and acquaint myself and advise the House. That is point number one. 

 

Point number two, we do know the situation with respect to technology on CPN. The member says it is 

available and yet members opposite (the Liberal Party), point out that the converter filter is something which 

is new and that the technology is not available. That of course, indeed, is the situation. That is the best 

answer I can give today. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of 

Sask Tel. The Premier, no doubt, will be aware that the three cable companies in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon and 

Regina all intend to commence litigation against Sask Tel over CPN. They indicate that proceedings to seek 

injunctions against Sask Tel will probably be launched within the next 24 hours. The matter is imminent and 

serious. I ask the Premier what the intention of Sask Tel or the intention of the government will be in terms 

of dealing with this matter when litigation is commenced? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, this question or a similar one was asked yesterday and I believe my 

answer yesterday was the same as it will be today. 

 

Number one, we hope that no litigation takes place for the reasons that I have articulated in and outside the 

House. I believe that good business practice would indicate, as far as all the parties are concerned, that some 

sort of accommodation should be arrived at without the necessity of going to court. If, however, one of the 

parties (or all of the parties) decides to pursue this matter in court, that decision is something which is 

beyond the control of the government or beyond the control of Sask Tel. If indeed that should take place, 

Sask Tel will be guided by legal counsel and take the appropriate action that legal counsel advises it to take 

and Sask Tel, in its best corporate interests, thinks it should take. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A supplementary question, Mr. Attorney General. Is it true that Sask Tel has advised 

the licensees of CRTC (Canadian Radio and Television Commission), that if they take legal action and seek 

an injunction from the courts to prevent what is going on to continue, Sask Tel intends to take them right off 

the air. Have you or has Sask Tel threatened the licencees in this way? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I have not been in communication with any of the licencees, apart from 

a solicitor for one of the licencees a short while ago and personally I have not made such communication to 

any of the licencees. So far as I 



 

April 12, 1978 1375 

 

1375 

 

know the hon. Minister in charge of Sask Tel hasn't either although I cannot vouch for him. I do not know 

the up-to-date conversations that Sask Tel has had with the licencees but I would be I think fairly safe in 

saying that no such statement has been made to licencees by any responsible official at Sask Tel. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Final supplementary. The minister indicates that he, as the head of the 

Communications Secretariat, has not been in touch with the cable operators and doubts that the minister has 

been in touch with the cable operators. What steps are being taken to stop them from commencing litigation 

when all three say that within this next 24 hours they will be seeking an injunction against the government 

through Sask Tel? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that officials at Sask Tel have endeavored to, not 

recently, perhaps recently, I can't vouch for it exactly today because I have been otherwise preoccupied but I 

can say that as of Friday of last week Sask Tel has contacted the various companies asking whether or not 

some sort of an understanding or accommodation could be arrived at for such period as the converters and 

filters are in fact prepared. That's part of the step, I think, that the member asks is being taken to try and 

avoid litigation in this area. So far it appears that there has been no success in this situation. I repeat again as 

I take my place, Mr. Speaker, that Sask Tel is in the position of a common carrier. It has the duty, I won't put 

it that high, at least it's in business to provide services to customers and we have here two customers; one is 

CPN which is an independent customer and also the conventional cable company which also is independent. 

Sask Tel is trying to do its best to accommodate that which may be the competing and conflicting interests of 

both. I think these are very difficult things to do. It's trying its best attempt under its corporate obligations 

and I think that all we can do is just see how that develops. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

Answer to question on Loan 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Last week I took note as to a question raised by the hon. 

member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher). He raised a question with regard to a $21 million loan from the 

Chemical bank. Mr. Speaker, the $21 million is part of the $44 million loan of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation outstanding with the Chemical bank. Let me briefly explain the terms of the loan that is in 

operation. The rate of interest is established for six months at a time of each draw down of the line credit. At 

the end of the six month period a new rate of interest is determined for the next six month period. The hon. 

member referred to $21 million that matured on April 4. That is not correct. April 4 was the expiry date of 

the six month interest period and it was necessary to establish a new rate of interest. It was not the expiry 

date of the loan. Saskatchewan Power has the option of repaying the loan at the end of any interest period 

during the term of the loan. The loan was not repaid on April 4, because the line of credit is an interim 

financing. It will be paid off when permanent financing is arranged. Permanent financing will be arranged in 

US dollars so that any exchange risk will be spread over a 30-year period. Again it is important to emphasize 

that it is cheaper to borrow in the US market because of lower interest rates and the difference between 

Canadian and US interest rate provides sufficient protection against likely long-term movements in the 

exchange rate. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question. Mr. Minister since you have indicated that Sask Tel did 

have the option of either rolling the loan over or paying it off, would the 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1376 

minister tell this Assembly today, why, in view of the predictions for a drastically dropping Canadian dollar, 

going down possibly as low as 80 cents, of course, we hope this is wrong, why the Department of Finance 

did not seriously consider this option? Particularly when the minister mentioned that he could spread this 

loan over 30 years. Would the minister also tell us exactly what the changes would be since the minister 

knows full well the interest rate changes, the entire ball game changes when you change from short-term to 

long-term financing. So when the minister makes reference to this long-term financing to avoid this 

discrepancy, what changes are they throwing at you, what are they telling you as far as the new interest in 

terms of collateral, etc.? The minister knows full well it is a new ball game, would you tell us what this game 

is? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know whose predictions the hon. member is looking at. Certainly 

we are aware of the exchange rate difference but, Mr. Speaker, on a long-term basis, in fact, I just had an 

opportunity to have a lengthy meeting with the president and chairman of the Investment Dealers 

Association of Canada who are people who have some idea about borrowing and about exchange rates. We 

are confident that borrowing in the US market over a long-term period that the Canadian dollar will 

strengthen over a period of time and the Canadian dollar will be at par or better during that long-term period. 

When you consider that at the present time the interest rate is about three-quarter per cent difference that it is 

still to our advantage to borrow in the US market on a long-term basis. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

CCIL Loan 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce an agreement 

has been reached with the federal government and the governments of Manitoba and Alberta to advance $15 

million in guaranteed loans to Canadian Co-operative Implements Limited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agreement will mean that Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta will guarantee loans of 

$2,625,000, $2,800,000 and $1,575,000 respectively. The remaining $8 million is in the form of an interest 

free federal contribution, recoverable over 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is gratifying to our government to have the other governments join us in supporting this 

important co-operative during a difficult short term financial crisis. With over 50 per cent of CCIL sales and 

approximately one half of its 90,000 members in this province, our government was and is concerned that 

the operation remain financially viable. 

 

The government guarantees are in addition to funds which major co-operative centrals, already significant 

investors in Co-op Implements, will also be making. With the infusion of new capital and provision of 

longer term credit, CCIL will be able to protect the investments of its members and continue to serve them 

through its distributional system. In addition, up to 3,000 jobs at the factory in the distributional system and 

its spin off effects across the West will be protected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, let me first say that I am very pleased to hear that CCIL's financial 

difficulties are temporarily at an end. However, Mr. Speaker, we would like to 



 

April 12, 1978 1377 

 

1377 

 

have emphasized to the minister prior to the granting of this line of credit, that because 50 per cent of the 

sales are in the province of Saskatchewan and because we are in the centre of western Canada, that the 

government of Saskatchewan should have taken the opportunity at this time to insist that the CCIL plants be 

located in the province of Saskatchewan so that the jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan citizens from 

that very worthwhile organization could be introduced to us here. 

 

We think that it is too bad, Mr. Speaker, that the government of Saskatchewan did not emphasize this point 

with the other governments of Canada and did not emphasize that because 50 per cent of the jobs are here, 

that we should have had the plant here in the province of Saskatchewan to create new jobs. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Cable Television 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I 

would like to move pursuant to Rule 17, seconded by Mr. Merchant (Regina Wascana): 

 

That priority of debate be given to the urgent and compelling need for this Assembly to 

discuss the decision of the government controlled Crown corporation, Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications, to refuse the duly licenced cable television operators, Cable Regina, 

Saskatoon TeleCable and Prairie Coax, the exclusive access and use as of 12 noon, April 7, 

1978, of channel 3 Regina, channel 3 Saskatoon and channel 9 Moose Jaw respectively, 

thereby breaching the written agreement between Saskatchewan Telecommunications and the 

said cable television licensees and as a result placing the said cable television licensees in 

jeopardy of being prosecuted pursuant to section 29 of the Broadcasting Act of Canada and 

being liable to the payment of a fine of $25,000 each. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — A notice regarding this matter proposed for priority of debate was received in the 

Clerk's office at 8:30 a.m., for which I thank the hon. member. The matter of the continuing dispute between 

Sask Tel and cable television operators was proposed for priority of debate three days ago on Monday, April 

10, 1978. At that time I ruled that the matter was not of sufficient urgency and public importance to set aside 

the normal business of the Assembly. This matter is still not of sufficient urgency and public importance to 

merit a priority of debate under Rule 17. If members wish to debate this matter, they may do so under Rule 

38 with proper notice. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if, on a point of order, I could point out to you that the priority of 

debate I presented to you today deals with a matter of prosecutions and fines of $25,000. It is not . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I am quite aware of that. I read it in the member's presentation. I think my 

statement covers the situation. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Second Readings 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. D.L. 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1378 

Faris (Minister of Education) that Bill No. 22 — An Act respecting Elementary and Secondary 

Education in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate 

if I addressed a few remarks to this particular debate, debate on an act respecting elementary and secondary 

education in Saskatchewan, Bill 22, since I was the minister who started the process leading to this 

legislation. 

 

As we debate Bill 22 in this Assembly, I think it's important to remember the larger context in which this 

particular act fits. I am sure all members are aware of the constitutional framework of education in Canada. 

The British North American Act delegated education entirely to the provinces and each provincial 

government, without exception, used the provincial responsibility of education as an important constitutional 

right and responsibility. In all of the provinces, therefore, in keeping with our parliamentary democracy, the 

Lieutenant-Governor in Council has delegated the responsibility of education to one of its minister, the 

Minister of Education. That minister, of course, is provided with a departmental staff to assist him in making 

provision for education throughout the province. Because of that system the member of the Cabinet, the 

Minister of Education, is ultimately therefore held responsible for what does or does not happen in education 

in any province in our country. He is put in place by the electors and he may well be removed by the electors. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the public has also throughout the years felt that it has as much as possible the 

educational decisions and the control of education should be at the local level, as close as possible to the 

parents. 

 

Therefore, by design and also by mutual agreement, the Minister and his department have delegated as many 

decisions as possible in education to that local level. So school boards were established with fiscal 

responsibility for educational decisions within their geographical area. Now, who should pay for this 

education? Well, again by mutual consent, the system was designed so that those who used the system paid 

for it, and so the property tax was born. 

 

Now, statutes evolved over the years to meet the current needs of education. School law in Saskatchewan 

evolved, therefore, over the 75 years, but with the School Act of 1905 remaining the basic act and other 

statutes added as the requirement arose. So by 1975, 17 statutes dealing with education were, in fact, in 

place. The acts were each adopted when specific needs arose which made them necessary - acts which 

provided for the larger school units, provided for collective bargaining, provided for education for the blind, 

education for the deaf, vocational education, teacher training, teacher tenure, free textbooks and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the early stages of our province's history, the department and school boards found 

themselves each suited to a different role in education. The school boards accepted the major responsibility 

for fund raising, as the tax dollars collected from local property taxes were the source of funds for the local 

school. But at that time instructional resources were scarce and the provincial Department of Education was 

best able to set curricula, to set educational standards, to prepare instructional resources. School boards have 

always assumed the responsibility of employing teachers and still do so, and the training of teachers has 

always been a provincial responsibility. 

 

But 75 years, Mr. Speaker, brought changes to the way we live. New modes of 



 

April 12, 1978 1379 

 

1379 

 

transportation, telephones, rural electrification, those farm lights and those small town lights, the new 

technologies have revolutionalized all walks of life. 

 

The changes over the years have been reflected in educational legislation, therefore, through the additions of 

the new acts to that basic School Act of 1905. And what became clear as we entered the last half of the 

1970s, however, was that a drastic change had emerged with respect to the roles of the province and with 

respect to the roles of the school boards. 

 

Now, this government made a commitment in 1971 when it came into office to reduce the percentage of 

school costs raised through the property tax and to increase the amount raised through income tax, or taxes 

based on ability to pay. The Foundation Grants Formula was introduced removing the pupil-teacher ratio 

formula and providing grants on a more equitable basis. The Property Improvement Grant Program was 

introduced, which with the 1978 Budget has been raised to 25 mills of assessment, 25 mills of property tax 

that is rebated to the property owner. The money for schools is taken out of the general revenues at the 

provincial level, which means that the burdens of school costs have been shifted from the property owner to 

the income taxpayer, or to the taxpayer with ability to pay. That is right and that is just. 

 

So, this year the province will be contributing 58 per cent of the direct cost of education to the Foundation 

Grants Formula and another nearly 20 per cent through the Property Improvement Grant. In other words, the 

province picking up through direct and indirect grants almost 75 per cent of the cost of education. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at the same time there has been a steady evolution, since the late 1950s, to more and more 

independence in curriculum at the local level and less and less domination by the Department of Education. 

Comprehensive schools were built. Superintendents moved from being provincially employed to being 

locally employed. Departmental final examinations were phased out for the earlier high school grades. 

Individual teachers became accredited to develop their own programs. Curriculum offerings were tailored to 

meet the local circumstances and the available facilities. Most important, since the start of the 1950s, the 

historical rules of the Department of Education and the school boards of education have been reversed. 

Where the school board, in early days, was primarily responsible for finances and the department handled the 

curriculum, by the mid 1970s, school boards were making most of the program decisions and the provincial 

Department of Education was carrying the main burden of providing the money. 

 

The greater flexibility in school programming that emerged better facilities the possibility of transportation 

to programs if necessary and highly specialized teachers had also brought some questions of to just what was 

the most important job of our schools in this province. 

 

By the mid 1970s there was some very real questioning as to whether the job of the schools should be 

teaching basics, if we could agree on what those were, or whether the job of the schools should be preparing 

the student for a job or whether the job of the school should be preparing the student for life in a more 

general way through skills and through the use of television and modern technology. 

 

The legislation governing school operation in Saskatchewan did not seem to help us very much with those 

questions. After all, it had its basis in 1905. The legislation did not even, very adequately, reflect the change 

in rules, the department handling the money 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1380 

raising and the school boards deciding the programs which had occurred. 

 

So the time had come said the trustees for the parents and the students and the administrators, to take a look 

at the school law. There were by now 17 statutes. They were a confusing maze to the layman, at times a 

confusing maze to the experts. They overlapped and they tended to keep people away from involvement and 

education rather than encouraging it. But to what purpose would we change the statutes? No one was sure 

because no one was very sure exactly what kind of an educational system the people wanted for themselves 

in the 1970s and the 1980s if they were given a choice. So the only thing to do, Mr. Speaker, was to ask 

them. Do we want schools to lead society or do we want society to lead the schools? What is most important 

that a student obtain during his years in school? 

 

So the regional conferences on education were held in 1973 asking those questions to all regional 

conferences in which 200 to 300 interested people came for a day to each conference to discuss just what 

they saw the role of the school to be, the role of the teacher, the role of school boards, and the role of parents. 

Each regional conference was followed in local areas by other conferences called mini-conferences and 

several hundred conferences gave more people, than probably ever before, an opportunity to make 

themselves heard as to the proper system for education in the day. Those conferences, known as issues and 

choices, yield a summary of opinion across the province. 

 

While there was naturally disagreement on a number of issues, some general conclusions could be drawn. In 

general, Mr. Speaker, the conferences told us that the schools in Saskatchewan were doing a pretty good job. 

There were some small problems, many small needs, lots of people problems, but when it came down to a 

choice, people were pretty much satisfied with the job that our school boards, our teachers, our 

administrators and our department doing. 

 

What were those small problems and small concerns? Throughout the conferences there was a greater call 

for openness within the system. Conferences said, teachers please talk to parents; parents please talk to 

school boards; parents please talk to teachers; school boards please talk to the department; and for goodness 

sakes, somebody please talk to the students. When tough choices have to be made, discuss the alternatives 

openly with those affected, for the stakes for everyone are too high in education for misunderstandings and 

for lack of communication. 

 

The issue of the teacher as a professional and as an individual in the community was in the minds of 

conference participants. They expressed the concern over dismissal and tenure; they said local people want 

more to say as to who is hired and how the criteria should be established to hire them. But most important, 

people wanted to know that the teacher was a person who could first of all teach or instruct children as well 

as subjects. 

 

Finally there was a call for schools to remain local. Centralized programs were regarded as an expensive 

luxury that participants were willing to trade off for simpler programs that could be offered in the local home 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those conferences also left questions. There was a demand for an accommodation of individual 

differences, yet there was a demand for a standard core curriculum with rigorous drill in the skill subjects. 

 

There was a call for maximum local decision-making, but there was also a call for the 



 

April 12, 1978 1381 

 

1381 

 

Department of Education to impose firm standards on the quality of the school's program and the quality of 

the teaching. 

 

There was a call for parental involvement, but a resistance to a structured or a mandatory form of 

involvement. 

 

There was a demand for financial support from the provincial government, but an accompanying demand 

that the local community could override considerations of efficiency in stipulating where the elementary 

education program, at least, should be offered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those guidelines, the Minister of Education of the day appointed a School Law Review 

Committee to look at the existing 17 statutes to see how they could be rewritten, to see how they could be 

consolidated, to see how they could be dated to match the concerns expressed in those conferences. 

 

The Committee was chaired by Clarence Amundrud, a long-time and highly respected former minister of the 

Department of Education. Among its members were leaders in the educational field in this province, Dr. 

John Egnatoff of Saskatoon; Dr. Fred J. Gathercole of Saskatoon; Dr. Stirling MacDowell; Mrs. L. Coleman 

and Mr. Lyle Bergstrom, former Deputy Minister of Education, who acted as general secretary for the 

Committee. 

 

Now, this minister's Committee on school law reported in January of 1976, with a remarkably thorough and 

far-sighted review of the existing legislation and that committee provided recommendations for a new act to 

meet current needs in education in Saskatchewan. The committee recognized that each participant in the 

educational process has a particular role. Each has responsibilities, each has rights. They suggest an act 

organized around these roles and around these rights and around these responsibilities. The act, they said, 

should include: provincial administration, local government administration, pupils, programs and services, 

teachers, and finance. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us take first of all a look at provincial administration. Under existing school 

law, the law that is now in effect today the emphasis is on control and management by the Minister of 

Education and his department. Most people in this province and I suspect most people in this Assembly 

would be surprised to learn that in present school law, a carryover from 1905 if a board wants to modify a 

course, a school board wants to modify a course or a program, they are required to have the approval of the 

Minister of Education. There are frequent references in the present act to 'with the approval of the minister', 

'subject to the minister'. Now, let's be realistic. Many of those controlled mechanisms are no longer in use. 

Insofar as is possible without jeopardizing the minister's duty under the constitution, really powers have been 

delegated to school boards. But that in fact, is in practice, the practice as it has evolved over the years but it 

does not read that way in the existing school law. 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1382 

 

Now the new Education Act, Bill 22, shifts the emphasis away from control and management on the part of 

the minister, and turns his role into one of guidance and one of leadership. In this act the minister has 

responsibility to set goals and objectives, to provide a goal, to provide a direction for education in 

Saskatchewan. The minister's functions as set out in the new act, give him the function of leading education. 

It removes the dictatorial control and management aspects of the old legislation, the existing legislation. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, makes sense — for it fits with the shift of goals which has gradually taken place over the 

years, where the main decisions concerning programs are, in fact, being taken at the local level. And Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it fits with the modern view of democracy, where the function of the provincially elected 

minister is to provide leadership. If ever there was a role for leadership required, it is in the field of education 

today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

You have a situation where you have strong organizations that are doing a good job — the trustees, the 

teachers. But the people look to the elected provincial official for leadership; they look to him to keep the 

balance that will reflect the wishes of the public, and allow the schools to get on with the business of 

educating their children. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new act also provides for a more up-to-date view of school boards and their 

function. Part and parcel of the lessening of direct control management on the part of the minister, has been 

the growing independence on the part of the school boards — both with respect to educational programs but 

also with respect to fiscal decisions. Everyone in this House has long supported the growth of local control 

and the lessening of central control, and it has become a fact of life — no one will deny that. But, if you are 

looking for support in principle, in the present law, you are not going to find it. It is interesting to note that 

when you take a look at existing legislation, the only reference to the powers of the boards is that the boards 

are required to provide instruction to pupils who have a right to attend schools, subject, of course, to the 

regulations as laid down by the department. 

 

One of the concerns that has been continually voiced by trustees at conferences and meetings and hearings, 

was that the present legislation did not spell out the role of the board. So the new legislation enshrines in 

law, the present practice of boards making decisions concerning the programs that they shall offer, the level 

of programs, with no intervention by the minister. Where the existing legislation sets out limited and 

prescribed powers for boards, the new legislation widens the definition of specific powers and expands the 

discretionary powers of school boards. Notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provisions governing the powers of 

the boards in the new act. 'Boards,' the new act says, 'may administer and manage the educational affairs of 

the school division in accordance with the intention of this law.' So long, therefore, as boards operate within 

the intent of the law of this act, they administer and manage the affairs of the division. The residual day-to-

day control therefore has been transferred in the new law, in keeping with present practice, from the Minister 

of Education to school boards. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the discussion concerning the role of teachers is similarly updated in the new act, 

from the present legislation. Existing law spells out 18 duties of 



 

April 12, 1978 1383 

 

1383 

 

a teacher — and that made sense back there in 1905 — but increased opportunities for training teachers has 

resulted in a shift in emphasis from directing a teacher as to exactly what he must do each day, to making 

him understand his function — understand his function as a person responsible within the classroom for 

setting the quality of learning. The decisions with respect to the how, the best means of achieving learning in 

a practical situation are increasingly left up to the teacher and this is not new. It's not innovative so far as the 

fact is concerned. It is only a reflection of the way things currently are. It is enshrining in fact into legislation 

the current practice. This new bill, therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sets to outline the function of the teacher 

leaving the decision as to how it is taught, the how of the learning up to that teacher. 

 

So there is the minister and there is the department and there are school boards and there are teachers, but 

what about the two other main participants in the educational process, the students and the parents. I guess 

that's what schools are all about. No one would deny the importance of students and parents in the 

educational spectrum. Indeed, so much of the discussion in education the last 10 years has, in fact, centered 

around the roles and the rights and the responsibilities of these two groups. And over the last 10 years 

parents have been telling us that the increasing school size, the larger school systems in the cities, the larger 

units out in the country, the specialized programs, make them feel that they have little input or control when 

it comes to their children's education. The students question to what extent they should be required to take 

certain subjects and why they should not be allowed maximum choice in the school program. Both question 

the amount of influence that they can have in determining what goes on in the schools. It is hard to believe, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but under existing school law the only rights that parents are guaranteed is the right to 

vote in elections and the right to attend annual meetings. I don't think there is any parent in Saskatchewan 

who would accept today that those are the only rights they had with respect to their children's education. 

 

With respect to students, the present legislation provides no rights either except to say that no teacher or 

trustee or superintendent could interfere with a student's right to attend school. I know of few students who 

would be prepared to accept that those rights were the only rights he had in the school system. 

 

So this new law provides rights for both students and parents. Parents are specifically provided by legislation 

with the right to become involved with a problem that their child may be having in the school. This extends 

from the right of access to information, to the right to become involved in where a child is being expelled, 

the right of parents to review suspensions within one year if they are carried out, the right of parents to 

become involved in what they feel are the special needs of their child in the school. And these aren't new 

things. Everyone knows that. That practice is already present. The point is that this legislation ensures the 

parents the rights that they already enjoy and assures them of those rights in law. 

 

But the bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also spells out the rights of students. They are entitled to programs that suit 

their needs. They are entitled to procedures for investigation of a problem in a school. They are assured the 

right of mediation through the parents, if desired, for school problems and they are assured the right of 

review in case of when they are expelled. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in both cases, parents and students are ensured that they do have rights of access to 

information and mediation if there are problems in the school. But, most important, both are encouraged to 

become part of the solution rather than part of 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1384 

the problem, for emphasis is put on diagnosis and resolution of problems rather than some unilateral 

decisions in the case of problems which usually hurt and seldom help understanding and future learning for 

the child. 

 

But those parents and students have responsibilities as well and this is what we expect it to be. The present 

act, the existing law is silent with respect to both. There is no clear agreement in society as to what 

constitutes the responsibility of a parent concerning the school system. Most would agree that parents should 

co-operate, that they should participate in the partnership of learning between the home and the school which 

is their child's environment but there is resistance to formalize this in any way. The provisions with respect 

to parental involvement remain permissive. All the rights specifically included in the new act, the right to 

information, the right to assistance solving a problem at the school concerning their child, carry with them 

implicit responsibilities. 

 

The opportunities for parental involvement in the schools through formal organization are simplified. Mr. 

Speaker, where before there was a complex mix of local boards and central boards, this new bill envisions a 

local board for each school. All parents would have the right to participate in electing this board, who would 

advise the larger boards on matters concerning their individual school. This is the essence of the present 

situation in places where local boards are functioning well. It, therefore, merely provides for the participation 

of all those who are interested and ensures that there is a local forum where parents can, in fact, take 

concerns related to the school. 

 

With respect to students, the responsibilities are set out in the new legislation in keeping with current 

thinking. Few teachers would deny that they expect certain things of students. The act merely sets out their 

responsibilities for all to see so that the whole process can be made more open. Students are required to 

attend school, to observe school board standards, to be diligent and to conform to the rules of the school. The 

act states that students will be accountable to their teacher and to their principal and to their school bus 

driver when they are under his supervision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me review. The role of the minister and the department is shifted from control and 

management to guidance and leadership. The role of the school board — a shift from limited prescribed 

powers to wide powers and more discretionary leeway. Teachers — a shift in emphasis from specific duties 

to a function and the responsibility for the learning process in the classroom with the teacher making the 

decisions as to the best methods. For students and parents — their rights spelled out for the first time in law 

. . . 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I don't like to interrupt the minister's speech and I apologize to him but I 

do intend on making right now, Mr. Speaker, as I am entitled to do, I believe, pursuant to Rule 39, a motion 

in case of urgent and pressing necessity. The motion, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

That this Assembly request the government to forthwith introduce a bill to end the milk 

strike. 

 

I would like the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to speak to the motion as it is a matter or urgent and pressing 

necessity. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It is out of order. I will take the member for Touchwood. 



 

April 12, 1978 1385 

 

1385 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, I didn't hear you. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I said the member is out of order. Order! . . . The member wants to know why? Rule 

41. 

 

When a question is under debate no motion shall be received unless to amend it, to postpone 

it to a day certain, for the previous question or reading the orders of the day, for proceeding 

to another order, to adjourn the debate or for the adjournment of the Assembly. 

 

MR. MALONE: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What is your point of order? 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The member is out of order because he didn't have the floor. So therefore he 

cannot move the motion. Order! The member rose on a point of order. 

 

The interrupted debate continues on Bill 22. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, let me review. Let me once again review before I was interrupted by 

the hon. member and the Leader of the Liberal Party. Let me review the role of the minister in the 

department, the shift from control and management to guidance and leadership. The role of the school board, 

the shift from limited and prescribed powers to much wider powers with more discretionary leeway. For 

teachers — a shift in emphasis from specific duties to a function, a responsibility for the learning process in 

the classroom with the teacher making the decisions as to the best methods. Students and parents, their rights 

spelled out for the first time in legislation. Parents providing responsibilities for contact with the school for 

co-operation but remaining permissive, and students' responsibilities spelled out. 

 

In all cases, Mr. Speaker, there is a much clearer definition of rules that exist in current legislation and in all 

cases, the rights and responsibilities are aligned with the current thought, so there is nothing new in the 

legislation so far. It is merely a re-ordering of present provisions with an inclusion of current practices in a 

more simplified version. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that brings us to some of the advantages in the new bill. This new bill is infinitely 

simpler than the maze of 17 statutes now governing school operation in Saskatchewan. How many, I ask, 

Mr. Speaker, how many in this Assembly have ever opened the covers of each of those 17 acts, let alone 

understand all of them, or know where to find a particular provision if he needed it? I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, not many. 

 

If education is to be an open process; if education works best in an environment where each participant feels 

he understands the process, and has access to another participant; if the school is to be brought back to the 

community and if parents are to be brought back into the system, then we all need to know where we stand, 

we all need to understand where we stand and we all need to understand the same ground rules. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that this bill makes that possible. 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1386 

In the existing law no one is ever sure of the rights of the other party, so what are the results? The results are 

that parents or students will often back off from a problem or dispute rather than risk a more drastic action 

which they simply cannot anticipate. As far as this bill is concerned, Mr. Speaker, it is written for the 

layman. It is compact; it is all in one place; it sets out as clearly as it is possible to do at the present time, the 

current understandings of each participant's roles, each participant's rights, each participant's responsibility in 

the system. I think this bill will do a good deal to humanize the educational system, to open it and in the long 

run to improve it because everyone wants to use the act. Now they can use it and now, Mr. Speaker, they 

understand it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second big advantage of the new bill is that it does set out roles and it does set out rights 

and it does set out responsibilities in accordance with current thinking. We have been fortunate with 

education in Saskatchewan since 1905 — fortunate to have the benefit of responsible and mature ministers, 

of responsible and mature school boards, of teachers, of parents and of students, even though there was no 

assurance of this at all in existing law. 

 

The message I have been getting from so many groups in society who have been lobbying for changes in 

legislation is precisely that — that they have now no guarantee and no assurance in law and they must 

depend upon the other party to accommodate them. To update our legislation to bring it in line with current 

thinking and with current practice therefore, Mr. Speaker, only makes sense, especially in an area so 

important as education. To pass up the opportunity as some people suggest today — 1978, to pass up the 

opportunity to do so, Mr. Speaker, I say would be sheer folly indeed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the third big advantage of the proposed legislation over the present legislation is that it 

simplifies the organizational structure without taking anything away from current practice. The complicated 

mix of school districts — high school districts, consolidated school districts, separate school districts, units, 

boards, unit districts and union districts. It makes it extremely difficult to sort out which is which, with what 

powers and what responsibilities? 

 

Similarly, Mr. Speaker, at the advisory level, the confusion of local boards and central boards has 

discouraged, rather than encouraged, parents to participate in their local schools. 

 

This new legislation simplifies these terms into two levels of organization. There will be the school division 

governed by a school board which has fiscal responsibilities and program responsibilities for the schools in 

each division, but each individual school, Mr. Speaker, can have its own board of trustees to act in an 

advisory capacity concerning matters of interest in the individual schools. 

 

Two levels, Mr. Speaker, a structure everyone can understand and a structure that everyone can participate 

in. Well, now, Mr. Speaker, you begin to see the framework of this new bill, a new bill simplified in volume 

and in overlapping provisions, in finding in legislation what is already current thinking and what is already 

current practice in education, outlining the rights and responsibilities and the roles of each level of education, 

and simplifying the organization of the system so that all are encouraged to participate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some new provisions in this new bill, provisions which make Saskatchewan 

legislation a leader — in educational legislation in Canada, not only in crispness and not only in clarity, but 

in content as well. 



 

April 12, 1978 1387 

 

1387 

 

In no other provincial education bill in Canada is there any mention of providing special education for 

children handicapped in the opposite direction from normal. In no other legislation or provincial education 

bill in Canada is there special provision for special education for the gifted. There was provision in existing 

law, it is true, for education of the mentally and the physically handicapped. That provision is carried 

forward and is not different from provisions in other provinces, but boards in some jurisdictions have found 

that they have a number of particularly gifted children in their schools, for which they wish to make special 

provision. Existing legislation is silent on the matter and legislation in other provinces is silent on the matter, 

although we know that in Saskatchewan and in other provinces this kind of programming is already being 

done. Saskatchewan will have the first legislation in Canada which provides for legislative authority for 

school boards to make special arrangements for these gifted students if that school board decision, in its 

wisdom, decides to do so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the burdens of cost in education have shifted from the property taxpayers to taxation in 

relationship to ability to pay. That is a right and just shift. We are satisfied with that shift. Families who live 

in apartments send children to school the same as families who own their own homes, but families who live 

in apartments have as much to say in what goes on in the educational system and what goes on in the school 

as, in fact, families who own their own homes. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, it is only right that these people should have some say, the same say in education as do 

the property owners. Their increased contribution through income taxes to school costs should be reflected in 

equal say in the system. This bill, as you know Mr. Speaker, makes provision for the term elector, rather than 

the term taxpayer, an elector being anyone 18 years of age who is a Canadian citizen and who has resided in 

the division or the district for a period of at least six months. So this provision not only updates the act but it 

embodies, Mr. Speaker, a sound, progressive, democratic principle in our education system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a third aspect to this new bill, which is different from the past legislation and in 

fact, different from the past practice. There has been considerable debate about this particular aspect of the 

bill, and I refer to the provisions governing the right of appeal for teachers on dismissal. And what does the 

existing law say? The existing law says that a teacher, either a tenure or a non-tenure teacher, who is 

dismissed at the end of the school term (in other words, was given notice in the normal fashion prior to May 

25,) and dismissed for redundancy, may appeal to a board of reference, such board's decisions being final 

and binding on both parties.' Mr. Speaker, the existing law says that a teacher who is dismissed during the 

school year, let us say on Thanksgiving Day or at Christmas time or St. Valentine's Day or on Easter 

Monday, whether that teacher be tenure or non-tenure, has the right of appeal to a board of reference whose 

awards are final and binding on both parties. 

 

Under existing legislation, Mr. Speaker, a tenure teacher, who is a teacher who has passed through two years 

of probation with a school board, and who in fact has been placed on a tenured position by that board and 

has the right to permanent employment and is dismissed at the end of the school year can appeal to a board 

of conciliation. That board of conciliation can make only recommendations and cannot make final decisions 

that are binding on both parties. Is that right, I ask the hon. members? Is that right? Is that structure a good 

structure? 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1388 

Mr. Speaker, there are real problems with this policy, not only the obvious problem of inconsistency, but 

there is also the problem of the right of teachers and there is also, Mr. Speaker, the problem of keeping 

Saskatchewan legislation in pace with the rest of our country — keeping Saskatchewan in pace with British 

Columbia and Alberta and Manitoba and Ontario and so on. 

 

I make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that in this new law, the two year probationary period remains for the two year 

non-tenure period. It retains, Mr. Speaker, the board of reference for a tenure teacher's right of appeal for 

dismissal during the school year. But it also contains a provision which provides for a tenure teacher's right 

of appeal to a board of reference whose decisions will be final and binding when dismissal is provided at the 

end of the school term. So it continues the existing law with respect to dismissals during the school term — 

dismissals at Thanksgiving Day, at Christmas and Valentine's Day and Easter. But it provides for a board of 

reference on dismissal of tenure teachers, the decisions of the board of reference being final and binding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support this change because not only does it bring our legislation up-to-date with the other 

provinces, but I know and I say to the hon. members in this House, I have the experience to know, having 

served as a school unit board member for ten years. I dealt with teacher dismissals during those ten years 

using the existing law. I also, Mr. Speaker, served as Minister of Education and as such, dealt with hiring 

and dismissal of teachers at the School for the Deaf, and there are quite a few there. I dealt with hiring and 

dismissal of teachers at the three Saskatchewan technical institutes, the one in Saskatoon, the one in Moose 

Jaw and the one in Regina. Those teachers at the School for the Deaf and at those institutes have the right of 

appeal to a board of arbitration with the same powers that are provided in the new law under the board of 

reference. There is no question — from that experience there is no question that I know of. Boards have the 

responsibility and must have the responsibility to hire and if it is necessary, to dismiss, and this new law does 

not change that one iota. The hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley knows that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the binding awards issue will require an adjustment because it is 

different from the past, and it is different from the present practice. When I think about it and when I look at 

the experience that I have had, I'm not sure that the adjustment is as much required by the school board or by 

the trustees as it is going to be required in the work of the superintendent of schools and the principals of the 

schools. I want to make that clear and I want to say to all of the members of this House and the people of 

Saskatchewan that in my mind, if the superintendent and the principal are competent and are doing the job 

that they are hired to do, adjustment for the school board as it relates to boards of references in this new law 

will be very insignificant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new law brings us a long way — a long way since 1905. I have talked about how obsolete 

the law is and everybody knows that. I have talked about how the new law makes education open. It is open 

because anybody can read it who wants to read it, but most important, for the first time Saskatchewan 

educational law describes the rules and the rights and the responsibilities of each of the participants to reflect 

current practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Education for introducing this legislation, and I want too 

to congratulate, in this House, the member for Maple Creek who rose in this debate and made an honest 

speech. He made an honest speech and a good speech. He said the changes in the new bill are welcome — 

they provide more 



 

April 12, 1978 1389 

 

1389 

 

control to local authorities; the pupil rights and the parental rights have been enhanced and the obsolete 

legislation has been eliminated. He made a good speech; he made an honest speech; he has made an honest 

assessment. He has made an honest assessment because he understands the system. Not only does he 

understand the system but he has put his mind ... Mr. Speaker, the member for Maple Creek has put his mind 

to the legislation. He has put his mind to what the legislation is all about, contrary to the critic from the 

Conservative Party, and I will have something to say about the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head - Wolseley): — I would like to continue, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 22. 

Mr. Speaker . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The member has the floor. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, let me, let me . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What is the point of order? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The point of order is that the hon. minister sat down in his chair and I took his 

place on the floor. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I have not recognized any other member except the member that was speaking. I 

still recognize him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I want to congratulate the hon. member for Maple Creek (inaudible interjection.) 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that the hon. members opposite are so upset about this speech — 

I feel very sad for them, but I will have some comments for the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

I want to talk about the comments of the Conservative critic. The Conservative critic said the teachers and 

trustees should get together. Beautiful! Everybody says that and everybody agreed with that. They should get 

together, he said, and discuss . . . (inaudible interjection.) Amazing new approach! But he also said they 

should negotiate all matters concerning the terms of employment and the conditions of employment. Now 

that says to me we should throw the bill away and negotiate everything — and maybe that is extreme and 

maybe we should only throw half the bill away — and negotiate everything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my advice to every one in this Assembly who plans to speak in this debate on Bill 22, An Act 

respecting Elementary and Secondary Education in Saskatchewan, and everyone should speak, regardless of 

whether they have been a teacher for 20 years or a superintendent for 10, or a school trustee for 15 years, or a 

parent for whatever. My advice to all hon. members is that you are going to have to do some homework. You 

have to do some homework and then you have to do some thinking — now I know that is a problem for the 

hon. members opposite, except the hon. member for Maple Creek who did some thinking. I say to hon. 

members that homework means reading the existing school law — reading the existing school law from the 

beginning to the end — all 17 statutes, that mare's-nest of existing legislation. 

 

I ask all hon. members to read, to read the report of those conferences, issues and choices; and, Mr. Speaker, 

then read the White Paper on Education; then, Mr. Speaker, read the report of the School Law Review 

Committee. Now, Mr. Speaker, you noted the 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1390 

hon. members who are interested at all in education and the Education Act, will note that both don't flow — 

they don't follow in sequence — but in fact the work went on — existing law, conferences, school law 

review committee, White Paper — but I bring to the hon. members attention that they read the report of the 

School Law Review Committee before they sit down to read this bill. They will be amazed, they will be 

amazed how well this bill under debate compares with the recommendations of the Clarence Amundrud 

Committee. Then I say to all hon. members to read the bill — read the bill. Then what is really difficult for 

all hon. members, put their minds to what they have read — to what they have read. I say, Mr. Speaker, that 

this advice applies to anyone who assumes he should speak in this Legislative Assembly in this debate. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, to the members of this Assembly that what the hon. members have been reading letters, 

plus statements, and I say to all hon. members that that showed up yesterday — that showed up yesterday, 

particularly with respect to the hon. members opposite, on the steps of the Legislature. 

 

I want to say in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that I was proud of our Premier of Saskatchewan on the steps of 

the Legislature yesterday. I was proud of the Minister of Education on the steps of the Legislature yesterday. 

I was there listening. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I didn't see you. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — You were thinking about the bill, member for Maple Creek. 

 

Because they talked about the issues, the real issues as they are contained in this legislation and as they are 

contained in the change from the old legislation to the new legislation. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, that I was ashamed, I was ashamed of the member for Nipawin 

(Mr. Collver). I don't suppose I should have been because I really don't think he knows any better. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say this. I was amazed, I was amazed at the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 

MacDonald), whom I respected for a long time as an educator in this province. I have know of him, I have 

watched his work at Notre Dame College and I was pleased to sit opposite him in the Legislature, because I 

have respect for him. I questioned that respect yesterday. I say that that teacher from Notre Dame College 

should have known better in the statements he made to the gathering on the steps of the Legislature, 

yesterday afternoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened to what is going on with respect to this bill. There is a lot of talk about words. 

The hon. member, in making his honest assessment and in making his honest speech, the hon. member for 

Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka) talked about words. He talked about words in terms of needing some 

amendments. He was preparing in his mind some amendments. Maybe we need to work on those words, 

maybe we do. We really need ones which reflect what is going on now and what can go on in the future. But 

really, Mr. Speaker, is the student in the classroom going to stop learning because a trustee and a teacher, 

and a superintendent, and a politician, and some lawyer cannot agree whether the right to use the words, 'of 

authorized', should be authorized or determined? Or whether the teacher is responsible for the quality of the 

learning process, or whether the teacher is responsible to co-operate with the staff and the administrative 

authorities in advancing the standards of education. 

 

I ask hon. members, is that what this law is all about? Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am appalled. I am appalled 

at the kind of debate that has been going inside of this Assembly 



 

April 12, 1978 1391 

 

1391 

 

and I am appalled at the kind of debate that has been going on outside of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the most progressive piece of education legislation that has ever been tabled in the 

Legislative Assembly in this country. Members of this Assembly and interested educators outside of this 

Assembly, who should know better, have not even taken the time to get a grip in their minds on what this bill 

and the totality is all about. I say that it is a disgrace. 

 

Surely, surely we all agree. Surely, Mr. Speaker, we all agree on the broad framework. Surely, we all agree 

on the need to set out the respective roles and the respective rights, and the respective responsibilities. Of 

course, as the hon. member for Maple Creek is saying. Of course, as the hon. Minister of Education has said, 

we need to continue to work at the words. That process has always gone on in education and there is no 

question that it always will. There will always be discussion between the trustees and the teachers, the 

minister, the politicians, and those lawyers, and the parents about words. But I ask, Mr. Speaker, that we 

should acknowledge in this Assembly that we accept the concepts that we very much need in this province to 

process this Bill 22 and that prospecting elementary and secondary education in Saskatchewan has in fact 

been set in motion. When we do, Mr. Hon. Member for Indian Head-Wolseley, then we will get down to the 

day-to-day work of educating our children and there is a lot of time. There is a lot of time for the hon. 

member, in the months ahead and the years ahead, to decide which exact words fit best. What we want to do 

is make education work in Saskatchewan, and this bill provides the means for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 22, in my mind, is another first in education in Saskatchewan. I want to say to all hon. 

members and to the people of Saskatchewan, there have been a lot of firsts in education in Saskatchewan 

since 1971. While it is true we did not introduce The Foundation Grants Act; we had the courage to 

implement the law without the Foundation Grants Act. The trustees, the teachers and the people of 

Saskatchewan respect us for that decision. The Foundation Grants Program.. (interjection by Mr. Nelson - 

inaudible).. My goodness, the hon. member is getting upset. My goodness.. My goodness. The Foundation 

Grant did away with the old pupil/teacher ratio formula and introduced grants on a more equitable basis in 

this province, the Teacher Collective Bargaining Act, the university legislation, the community college 

legislation and now, Mr. Speaker, an updated education act. 

 

I said when I started out, Mr. Speaker, that I started the process. I started the process with the conferences 

and the Education Law Review Committee and that process has led to this bill. I want to say that I am proud 

of the finished product. It may not be perfect but I say it is good stuff. I say it is good stuff and I say I will be 

disappointed if all members in this House do not vote for this legislation. 

 

I urge all members to look at this law and support it, Mr. Speaker, in second readings. 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — It is a pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to .. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — What is the point of order? 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — I rise under rule 23, Mr. Speaker. I saw the member for 

Lakeview rise and I move: 

 

That the member for Lakeview be now heard. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 12, 1978 

 

1392 

The motion was negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 0 

 

NAYS — 25 

 

Pepper Matsalla Rolfes 

Thibault Robbins Tchorzewski 

Bowerman MacMurchy Vickar 

Smishek Mostoway Skoberg 

Romanow Banda Allen 

Messer Whelan Koskie 

Snyder MacAuley Johnson 

Baker Feschuk Thompson 

Kowalchuk 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Well, Mr. Speaker, while I have about an hour and one half's 

speech to deliver on this bill, I think that the hour is getting late and in view of the fact that I understand the 

Minister of Labour has an important announcement to make, I would therefore beg leave to adjourn the 

debate on Bill 22. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Dairy Producers' Strike 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could have the attention of the 

House for a moment. 

 

I want to say that it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in the House and announce to the House, that 

only moments ago I received word from the parties to the collective bargaining agreement, the unions 

involved and the employer organizations involved in the dairy dispute, that a tentative agreement had been 

reached and an indication has been received from the unions involved that they will be returning to their 

respective work places and will be recommending acceptance of the agreement by their membership. 

 

We have every reason to expect that this will happen and we have every reason to expect that the milk trucks 

will be in operation and will be making pickups as early as tomorrow. 

 

I think it has to be said, Mr. Speaker, that the negotiations were conducted under difficult circumstances. The 

circumstances which I refer to certainly were not enhanced by the bells ringing during that point in time. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Call it 5:00 o'clock. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:47 o'clock p.m. 

 

 

 


