
























































Hansard: April 20, 1978


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 20, 1978 

1751 
 

 
EVENING SESSION 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION - VOTE 16 
 
ITEM 1 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Chairman, if I may . . .  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I recognize the member for Swift Current, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, were you intending to introduce your officials? Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister I indicated to the minister before we sat tonight that I would like to run through, if I have the 
latitude, the Annual Report following my questions. Under the Planning Division, Mr. Minister, could you 
indicate at this time any increase in the ownership rate, or are the traffic volumes up? On paragraph 4 
regarding field surveys, indicate that on the average, the traffic volumes increased by 4.1 per cent from 1975 
to 1976. This is generally consistent with the growth rate recorded the previous years. Could you tell me if 
the ownership rate of vehicles are up or the traffic volumes are up? Mr. Minister what I was concerned about 
was under the planning division with regard to field surveys on traffic volumes and vehicle registrations. 
Could you tell me if in the year 1977 there was an increase in ownership rate and are traffic volumes up? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, there was. I am sure our staff would have a better . . . I can give you a more 
accurate answer, but I can give you a generalized answer. First of all, the traffic, the general miles travelled 
in the province, from one survey I looked at recently, went up from 1972 to 1977 from 4 billion miles to 5 
billion. And if you took that over a five year period, I think and I am waiting for a more direct, but . . . it 
would probably be 2 million miles more travelled. That would be the general increase. And the ownership of 
vehicles was up pretty tremendously. You have that figure here, I believe. 
 
MR. HAM: — Under the same planning division, Mr. Minister what is the average life of an average paved 
surface of the Saskatchewan highway? Do you have those figures or some indication of those figures. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The answer will be what the life expectancy is by the engineering services. Sometimes 
these roads fool us a bit. A light surface road my last six or seven years more than it was anticipated and in 
some areas sometimes it goes to pot a little sooner, or potholes. Just a moment. We have about four different 
stages, about four or actually five, all the way from light oil to first-class paving. Now, No. 1 or some of our 
major highways, there's a 15 year life expectancy on light oil which is the same kind of surface that's put 
down on super-grids as well. We might expect at least 5 years to be better depending on the weather 
circumstances and it would go in between the 5 when you go into an AMOS or B-pavement, we would be 
looking at 10 to 12 years, possibly 9 to 12 years. 
 
MR. HAM: — This may be part and parcel of the last question I asked. Are the paved surfaces, and I'm 
speaking on average again, are they receiving the same applications 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1752 
 

or thickness as in the past years, or are they receiving more? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We are staging, quite deliberately, with the increase cost of asphalt — we are doing 
everything with the base and the foundation of the road that is necessary to take the full scale pavement 
when necessary. But if we can get by with 2 inches on top of our base, that's the gravel-asphalt base, which 
we are — for anywhere from 5 to 7 or 8 years and not have to spend all of the extra money, which might 
mean $75,000 a mile more, we're doing what is necessary and getting more miles that way with less dollars. 
In other words, the public is getting the same driving comfort and when the traffic count goes up, or the 
loads go up — for instance, if suddenly a rail line is abandoned and there's a lot more traffic needed then we 
can put a extra two inches as we are, in fact now, on certain sections of the Trans-Canada. I think you've 
travelled over some pretty good examples of where we're putting an extra lift on. Incidentally, that lift is the 
only area that we get any assistance from the federal government. They go 50-50 on increased thickness in 
order to accommodate the agreement that was made in Calgary in 1973 called the WEOC (Western 
Economic Opportunities Conference) Agreement which requested the provinces to increase their load limits 
across western Canada up to an average equal in each province to 110,000 pounds. Now, in order to 
accommodate that, the federal government said, we will pay 50-50 for that increased strength. This was 
called the Highway Strengthening Program. So this is being done. Now, we do a lot of that in our staging. 
We have not and it's unfortunate, we haven't on any of the paving we've done with the lighter surface on top 
of the full base, we are rolling along pretty well and saving an awful lot of money and, as I said, getting a lot 
of extra miles because miles are our problem. 
 
MR. HAM: — Would it be safe to say that you are in some instances or on average, you are decreasing the 
thickness but you feel that the base is increased adequately to allow the regular pavement to last as long and 
serve as well? Would that be correct? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — It isn't quite that way. We feel that we can get by for seven years with a lighter surface 
and then we can add the extra surface at that time, if necessary. We anticipate that seven would be about half 
the anticipated life of a full scale pavement. I might say to you and the House that full scale pavement which 
we put down in one of the most recent ones I remember was No. 11, the pavement alone cost $156,000 a 
mile, that was a low bid contract. So you have some idea and I'm sure that we do original lift on that for half 
that. 
 
MR. HAM: — Are you anticipating or is your department doing any studies or planning to cut back on 
paved highway miles as a result of the reduced speed laws? Is there any need to cut back on highway miles 
of pavement? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No, I don't think so. We're not that do need resurfacing and we have a fair backlog of 
highways that need widening and rebuilding and I see no cutback certainly in the immediately foreseeable 
future. I believe that we will probably, if we have the capability and the budget we should be continuing to 
increase our capital budget by similar amounts to what we have done this year. 
 
MR. HAM: — Perhaps we should have added to that question with the reduction of speed laws obviously 
you wouldn't find it necessary to build the high speed curves. Do you think there would be any saving with 
respect to a cutback in a survey in the cost of high speed curves? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Our spiral curves on our new highways are some of the best you will 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1753 
 

find anywhere but even though we may be somewhat overbuilding for a 55 - 60 miles an hour speed limit 
there still will be people who will go 75 and 80 and if they do, they are going to roll an automobile and the 
accident rate would go up I'm afraid, because we find the curves in our highways have been a definite 
improvement as far as safety is concerned. 
 
MR. HAM: — Well, obviously, Mr. Chairman, the use of our highways by ambulances and emergency 
vehicles would require high speed curves in any event. Just one comment with respect to the actual 
estimates. I noticed under Planning Branch, if I can again ask for this latitude, there is an increase in the 
estimates for the Planning Branch? Can you explain why please? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I think that is a subvote. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — If some question is overlooked, Mr. Chairman, I am quite happy to revert back 
afterwards so you do not have to worry about us and say we are through that. I am here to give as much 
information as I possibly can. 
 
MR. HAM: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister. Under the Traffic Safety Engineering Branch, I 
might ask if the accident rate in Saskatchewan is declining, or why is there an increase in expenditures in the 
Traffic Safety Engineering Department? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well the accident rate — we have some very, very hopeful figures here, certainly 
figures that are pleasing. Certainly we are not going to relinquish any of the momentum or reduce any of the 
momentum we have tried to establish through Safety '77, but I can report to the House that in the eight 
month period when Safety '77 was introduced — If you want to — the question is bound to come up and I do 
not want to suggest that seat belts have been responsible for all of this reduction, but I can simply say in that 
eight month period — I will go back prior to the 1st of July, in that fiscal year our accident rate and fatalities 
— the whole bit, had gone up by 22 per cent. We went down after the 1st of July last year by 4.4 in injuries 
and 12.9 in fatalities. That is with an increase in miles travelled — the total accidents. Now this, I think, is 
important. The total incidence of accidents increased by 10 per cent but, I will repeat, injuries were down by 
4.4 and fatalities were down by 12.9, nearly 13 per cent. Now the first two months of 1978 show a 22 per 
cent reduction in injuries. Reductions are even more significant because total amount travelled, as I said 
earlier, in 1977, and that answers your earlier question, increased by 5.2 per cent over 1976. So our miles 
travelled increased by 5.2 per cent over the previous year. So it is obvious that the incidence or the likelihood 
of accidents would have to go up because there are more cars on the road and more people on the road — so 
therefore more exposure. Another interesting little sidelight — a year ago last December we initiated the 
'Seat Belts Survivors' Club which provides a safety sticker and a pocket card to people who write in, 
describes the accident they had with proof of an accident and I have on here 210 members have now written 
in and have joined the Seat Belts Survivors' Club. That has gone up because I signed No. 214 just yesterday. 
Now this is no indication really of the number of people who actually were in an accident — these are just 
the number of people who took the trouble to write in. You have in south of Swift Current I think one of the 
things that, well, my eyes got a little wet when I got the letter. The House may remember the young woman, 
and I think she was somewhere in the Simmie area, that hit a school bus. She had a two year old boy and a 
four year old boy with her, and her children were killed. Well about January I got this letter from this lady, 
and it must have taken a lot of courage for her to write it, she said, 'I had my seat belt on and my children 
were in the backseat. It was a Super Cab, and they were both killed. If I had had the foresight to have had 
them 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1754 
 

in a child's seat, they probably would be alive.' I think for that lady it must have been almost heart breaking 
for her to write that letter, but in any case she did. That is probably the most pathetic letter that I have 
received from any seat belt survivor. 
 
MR. HAM: — If I might then, Mr. Minister, on that story about that accident, I noted that last week the 
Moose Jaw branch of the Saskatchewan Motor Club recommended through resolution to the Saskatchewan 
Motor Club annual meeting that the province should adopt the use of mandatory rear seat belts. I wonder if 
you could tell us at this time whether you are planning on that move soon? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No. There are no plans for that at the moment. Frankly, I agree completely that we 
should be going in that direction, but I think some people would say that we have already gone further than 
we should and I think, easy does it. 
 
MR. HAM: — I noted under the Traffic Safety Engineering Division, again under Studies, the branch 
carried out a number of urban traffic accidents showing that 56 per cent of all traffic accidents occurred 
within the limits of urban areas, greater than 1,000. On that note, I know you and I have had correspondence 
and discussion in the past. I am wondering if there have been any change in the department's attitude with 
respect to: (a) Pedestrian overpass in Swift Current over the Trans-Canada Highway, and, (b) Increased 
lighting on the Trans-Canada Highway specifically at the overpass areas through Swift Current. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We have under way at the moment — I had the Urban Municipal Association 
Committee meeting with me yesterday and we informed them that we have initiated a study of the very 
things that you are mentioning and we are trying to provide as much assistance as we possibly can towards 
improving traffic safety in urban areas. 
 
We also have a roadway illumination program that we are commencing this year. I do not know whether 
Swift Current, in this case, will be one of the first places we would look at. There are a number of others that 
are considered to be worse by my staff. I was just informed, but anything that is possible to do, we are 
certainly going to do. 
 
As far as overpasses, they are part, as well, of the terms of reference of the study that is going on. I know that 
you have raised that question and I think I have sent you information about the incidents of accidents. I think 
they are not really as high as some people think them to be. In fact, they are not as bad as some other places 
in Saskatchewan but that does not mean — I can give you an example that you possibly go through every 
week — Ninth Avenue West junction on Trans-Canada No. 1 at Moose Jaw. There is a tremendous lobby 
there in Moose Jaw continually. I hear quite often from the member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg) 
about the need for another complete overpass in that area; yet even then there have been some sad accidents 
but it was pretty obvious when the accidents were examined, that very little could have helped those 
particular people. I do not want to say anymore than that because I invite members to study the history of 
those accidents and what happened. 
 
You cannot legislate or build roads to prevent those kinds of accidents. I can only tell you that the Swift 
Current situation certainly is one that should be on a priority list, but is not one of the worst we have in 
Saskatchewan and, when the study is completed, we will probably know a little more about it. 
 
MR. HAM: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. No doubt, potential accidents and potential deaths are a concern 
and I have written you about that, however my major concern, at 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1755 
 

this point, (obviously that would be one) is with respect to the newest development of the city on the north 
side of the highway trail subdivision. The children from that area have to travel across the highway is they 
choose to short-cut or they could have, until the fence went up across the freeway or down the freeway. 
That's my concern for the over-pass. These children can save themselves several blocks walking on the 
over-pass and secondly, the tourists and visitors have just one heck of a time finding their way off the 
over-passes and into the city onto the service roads and I congratulate your department. I know there was a 
cost-sharing situation struck between the city and your department with respect to lighting on Highway No. 4 
and on the No. 1 and No. 4 over-passes . . . a big improvement. 
 
This may not be a question for your department, but I'm wondering if you might comment, if you can. Is 
there any liaison between yourself, your department officials and the Attorney General's Department with 
respect to prosecuting non seat belt wearers, or those people not wearing seat belts? Are the police given a 
free hand, so to speak with respect to prosecuting? Are they encouraged to prosecute? Is there any particular 
encouragement given from either department, are you aware of it? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — It is the law in Saskatchewan and certainly I don't think it should be necessary for the 
Attorney General to talk to the various chiefs of police and tell them, now look, you should be enforcing this 
law, any more than helmets that have to be worn by motor cyclists or a number of other laws. We have a lot 
of trouble with trying to enforce all the liquor laws. I am sure that for the most part the RCMP traffic officers 
and the city policemen are doing their job. I believe there will be some policemen, because of their own 
possibly personal bent will be more assiduous than others. I don't think it would do any harm for the 
Attorney General to take a look at the statistics of incidence of fines in the various areas and see what the 
record is, if enough time has gone by to see whether there have been more or less per capita in some areas. 
 
I have an exact answer, that I said I would give you, on vehicle registrations. In 1976, the estimate was 
600,000 vehicles in Saskatchewan; in 1977, 620,000 vehicles. The travel in 1976 estimate was 4.8 billion 
vehicle miles. In 1977, it was estimated at 5 billion vehicle miles, which resulted in the 5.2 increase. We 
have on the seat belt matter, I had this on the sheet, but I didn't want to dwell on the seat belts too long. The 
use of seat belts has increased according to the statistics we have from 30 to 75 per cent. The use on 
provincial highways is as high as 90 per cent. Unfortunately, the tendency is not to buckle up in the city . . . 
going short distances. And that's where it shows 56 per cent of the accidents occur in the urban areas. I don't 
want to talk about Safety '77 as if that was the only thing that happened. We've done a number of things and 
I think most of you know there are speakers in schools and various places lecturing on traffic safety. The 
classified driver licence system was implemented. This caused some problems because of the 
computerization. The assistance to community groups for traffic safety projects — there's cash assistance 
through the SGIO for different projects that they undertake. Alcohol education, DWI courses are now 
available throughout the entire province; that is drinking while intoxicated or people who have drinking 
problems. Apprehension — now the Attorney General, as you know, has instituted a road-side breath testing 
which is also prevalent across Canada. The twenty-four hour suspension if you are found with .06, that's with 
the alert machine which can identify .06 or over and will identify red after they get well over the .08 or .09. 
The forgiveness is reasonably good on the highway but if anybody was to argue, I would not advise them to 
argue on an amber light because they still might, if they went to a more scientific machine they might find 
they were over .08. 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1756 
 

The rehabilitation, there's a treatment alternative now being explored. We've had the reduction of speed 
limits, financial assistance to urban municipalities and there you go back to your question again. Because 
three-quarters of all accidents occur in these jurisdictions, urban and then in the rural municipalities. You 
know it is rather interesting to note that only 25 per cent of the accidents occur on our provincial highway 
system, that's what we are discussing tonight and over 50 per cent of the traffic is on those roads. So I think 
it's certainly a point that's worth remembering, maybe worth talking about a bit. 
 
MR. HAM: — I may be a little ahead of myself here, I meant to ask you previously on that discussion we 
had about the overpass, the pedestrian overpass and the lights, I wonder if I might be able to not pinpoint a 
specific time but an approximate time that your department officials could indicate when we can anticipate 
either/or - increased lighting or an overpass? With respect to the pedestrian overpass over No. 1 highway 
through Swift Current and lighting, if you could indicate some approximate time - two years, five years? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — It's in the terms of reference as I said of our study. I would like to see overpasses built, 
assist the cities with them, as soon as possible. I can tell you this, if you had a highway right through the 
middle of your city as I have with kids crossing back and forth, No. 4 runs right through my city, and I have 
been sweating over that for some time. I believe, unfortunately, there are some areas where overpasses have 
been built and the kids still run across the highway. So you are not going to cure it all with overpasses but at 
least society can't be blamed if we have the overpass and the children refuse to use them. We should be 
moving in that direction; I hope we can. My deputy here informs me - did you say the traffic budget is up or 
down - you made an observation on the budget, the traffic safety engineering budget? 
 
MR. HAM: — I think I asked why there was an increase in expenditures. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I took it that you said it was up and unfortunately and I am not happy about this but I 
think there is a reason for it, it is actually the safety engineering budget which covers many things is down. 
The reason it is down fortunately is because they have been shifted into another area working on the traffic 
accident data system and into the transportation branch. So what does not appear here will probably have 
showed up in transportation or management services. So I'm glad you asked that question because it was 
something - I knew it had happened but it went out of my head. 
 
MR. HAM: — Maybe I can wind up the discussion on the pedestrian overpass in Swift Current with the 
comment, maybe once North Battleford has their overpass Swift Current can get theirs. Is that fair to say? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I didn't indicate that. 
 
MR. HAM: — I wasn't suggesting you were. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No, but I would say, frankly, if I was not the member and you were not the member for 
Swift Current I think if we looked at the thing judiciously there wouldn't be much doubt where the overpass 
should go when you have that incidence of traffic. 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1757 
 

MR. HAM: — If I might, Mr. Chairman, now move on to public communications, that division, if you 
might have some indication of the cost of printing pamphlets for the seat belt program, (a), (b) maps, 
provincial highway maps and (c) the annual report? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please, if I just might have your attention. I know I have mentioned it before 
and I just want to remind you that I know there is an item 7 on public communications. This is in general on 
item 1, I realize this, but I would just like to remind you that there is an item specifically for this later on and 
it would expedite things any why .. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Chairman, I think it's a point and I didn't want to raise it again but I think it would 
be easier and I don't think it matters to the member for Swift Current. The highway map. But this is only one, 
we will get the rest of them. I think maybe you had better ask under the item of communications, please. All 
right? The highway map incidentally, that is the first figure I got — it was $99,000 and there are one-half 
million. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, those are excellent maps I might tell you, but I have difficulty 
explaining to people where to get them. Are there specific locations, other than government offices, where 
you can locate these maps? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We keep the Chambers of Commerce supplied with them. We certainly have supplies at 
our Department of Highways stations and we are going to try to get a number of them into the service 
stations along the heavier travelled highways. As far as I am concerned, you will notice that the highway 
maps are not as available as they used to be at service stations —and if they are, you pay for them — and if 
you get them and pay for them they are not worth damn — pardon me, Mr. Chairman. I believe, I would like 
to suggest to the House and I would like to have comments from the other side. A good many maps are used 
and used very carefully and the rest are just used and tossed in to the garbage, almost. I wondered if anyone 
would really mind if $1 impost should be put on those maps — because they cost a lot of money. 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just three areas that I 
would like to ask the minister some questions about. And the first has to do with the sort of the State of the 
Union if you like, insofar as the 42nd Street bridge in Saskatoon is concerned. The matter has been before 
the city and before the department for a number of years, and as I recall last year when the Highway 
Estimates were before the House, the minister was indicating at that time that there were some studies that 
were ongoing, which were sort of prerequisites if you like, before any further steps could be taken along the 
line of finally getting to the point where that very much needed river crossing in Saskatoon is put into place. 
I wonder if the minister would care to comment with regard to where the situation is between the city and the 
department now. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, I think what I ought to do because this has been a vexing question and depending 
on who is telling the story and asking the questions over the years, there has been .. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — You're the one. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, I am telling you and I have a documented summary here, which I will Table. 
(Inaudible interjection). That's it. I can go back through this summary, it is just 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1758 
 

a little more than three pages — going back to August 1972, and maybe for the benefit of the House and the 
press, especially the Saskatoon press, I ought to read at least some of it. (Inaudible interjection). August 1972 
I wrote to the city of Saskatoon and strongly recommended that an up-to-date overall transportation study be 
carried out to assist with the orderly development of transportation facilities in the city. I stated in part, at 
that time, that my department would be prepared to contribute significantly to such a study under our Urban 
Assistance policy. That was in August of 1972 — remember that date. Now, in 1973, on March 20, and I 
think that is about eight months later, Mayor Sears indicated the willingness of the city of Saskatoon to 
co-operate with the province of Saskatchewan to undertake a transportation study. Two weeks later I wrote 
back to the mayor, indicating the department's willingness to co-operate with the study and that the 
department and the city agree to establish a steering committee at that time. July 24, and here again, all of 
April, all of May, all of June and nearly all of July went by and we heard nothing from the city of Saskatoon. 
Mr. Couturier, our planning engineer, wrote to Mr. Beverige, expressing concern about the delay in 
proceeding with the transportation study. I am sorry, I was a little too generous with that time. That was one 
year and four months later. One year and four months later and this will be tabled and copies can be made of 
it. October 16, 1974, a meeting was called with the city Department of Highways staff to discuss the details 
of the transportation study and the possibility of a start in the near future on the 42nd Street bridge. The 
department emphasized the need for the transportation study as a first step in the process. And on November 
22, 1974, the city of Saskatoon formally requested concurrence from the department to obtain proposals 
from consultants for the transportation study. On December 3, 1974, and that again is within two weeks. I 
replied in answer to the request stating we had asked our planning engineer to make arrangements to contact 
city staff in order that a consensus may be obtained on the goals, objectives and terms of reference of the 
study. The transportation study was commenced in 1975 and completed in July, 1977 by DeLeuw, Cather 
and Company of Canada and Underwood, McClellan and Associates Limited. The Department of Highways' 
share was $247,500. That was 75 per cent, the city paying the other 25 per cent. 
 
Then on December 17,1974, I answered another letter, number 29 letter from Mayor Sears. Mr. Sears' 
request was that the department undertake the design of the proposed 42nd Street bridge, the design. I 
indicated that the department would consider an application for the design of the bridge under the urban 
assistance policy but the department staff was not available to undertake the design at that time until 1976, 
that would be the following year. The key point is that the final design could not start before final decision 
was made concerning the bridge location which was part of the transportation study for which the city of 
Saskatoon and ourselves spent over $300,000. 
 
On April 2, 1975 I answered another letter from Mayor Sears regarding the location and technical feasibility 
of the 42nd Street bridge. I said at that time negotiations can proceed but the department's position is that the 
construction of the bridge would be contingent upon the findings of the Saskatoon city transportation study. I 
also indicated this was mutually agreed to, mutually agreed to, at a meeting with Saskatoon officials on 
October 16, 1974. 
 
On May 24, 1977, that is getting a little more up to date, a letter to Mayor Wright approved the city of 
Saskatoon's application for cost sharing the functional design for the 42nd Street bridge and the function 
design study of Circle Drive, for College Drive and Warman Road. On June 6, 1977 things were moving 
along a bit brisker at that time. City council received this information at its regular meeting and it was on 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1759 
 

August 10 following that, from June to August 10, city engineer Carol requested written expressions of 
interest to approximately eight consulting firms for the functional planning and design of the proposed Circle 
Drive arterial roadway. 
 
On October 27, 1977 the city of Saskatoon in a letter to the department's district engineer, Harold Bird, 
Saskatoon recommended that DeLeuw, Cather of Canada Limited be commissioned to carry out this work. 
This recommendation was approved by written confirmation from the district engineer, H. Bird, on 
November 9, 1977. Mr. Bird also noted that the terms of reference were to be prepared. Terms of reference 
for the functional design study have been approved by the city of Saskatoon and the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. The terms of reference have been submitted to DeLeuw, Cather of Canada 
Limited. Work has started on the functional design study. It is anticipated the functional design study will be 
complete later this year in December. 
 
Following approval of this study by the city and the department, it will be the city of Saskatoon's 
responsibility to then formally apply for cost sharing for the construction of the project. When such approval 
has been received, the city will then be in a position to formally commission detailed designs of the roadway 
and bridge. This design could be completed by late 1979 at which time tenders could be called. That is the 
resume on historical data of the discussions over the years on this bridge. I think that I should repeat once 
more that the initiation, it is the city of Saskatoon's bridge. Let us not forget that. We have co-operated in 
every way possible. I do not think that there are any delays that we can be blamed for if there were any 
delays. I am not being critical of the city of Saskatoon, I'm simply giving the facts. I'd like to table this 
document for all interested members. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I appreciate the defence that the minister has attempted to mount with regard to the delay 
in the construction of the 42nd Street bridge. He mentioned the transportation study and I'm sure that most 
people in Saskatoon who have followed it with any interest will be aware of the fact that the Department of 
Highways in fact, in '72 and '73 insisted that before anything further was going to be done with regard to the 
bridge, the transportation study had to be done. You can tell that the minister didn't live in Saskatoon. 
Anybody who lived in Saskatoon realized that the bridge was a requirement, that it maybe wasn't a 
requirement immediately but when looked at all with any kind of realism both within the city and traffic 
patterns within the city, that it was a requirement. The minister is trying to kid us if he thinks that there was 
ever any doubt about the location. The location with regard to that bridge was set from the time that the 
Richmond-Heights, River-Heights development in Saskatoon was planned and the parcel of land was there. 
And there may have been some odd little question that maybe it ought to have been at 51st Street or 
whatever. But anybody who looked seriously at it, Mr. Chairman, knew full well that the location was set, 
that you could have all the experts in the world run around anywhere they lived; they were going to decide 
that the bridge was going to be at 42nd Street; that it was going to hook up at Circle Drive and College 
Drive. There may have been some technicality about which way the road curved through the area that was 
owned at one time by the University of Saskatchewan. It is true that there were negotiations that had to take 
place with regard to the city of Saskatoon getting the road right of way. 
 
There were some technical questions about the intersection at Preston and where the road was going to cross 
the railroad tracks. None of which took a number of so-called 'experts', three or four years to determine. And 
I say to the minister that while the transportation study may have had some long term usefulness to the city 
of Saskatoon, 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1760 
 

there was absolutely no need in the world to tie the 42nd Street bridge in terms of its location into that study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the minister to consider where the city of Saskatoon would have been had they waited 
from some kind of technical expertise, some kind of actual present demand, before they built the University 
bridge. It was because the people of Saskatoon, in their wisdom, had a bit of foresight and built the bridge far 
before there was ever any demand for it and it has served an extremely useful function. And I say to the 
minister that any attempt to say that the delay was because the transportation study hadn't been done, is 
simply a matter of trying to whitewash the entire situation. And the people of Saskatoon know full well, 
whether they are there as residents or members of the business community, that that bridge was required, 
they knew where it was going to be, it was never any secret. The planning was done in that regard. 
 
I want to ask the minister if he would maybe move away from the 'water under the bridge' so to speak, 
because that is in fact, water under the bridge. And there's nothing we can do to recover it, despite the fact 
that the bridge isn't there yet. In terms of the function design which is expected to be completed this fall, 
whether it's September or December or whatever, we don't know for sure, but sometime this fall, we're going 
to then be in the position as you indicated of looking at cost sharing. I'm wondering if the minister would 
agree with me that the present system of cost sharing which is roughly 50-50, I think it actually may work 
out, because there's a little more cost sharing on the part over the waterway than there may be in other areas, 
it may work out to about 52-48 but I think basically 50-50. The minister wouldn't agree that that's basically 
an antiquated system. I wonder if the minister would care to comment with regard to the kind of cost sharing 
that the city might anticipate when they get into that particular stage? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — First of all, I'm going to get into your question. I have to comment on your statement 
which is a reflection, I think on two things. The member for Saskatoon-Eastview talks about defence. Well, 
if there's anyone who ought to be on the defensive it's the member over there. He was on city council there 
during that time and responsible for some of the delay and the foot dragging . . . yes, him right over there. 
Certainly one of the supposedly . . . really an alderman in that city . . . and they waited and waited when they 
knew these particular things. The member stands in this House, Mr. Chairman, and says we should just go 
ahead and build a bridge, no studies, nothing to do with the future of traffic movements in Saskatoon. I want 
to point out to him, if that was a waste of time and a waste of money, why did the city of Saskatoon, I think 
he was a member of council at that time, agree to spend up to $340,000 of public money in the design study, 
the transportation study. After dragging their feet they finally said — I do not know why they did; the money 
was there. Our assistance was there. It could have been on its way two years ago. The bridge could have been 
under construction right now if they had moved, because the history is there. You cannot change it. It was 
nothing but a shilly-shallying delay on the part of the city council and that member over there was part of 
that council. Do not come along here and tell me where we were dragging our feet. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the records show not only that. On April 2, 1975, certain little things happened and it 
is on record — mutual agreement by the people at that time. Anybody who comes along and says we should 
spend billions of dollars on a modern-day structure that is going to be there for another hundred years and 
not do any studies to see whether it is in the right place at that particular time — he says anybody knows. 
Well, obviously they did not know because they finally, after they got back from their 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1761 
 

fishing trips and one thing or another, decided that year, well maybe a couple of years later we ought to get 
busy and ask the department to help us with the study. So, do not come along crying to me. Hindsight is 
always 20-20 and the member for Saskatoon-Eastview is a real example of 20-20 hindsight. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know that particular response makes an answer. The minister 
stands and says that I am being defensive. I do not think that I am being defensive at all. What I am trying to 
do is establish a particular point of view, and that is that there was one reason why the city of Saskatoon 
eventually agreed to that transportation study vis-a-vis the bridge and that was because the city of Saskatoon 
knew darn well the Department of Highways would not have approved it without it. The city of Saskatoon 
knew darn well that that bridge was a requirement and if that was the kind of game that the city of Saskatoon 
had to play to get it, we finally agreed we were going to do it. 
 
Now what did the study show? The study showed that the location of the bridge, as the city of Saskatoon had 
indicated, was exactly right. In so far as the study was concerned and the bridge and its development were 
concerned, there was really no need for it at all. 
 
Now, I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, and ask the question that I asked before I took my seat the last time 
and that is, where does the department stand or does it have a position at this stage with regard to the 
question of cost sharing, recognizing that the old sort of 50-50 formula is rather antiquated? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I did not answer that. When the things that are necessary are done, the various designs 
and so on and when the request comes from the city (because it is the city's bridge, not ours), it will be given, 
I am sure, the most generous consideration possible. I just want to point out once more, in case there is any 
doubt in anybody's mind but the guilty party across the way, I want to just read one more paragraph from the 
study I tabled. 
 

Mr. Kramer, (in a letter to Mayor) approved the city of Saskatoon's application for cost 
sharing of the functional design for the 42nd Street Bridge and the functional design study for 
Circle Drive and for College Drive, Warman Road. 

 
That transportation study was not just for the bridge. It was for the total perimeter of Saskatoon, for 
$247,000 of Saskatchewan's money and 25 per cent to match of Saskatoon's. I hope you will use it. But the 
functional design study is required prior to the detailed design of the bridge and associated roadway. The 
functional design will identify such items as right of way requirements, bridge length, width, roadway 
configurations, etc. you know, if you are naive enough to think that you just simply, like the beavers, throw a 
bridge up overnight, and you are going to spend millions of dollars and do like some of those Liberal 
governments in eastern Canada, Quebec and what not — you build a bridge today and the next day it falls in 
the river — I do not think we want to operate that way. 
 
When the city of Saskatoon gets around to making its requests, even though they are two years late, we will 
co-operate with them. The costs have gone up since that time too. Do not forget that. If they had been brisk 
and on their toes we probably could have saved two years inflation. 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1762 
 

MR. PENNER: — Mr. Chairman, you know the minister has a weak enough argument as it is without 
attempting to weaken it further by suggesting that I, in any way, indicated that a functional design is not 
required. Any fool knows that you are going to have to have a functional design before you can start. My 
argument had to do with the transportation study itself as a prerequisite for the location of the bridge. 
 
Now the minister, Mr. Chairman, indicated that the bridge was the city's bridge. You know it is kind of 
interesting. On the one hand he stands up and says that you cannot have the bridge unless you comply with 
our regulations to have this transportation study thing that we want and then, on the other hand, he says that 
aw, but it is the city's bridge. The city had already determined where the right of way was going to go. The 
city had already determined where the bridge costing was going to be. Now it is the city's bridge. Is the 
minister indicating that only city people are going to use the bridge? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No, I am not indicating that at all. I am simply indicating that we have an overall 
responsibility for the safety and certainly we have always recognized the fact that bridges are necessary. But 
what the member is really telling this House is that the aldermen, the city of Saskatoon, for a paltry $61,000 
when we are talking about a $6 million, or a $7 million or possibly $10 million bridge structure, now would 
drag their feet for two years because they did not want to spend $61,000 on a transportation study, not only 
for the bridge, but for the total perimeters of Saskatoon. And I say any member that would try to tell grown 
up people that kind of a story had better have his head read. And they tell me he is a school teacher, $61,000 
that they drag their feet on for two years when we were paying the bulk of it, three quarters, saying, oh, well, 
we don't really need to spend that because we don't really need . . . everybody knows where the bridge is 
going to be, when the total study was going to be done. It could have been done much sooner if it had not 
have been for that ridiculous foot dragging. And that is my point, $61,000, not even a fraction of one per 
cent of the total cost. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Chairman, the minister still does not understand the position of city council at the 
time that that decision was made. City council was not quarrelling with the concept of the transportation 
study. What city council quarrelled with and they were absolutely dead right, and the study has proven it, 
that there was no need to tie the location of the bridge into the transportation study. And that is what that 
particular situation was all about. I am wondering if the minister, and it gets back to the funding question, 
and I can understand and I can appreciate that the minister may not be able to stand up and say O.K., it is 
going to be a 75-25 on the funding, or it is going to be 65-35 on the funding. Would the minister agree that 
the old formula is antiquated to the point where it cannot apply in this particular situation? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Antiquated is one way of describing it. It has been around for a while. Probably not as 
long as the member for Saskatoon-Eastview. I want to say this that I can tell you definitely it will be 
somewhere between 50 and 100 per cent. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I appreciate that and I urge the minister to consider it to be as close to the 100 per cent as 
he can possibly get it. I want to go to an area, Mr. Chairman, that relates to Preston Avenue. Well, it really 
relates to the freeway on the southern outskirts of the city. In my mind, a roadway that was built with the 
idea that there was a need to move traffic fairly rapidly into the downtown area of the city and I have to say 
that I frankly agree with the concept. The citizens of Saskatchewan spent a tremendous amount of money to 
build a four lane highway, that is a reasonably high speed highway, that allows people from the south and the 
eastern part of the city, many of them in my 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1763 
 

constituency, to be able to get downtown in a hurry. The city has a position with regard to the intersection at 
Preston and the freeway insofar as traffic lights are concerned. A position, by the way, that has been 
developed since I left that council. I want the minister to know that. I wonder what the department's point of 
view would be with regard to that? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — First of all, and you are not the only one that has these requests. I believe that all of the 
members from Saskatoon and area have indicated concern about the Preston Avenue. Now let me for just a 
moment take a look at the situation in Saskatoon. First of all, a freeway was built to take people into the 
downtown area. That is right, what the member says. Not only that. But take people through the city of 
Saskatoon, those that did not want to, now I can't imagine anyone not wanting to stop in Saskatoon, but some 
people just have bad taste, in fact, thousands of them. Going on through we got a half a freeway through 
Saskatoon and then some politicians back some 10, 12 years or so ago, they decided that they were not going 
to have a freeway, that they were going to go up through that Avenue A area, at a tremendous cost to all the 
public of Saskatchewan to accommodate a few people and I think somehow or other to accommodate the 
town of Langham, when already there was a design to swing that freeway up around the outside and those 
routes, already widened on 22nd Street West, could have gone out there and swung straight up out of there 
and you would of had a freeway. You didn't, no but having gone that far, a freeway is designed to move 
traffic through. Now, again we find the local politicians in the city of Saskatoon, for whatever reason, 
ignoring their City planning branch. Some of the local politicians decide that they are going to move a 
congregation, a total congregation, on the south side of that freeway — with the Alliance Church — and 
expose them to the hazards of crossing that freeway. That is a city decision. And I say, if the city wants to 
make that decision they ought to possibly consider an overpass, because lights will do no good whatever. 
Lights will do no real good whatever and I would like to give you a little history — and I will table this, too. 
Traffic studies again. Let's take a look at what happened at Preston Avenue and Circle Drive, Saskatoon. 
1975 - five accidents, 1976, 11 accidents, 1977 (strangely enough with traffic going up) 7 accidents. Now, in 
the total picture right from your city of Saskatoon and as you know, our Traffic Safety Engineer, Al Popoff, 
used to be your engineer and a very, very fine chap — and I am relying on his advice . . .   
 
MR. PENNER: — Good man. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — A good man, right. Accident rates are not considered alarming (these accident rates) or 
high. A review of 12 similar intersections in Saskatoon indicates that this is one of the lower accident rates. 
(Inaudible interjection) Well there seem to be a lot of brave ones going down whenever I'm driving. Anyway, 
signalized intersections often have higher accident history than unsignaled ones — strange but true. Between 
20 and 30 accidents a year is not uncommon at some of those signalized intersections. Signalization is not 
warranted for the following reasons at this time: One, recognized national guidelines and technical warrants 
are not met; two, total vehicle delays would increase; three, traffic noise will increase. Heavy vehicles on the 
highway Circle Drive would be required to come to a full stop in not one, but two places, because if you put 
one at Preston you've got to have one at Clarence. The freeway facility would be downgraded and all that 
money that the people of Saskatchewan put in for that freeway would be down the drain, and all you have 
would be another city street. Now, I think what the city of Saskatoon is going to have to take a look at if they 
insist that they want to develop south of there, I think the city of Saskatoon had better come down and have a 
chat with us about the cost of building some fly-overs, because we just cannot have, on 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1764 
 

Sunday, all the fine people from over there crossing that busy road. If that is what the city of Saskatoon 
decides to do, against the advice of their Planning branch, then they had better accept some of the 
responsibility at least. I am prepared to listen, but as far as signalization is concerned, I have told my 
colleagues on this side of the House — they have been after me for two years as you have — but 
 
MR. PENNER: — You ought to. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — All right. I think there has to be a different approach. First of all I think there has got to 
be (until we find that different approach) I think there has got to be a better place to have a congregation. 
Right on the weekend and all the traffic is there, to have a congregation crossing that highway, I think that 
just doesn't make sense — especially flying in the face of the community planners, the engineers and the 
people who are advising them on this — but the politicians in the city of Saskatoon have decided otherwise. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could just comment briefly. I have had to say I am 
rather encouraged about the minister feeling that sometime of grade separation is preferable. It is my 
understanding that that portion of the freeway is presently the responsibility of the Department of Highways, 
and I want to invite the minister to contemplate the fact that probably the quietest time for the use of that 
freeway is Sunday morning — in terms of highway traffic — and I want him also to consider the tremendous 
implication that growth south of Saskatoon and the acreages you know, just immediately south of the 
freeway has had on people crossing at Preston and at Clarence. I think that, you know the implications 
behind the decision to locate the church there is something that I am not fully aware of, that I do not fully 
appreciate. I have enough confidence in the city of Saskatoon City Council that if they have made that 
decision, there is a good deal of wisdom in it. But I want the minister and his department to consider the 
implication of the growth that has taken place south of the city as a factor that is quite a part and probably 
more significant than the church would be insofar as traffic attempting to come across that intersection on a 
north-south plain. When one looks at the sight lines, particularly when approaching the intersection at 
Preston and the freeway from the south and driving north, the sight lines are not good and as I say in many 
respects, people who are using it, unless they are making the turn to go downtown, will do everything they 
can to stay away from it because of the hazard of trying to cross four lanes of quickly moving traffic. That's 
right. And so I say to the minister that I respect the position of the department with regard to a fly over or 
some kind of grade separation and would encourage the minister and his officials to do whatever they can to 
speed that up. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There is a fair bit that does not meet the eye in this whole situation. I would like a few 
people to ask a few questions as to .. it's fine. I sure would not want to stand in the way of the church people 
having their meeting place but community planning means something to me. And even today I believe that 
the application, if it has been in, it has only been in recently, after they have decided in council without 
advice from their planning branch; they have not even applied to community planning. Now if we are going 
to have orderly development of urban centres, I do not think they should ignore ordinary rules of community 
planning which is going to, in the final analysis, result in some very unsafe areas around that city. Here we 
are trying our best to bring down the incidence of accidents and a few developers are doing their very best to 
upset that just so they can get their development plans on the road. If development is needed, let those 
developers then put up a few bucks to create the safety devices that are needed to move traffic across the top 
of that road. 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1765 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — The member for Eastview has opened up a topic that I would like to 
continue on for two points that were made. You referred to the transportation study that was done in 
Saskatoon. Could you tell me why and what changed your mind that the original summation to the city of 
Saskatoon suggested that the north Saskatoon bridge, as it was called then, may not be at 42nd Street and 
may have been at 51st? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I never changed my mind and I do not know of any engineering studies that suggested 
the bridge would be elsewhere. There may have been some discussion about the possibility, but there was 
never any engineering advice on that. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Did the transportation study come up with any recommendations re the next proposed 
bridge in Saskatoon, which is supposed to be on the south end of the city of Saskatoon coming across 
approximately where the Saskatoon city golf course is now? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — My people say they are not aware of any suggestions, unless there was possibly some 
additional information or suggestions by the engineering firm that was engaged by the city. We will, 
however, check the study and I might say, for any member that might wish it, we should have copies 
available. The city should have copies available of that study and I think they would be very useful to the 
members. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, the reference I am going back to is that when the exhibition built their new race 
track it was announced that the reason of the location and everything would be that the new bridge, a 
suggested bridge, was coming across the golf course and that was the reason that the golf course was 
changing its location and so forth. Now, when did your study, you are saying that that was not considered at 
all? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am not saying it was not considered. My staff are telling me that they are not aware of 
a suggestion of that kind but they are prepared to check and see if there was a suggestion. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — On the same study, was there any recommendations re the problems that have 
developed in the city of Saskatoon from 20th Street to 33rd Street, and is there any sharing of financing to 
widen that area? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We share that 50-50. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Does that include the taking over of any properties and so forth, that have to be? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That includes everything concerning the new structure. 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — I just have a few questions I want to ask the minister. First of 
all, I hope he can help me correct this rumour which I heard, Mr. Minister, because when I was home on the 
weekend, I heard a rumour that (I hope it's right) you had changed your mind about that stretch of highway 
that I've been referring to. That you are in fact, going to rebuild No. 15 from south of Rosetown through to 
Milden. I thought perhaps, that you should correct me if I've heard that rumour incorrectly. Mr. Minister, I do 
have a question. 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1766 
 

Sometime ago, probably three years ago, on a number of occasions I made reference to the fact that to my 
knowledge Saskatchewan was the only province — the only place I had been in North America, I should say 
— where they didn't at regular intervals on the highway, have posted the school bus signs, that it is illegal to 
pass. You know the signs I mean. At that particular time the only signs that existed in Saskatchewan were on 
dangerous hills where a bus crossing would take place. I am very pleased now to see the odd sign cropping 
up on the highway which does just exactly what we do in the rest of North America and I congratulate the 
Department of Highways for that. I think it has a psychological effect and I think it is good. 
 
My question is this, is it your intention now to take a look at the overall pattern in Saskatchewan and go into 
the erection of (I suppose it would be several thousand) signs at regular intervals. I see a few on the 
highways; I congratulate you. We are now in with the rest of North America on this and I would like your 
comments on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We are going to continue to erect signs wherever they are necessary. These signs have 
become fairly expensive; we have to budget for them. I don't know. . .  I did price them; I am almost afraid to 
ask what the average cost of a . . . It would average out small and large, certainly at better than $100 each. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — I can appreciate that. That is quite a cost, Mr. Minister, and I can appreciate the . . .  
 
MR. KRAMER: — (inaudible) 
 
MR. BAILEY: — No. What was the department's reasoning (and I'm not being sardonic about this, Mr. 
Minister) for not having these signs on the highways previous to now? I checked it out and as far as I know 
we were the only ones in North America who did not have these signs posted at regular intervals. I think it is 
three years ago that I questioned. We now see the signs. Have you had a change in policy? Why did you hold 
back — was it just cost factor? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, I'm informed by my staff that we have always had them where there were 
problems of sight, distance and so on and we are simply extending the policy to as many spots as possible 
because even on the level, some people don't seem to be able to spot the buses at time. It is one of those 
things that we can't be too careful about. 
 
I believe that we will be moving with more signs as soon as we can and we will be going on a priority basis 
wherever there seems to be the greatest need. 
 
MR. BAILEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
I will allow you time. (I'm not going to ask you any further questions because some of these people have 
more questions than I have) but I would hope that before you are through highway estimates I will be able to 
reach a decision with you on No. 15 Highway, and give you and your advisor's an opportunity to change your 
minds between now and when we get through the estimates. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I did tell the member that I went down No. 15 last summer — down across the ferry 
and through there and those constituents of his were passing me at 75 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1767 
 

and 80 miles an hour on that road and I don't know what they would do if they widened that road to a 
modern standard. I don't know in the interests of safety whether we can actually really entertain, I think there 
has to be a bit of safety education done before we give them a freeway through there that will allow them to 
travel at those speeds safely. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I believe to hear you say that the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose's constituents are so happy that they are just about flying and, as he said that he will await 
your answer before the end of the estimates, I do hope you don't take five, six days or two weeks because it 
would be a long estimate here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am wondering about the highway bridge over the South Saskatchewan River between Prince 
Albert and Birch Hills. In Safety '77 last year we talked about a lot of safety programs and I have talked to 
many of the people in the Muskoday area, there is quite a concern there because the band is building a band 
hall on the south side of the river. The biggest part of the population live on the south side of the river and to 
go across that river there is just a traffic break, there is no pedestrian walkway, there is nothing marked for 
them. They tell me that they have written you and made many presentations to the Department of Highways 
to try and get a walkway put in there or something. There have been presentations apparently, they have 
talked to the RCMP and the RCMP have backed them and am just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can bring 
us up-to-date on what is happening in there. I know the hon. member for the other side of the river who is 
very interested in safety will be pushing for the same thing. What has the Department of Highways done so 
far in order to get a crosswalk of some kind, there any plans to get a pedestrian crosswalk on that bridge? 
The tourist season is coming on and now there is going to be more traffic as I say because of the band hall on 
the other side of the river. It is going to be very unsafe and we are probably looking to many accidents. I have 
come down that highway many times at night myself and if people are walking on that bridge it is just about 
impossible to see them until you are just about on top of them. I would just like to know what your 
department has done, what it is going to do and what are your long-range plans or immediate plans for this? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I don't know, the question I think was what are we going to do about an accident prone 
situation and there was a suggestion that there had been a number of letters from the Indian band. I want to 
tell the member that there have been no letters, no letters, not from you and the only approach that has been 
made to me has been as you say from the member for Kinistino, who has asked us to look into this. We have 
looked into it, I did check. Now let's take a look at the history thus far. There have been no accidents - there 
have been a number of accidents, rather, but there have been no fatalities - no, I don't want any either, that's 
right. On or near the bridge there have been 13 injuries but there has been no pedestrian hit, not one. Six of 
these accidents occurred at night. Most of the accidents occurred in the winter and this was because of loss 
of control and they hit the side of the bridge. Maybe those folks have been lucky until now but there has been 
absolutely no fatalities and all the people that have been injured have been inside of automobiles. I wish I 
could say that of all bridges in Saskatchewan. I would be pleased to have a letter from the authorities there. If 
there is a hall that is going to create a great deal more foot traffic, I'm sure our people would be pleased to 
look at the possibility of trying to take some counter measures, whatever they may be. But I have to say that 
if there were letters sent, my staff is not aware of them. I do not recall getting any communications from the 
Muskoday people. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I don't have a copy of any of the correspondence. I was told this as late as two weeks ago by 
band councillors that the Department of Highways had received letters backed by apparently 
recommendations from the RCMP. I just pass on to you 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1768 
 

what I have received and I am glad that the member opposite brought this to your attention. I brought it to his 
attention. But, as you say, let's not wait for accidents to happen, let's not wait for some fatalities to happen on 
that bridge or in that immediate area before we do anything. One of the reasons, I suppose is the people on 
the north side of that river live in one of the most safety conscious constituencies in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They are very conscious of the problem that they have over that bridge. You've said, I 
believe, that if you get a presentation from them to have something done in that area, you'll consider it and 
probably be doing it. I realize the expense, the cost of putting a walkway on this side of that bridge. It is a 
terrible expense. 
 
The other area I was wondering about, Mr. Minister is, there is a new bridge going up in, I believe, the 
Gronlid area. I do not know if there is that much foot traffic there — I doubt it. I think it is sitting where 
there is not a town close to it, but if this could be considered, in case it is close to an area there. 
 
The other area that I want to bring to you, Mr. Minister is this. I have had some complaints and I have been 
asked to ask you about Highway 55. On Highway 55 we have our truckers hauling pulp, we have truckers 
hauling chips. They have got two different sets of load limits. The chip truck's load, I believe, is 74,000 
pounds. The logger is allowed up to 110,000 pounds and I am wondering, Mr. Minister, why the difference 
in the chip and the pulp haul? There is a vast difference in the weight limit there and they are hauling the 
same type of wood product to probably the same place. Has your department made any recommendations or 
is your department prepared to let the people who are hauling the chips raise their limit up to the same limit 
that the pulp limit is? In the wintertime the pulp trucks can get up to, I believe, 120 or 130,000 pounds. They 
can get a permit to travel once the frost in the ground but the chip truck has to stay around the 74,000 pounds 
as I understand it. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — First of all, I think I am going to have to give a little more history. The reason for that 
special privilege for the pulp trucks, the logging trucks, was an agreement made in 1966 by the Thatcher 
government, which gave a special privilege to the pulp hauling trucks in order I suppose, to subsidize the 
operation and make it more financially viable. That agreement is one that has been made by the government. 
So far we have not abrogated it, but we are not happy with it. 
 
Now the question you raise is whether or not we should compound — and I do not want to add to the 
problem by adding more weight to roads that were never designed to stand that particular type of load. Now 
we did accommodate all truckers this winter with an increase in weight during those months that the frost 
was on, on an experimental basis. I believe we are going to be able to institute that extra loading earlier next 
year, probably mid-December, in fact, by bringing in legislation which is going to actually legalize what we 
did this winter. That is the little amendment that I was at because there was some question as to whether or 
not we could legally do what we did, but, anyway we got away with it. If I can get the co-operation of this 
House, the amendment I will bring in will allow us, in our department, to issue those permits and try to 
accommodate those roads. It was not a great deal but it certainly would allow an extra 60 bushels on the 
average truck, which is not bad. It was taken advantage of considerably. I think there were more than 1,000 
permits issued in Saskatchewan during that short period of time. I cannot hold out too much hope to increase 
those ready loads up to 110 and 125,000. I think we are bound by the agreement. I know it is annoying. It 
annoyed me when I was a farmer, and I have hauled stock over some of those roads and had the big logging 
truck go by me with twice the weight when I was going along with half a payload; but that is the situation 
and I cannot do much about it unless we decide we are 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1769 
 

either going to abrogate agreements or spend an awful lot more money on some of those roads. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, you say that you are going to increase the weight load on all trucks here. You 
are telling me then, that you are going to increase the weight load of the people hauling chips up to what the 
people hauling logs is? What are you talking about when you say all trucks? Will the log trucks be permitted 
the 90,000 or whatever it is that they are permitted to haul. The trucks hauling chips, will they be permitted 
to haul up to that level also? Will they be rated up there. You said all trucks — you mean the chip haulers 
too? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am talking about all trucks that are in the up to 74,000. Now we have the parameters 
of the permit that the terms of reference refer. During our special weight limit the one that would normally 
carry an allowable weight of 28,000 was raised to 30,000, an increase of 2,000; 42,000 went up to 45,000, 
increase of 3,000 pounds; 60,000 pound truck went up to 65,000; and the 74,000 limit went up to 80,000, 
which was an increase of 6,000 pounds or 3 tons payload. That would include chip trucks and everything 
else, but that does not put them up into the category of the poles and the logging trucks. Hopefully this next 
year (and I think our records show) that there wasn't real appreciable damage on those roads that have 
bridges that will carry those kinds of loads. We will be starting in December and going through until March. 
We will be in sort of an honor deal — if the weather is warmer than 6 below we are just asking people to use 
their heads and stay off them. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, we will look forward to that. That's an additional 6,000 pounds as you say. It 
is just too bad that the chip truck couldn't get up there. There are not as many chip trucks on the road as there 
are pole trucks and it's a little discrimination there for the same guy who owns the two trucks, one is hauling 
poles (logs) and one is hauling chips. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I didn't make the agreement. 
 
MR. WIPF: — I realize that, but you have broken other agreements that were made by the Liberal 
government and by your previous governments. I could see that you could maybe do it for the chipper or the 
chip truck. 
 
Mr. Minister, going to another area, in your department only building the highways up as far as the northern 
administration district line? Is that right? Or do you work into the DNS area, the northern administration 
district area? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We have the main trunk highways. We are responsible for No. 2 and No. 102 as far 
north as it goes. We are responsible for No. 155 and on up to as far as it goes, also for No. 4 and 104. Those 
are the main highways of the highway system, and of course No. 102 going to Flin Flon, even though it goes 
into the northern administration area. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan performs the function that 
is ordinarily performed by the municipalities. This is sort of their market road, grid road, community access 
road. Those are the responsibilities of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, the trunk highways that are 
marked and numbered by highways are ours. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, you talk about this road going up to Creighton. What percentage or what 
amount of money has the Department of Highways in their budget for this new bus experiment that they are 
running between Prince Albert and Creighton, 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1770 
 

 this brucks bus. Has the Department of Highways got any money in that experiment? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That's the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. I have no knowledge of that. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me at this time what was the complete cost of the water bomber 
sites in the different areas that you were responsible for? You were building them last year at Budget time so 
could you give us a breakdown of the cost in the areas there. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I'll get that. I think I will take another question and come back to that one, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister, over the last . . . I'm looking in your book .. maintenance . . .  in 1975-76 
we had 12,915 miles of road (it says in your book here), the maintenance on it approximately $29 million, or 
$2,230 per mile for maintenance. In 1976-77 we had 12,972 miles for $34.5 million roughly or $2,700 a 
mile. That's an increase of 57 more miles in the two years at an increase in cost of $5 million overall. Can 
you explain that and what is the reason for this rise in costs of about $500 a mile in maintenance costs over 
the one year? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I think once again the member is getting into an area — first of all, the figure he has 
given me are not correct. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They are from . . .  
 
MR. KRAMER: — They certainly are not interpreted properly because that is not the cost. 
 
I think members would be — we're prepared to stay and answer. I have been a member here for a number of 
years. I have sat over there. These kinds of questions if you took the time — Mr. Chairman, I'm not begging 
the question at all — I'm saying that the chances of getting accurate written researched answers are so much 
better if you take the time and put these on the blues as questions. We could have started way back last fall, 
those all could have been compiled and further questions built on that. I am saying that not in a critical way 
but I am trying to suggest to you, if go you back through the records, I think the member for Morse (Mr. 
Wiebe) has had questions on the order paper and he's got the answers. Those answers are accurate, not taken 
kind of quickly. We'll give you approximations in some of these. What page were you . . .  
 
MR. WIPF: — On page 34, Mr. Minister, under maintenance. I guess to break the question and make it a 
little simpler, there is an extra 57 miles that you maintained in the year 1976-77 and it cost $5 million more 
than it did a year ago to maintain the highways. I was just asking what was the big breakdown and why the 
big reason on that? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I thought you were asking a question on how much per mile. What you are asking a 
question on is the total maintenance budget. The numbers of miles have not increased that much and that is 
true. Let us remember that for instance a great deal of this is asphalt costs and maintenance. The price of 
asphalt has more than quadrupled in that period of time. The cost of wages in that period of time, if you look 
at those three graphs those three bottom graphs, there is simply a tremendous increase in wages, the cost of 
equipment. We have a tremendous amount of equipment 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1771 
 

replacement repairs. Anybody that is in business or farming knows that the cost of repairs has doubled. All 
of these reflect in the total cost of maintenance and that I think is the answer to the increase, even though the 
mileage is not increased a great deal. It is pretty obvious that this has been the pressure of inflation. Asphalt 
is one of the main ones, machinery equipment and wages. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, when I did quote you the cost per miles, as I said, it's just about $500 per 
running mile in 1976-77 over the maintenance costs of 1975-76, which I thought was a little high, $500 a 
mile. You do explain some of the reasons for it. 
 
There is another question, Mr. Minister. I believe you are going to give me a breakdown after on the costs of 
the water bomber sites and the work that was done at the airports. You can table that for me? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, I've got that. The costs for the Meadow Lake air base, and that's a commercial air 
base as well as a water bomber base, the total all in costs, that would be the land and everything to begin 
with, $2,418,830. Hudson Bay, $2,215,020. La Ronge, of course, was built, the main structure was built by 
the federal government totally as a commercial airport and our inputs into that were the clearing, and the 
roadway which we still have to build, and so on. All of the costs on that one are not yet in. Prince Albert's 
water bomber base site is $485,850 — nearly a half million, and we have an estimate for Buffalo Narrows of 
$1,000,004, if you are interested. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, we were talking about the metric conversion and I see in your book you have 
trained 100 people on metric conversion, in your department. What has it cost the Department of Highways 
so far for the metric conversion and when are you going to complete putting up the metric signs and taking 
down the old mile signs? What has it cost up to now? Mr. Minister, while you are figuring that out, just of 
interest to myself, can you tell me also the cost of replacing a 4 X 4 post with a stop sign on it in the Prince 
Albert District? Can you tell what it costs the Department of Highways to replace that? The reason I am 
asking this is because there were some people working on the highways and they knocked down a couple. 
The cost that the Department of Highways had quoted, I thought, was unreasonably high. I was just 
wondering if you had the average cost. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I can get the average cost of our signs. I will be quite happy to provide it for you but I 
cannot give you that right now. 
 
MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — While our No. 1 Highway in the province is one of the finest 
sections in western Canada and, as you well know, once we get to Swift Current, it is no longer double lane, 
so we run into a problem of traffic congestion. There is no point, as you know, double-laning it much to the 
border because of the fact that the province of Alberta, in spite of its riches and oil, have allowed their 
section No. 1 between the Calgary and Saskatchewan border to deteriorate. I do not think they have touched 
it since they built it. What we are faced with, as the traffic comes through in the tourist season, there is a very 
heavy overload from Swift Current west. You also know that we have, in the south, a highway that runs from 
Brandon (No. 2) to the border and turns into 13 and crosses the southern part of the province through some 
very scenic areas such as the parks and the Moose Mountain past the Big Muddies right on through. At this 
point with your program on the highway system, this road will be oiled completely across the province 
except for 12 miles from Govenlock to the Alberta border. Alberta is in the process of closing up the 40 or 
50 mile gap they have, of 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1772 
 

unoiled road, coming in to meet it, which will give us one of the shortest, most scenic routes, for a second 
Trans-Canada route. 
 
In the year of 1952, I think the year which the member was elected, that portion of highway of which I am 
speaking was then part of the highway system of the province. 
 
I am asking the minister if he is considering requesting and finishing the oiling of this 12-mile stretch 
missing in the No. 13 Highway, which would make the second Trans-Canada route across the province the 
shortest and most scenic. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That section, as the member points out, is now in the municipal road system and he is 
right. It had roadway signs on it. I understand that the old timers who live down there say that it wandered 
around and you had to stop the old Ford and kick the cows off the road when you were using that highway 
because it was just one jump from the back pasture, but you are right. It did have highway signs and it was 
marked in the highway system at one time. I do not really know. I am glad you raised that because I was 
rather wondering who had decided — I imagine it was by some deal with the municipality. There is a need 
and there will be some development, I believe, when the federal people decide what they are going to do 
about their total road development and their road agreements in the Grasslands Park, that this will be a 
natural extension. I certainly am interested in seeing that road developed. I am getting a little feedback from 
people in places like Maple Creek that they are not anxious to see it developed for reasons that are obvious. 
But there is no doubt that it is feasible for No. 13. There is a fair bit of work to be done on No. 13 and I think 
the Grasslands development will be a factor, certainly an important factor. A study as you know is being 
undertaken by Parks Canada of what they will do on roads. Originally, when I was Minister of Natural 
Resources, there was an offer of 200 miles of good highway through that whole country. I am not sure where 
it is at now but I can only tell the member certainly it is in the ball park for development, and I am sure there 
will be something come out of it, especially when those studies are completed. 
 
I am a little bit worried about something that is north of there and some of the same people we were talking 
to were interested in that too, and that is the Fort Walsh road. We thought we had an agreement with the 
federal people that they were going to develop that road and take the burden off the municipality of Maple 
Creek, but there seems to be a slow down. I hope it is going to be cleared up soon. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Chairman, it seems that a lot of members tonight are discussing certain 
highways which are located within their constituencies. I noticed even some of the city members are bringing 
up particular problems and not to disappoint the minister I would like to join with my colleagues as well and 
discuss some of the highways located in my constituency. I think though, before I go into that, I think the 
Morse constituency is extremely fortunate in that, as a whole because we do have two major highways going 
through it, the No. 1 and the No. 4, we probably can claim a superior highway system which is located in the 
Morse constituency. Part of that is a result, I believe, because approximately 80 miles of No. 1 Highway 
four-laning runs through the Morse constituency which is probably the largest chunk of four-laning of any 
constituency in the province of Saskatchewan. I don't know whether you can say the good highways in the 
Morse constituency are the result of an energetic, eager MLA (Laughter) or whether they are the result of an 
excellent staff located in the Swift Current district. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
Merv. Clark and his staff in Swift Current and also Ernfold for the excellent job which they are doing. Not 
always do they agree with all the requests which I make but, on the whole, I feel they are 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1773 
 

doing an excellent job and would just like to offer congratulations to them. 
 
I am talking, Mr. Minister, in regard to a highway which we have discussed in Estimates in previous years, 
and which I have written the minister about in previous years, and this is No. 19 Highway from Hodgeville 
to the No. 1 Highway. I got rather excited last summer I must say in that when I did have an occasion to use 
that particular stretch of highway I noticed a fair amount of survey and activity on that particular route and 
thought, we are finally going to get some work done on No. 19. Basically, the highway system as I said 
earlier, in Morse is good. There are two problem areas; one is No. 43 and one is No. 19. No. 43 is not that 
bad; No. 19 I think that 21 mile stretch from Hodgeville to the No. 1 Highway is getting to the point where it 
is becoming quite a cost in terms of maintenance and I believe that the traffic count and the need is there for 
consideration to be given to No. 19 Highway. As a result of that survey activity which did take place last 
summer, I am just wondering when that particular stretch of highway will be slated for reconstruction. I 
noticed it was not in this year's program. I am hoping that it might be in next year's program. I am just 
wondering if the minister could shed any light on that particular stretch of highway. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I have said and I see the member for Morse does not see there is about 5,000 miles at 
least of that kind of highway that certainly needs widening and upgrading in the province. All I can tell the 
member at this time is first of all, we are doing our best to keep first class maintenance on it. I think he has 
indicated that our staff is doing a real good job and I think they are. I think we can be very proud of our 
maintenance staff in spite of some criticism from some quarters, that I may refer to later in the Estimates, 
which are completely unfounded. But that road you refer to is certainly in that total of 5,000 pretty high on 
the priority list. I don't know whether your people are travelling as fast as the people in Rosetown-Elrose. Do 
you think it is safe to build them a good road, Jack? 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Chairman, when it comes to the driving habits of the constituents of Morse, they are 
very conservative and that is as far as they go in their conservatism. 
 
I am sure that in regard to those 5,000 miles the department does have sort of a grading system in terms of 
priority, in terms of which particular highways need to be done first, second and so on, which is quite 
understandable. The ones that need the attention the most should, of course, receive that attention. It is my 
feeling that No. 19 has now reached that stage. I would be very pleased to talk to the minister about it after 
estimates, if he wishes and I would like to be able to put as much pressure as I possibly could on him to 
consider that particular stretch. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Just one further question that I want to direct to the minister on another topic. 
 
I have had occasion, in the last few weeks, to drive No. 2 from Findlater up towards Watrous. I wonder if the 
minister has given any thought and whether he has had any discussion with the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
with regard to upgrading that piece of highway at least to super-grid status? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I think the member knows No. 1 is being widened and upgraded and there has been a 
fair bit of work done on that in the past and the work program will continue. We can't do it all in one year. 
As we complete certain sections of road it provides us with an opportunity to move on others. I think that is 
what is happening. We will have completed by next year, for instance, one of the worst areas, and fairly 
heavily 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1774 
 

travelled - No. 4 north into the Meadow Lake area. That road has had a tremendous amount and it will be 
completed, totally completed next year. That will be No. 4 to Meadow Lake and that will be done. We can 
move then further west and probably we are already starting on No. 26. 
 
Likewise, we completed in the last three years, 70 miles on No. 35. That is going up north of the valley 
through to the north country there. That will be completed. No. 2 to La Ronge has been completed and that 
again is a job done and we can move to other areas. So there is a lot of daylight showing in places. 
 
I see the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf) is back. He was asking about metric signing and 
the very various costs concerning it. The gross costs that we have developed here have been about $849,050. 
That is everything; that is the total area of metric signing. I want to say to the House that I want to register, 
again, my disappointment — I think we have all the material, there is still some — my disappointment in the 
establishment of metric in Canada. It may be a surprise and I think it is a surprise to a number of people and 
to some of the people in this House that this act that brought metrication to Canada was passed in Ottawa in 
1971. In case anybody wants to make some political capital of that, they better think twice because it passed 
the House unanimously that Canada would go metric. 
 
The pressures, surprisingly enough, I report to the House came actually from big industry in the United 
States. That is where it really originated. Let us not argue the pros and cons of it. We are into it; we were into 
it with the unanimous consent of the House of Common in Ottawa and that is the direction that we are going. 
I have to say this - anybody knows that it is easier to figure by 10s than all those awkward measurements that 
we were raised with and another generation will appreciate it, we won't. We won't and I don't. I can say that 
honestly and frankly. I don't but another generation will. We were less than 10 per cent of the world that was 
using that old Imperial system - one yard, the distance from King Henry's nose to this thumb, you know, 
those kind of cute little measurements that developed over the years, which are ridiculous. The United 
States, incidentally while dragging its feet, on a government basis, is being pushed by those same industries. 
It would surprise this House to note that 16 States in the union now have metric signing on their highways. I 
was surprised and I get a little annoyed when people try to make political capital of this. You go to Alberta, 
go to Ontario, go to British Columbia (not to Manitoba) they are not on yet, but Canada has moved in that 
direction. We're in this, we might as well (as someone said) relax and enjoy it and do the best we can. 
 
MR. WIPF: — A supplementary on that, Mr. Minister, just a brief one. In this metric conversion is there 
any relief coming from the federal coffers at all to help us do this conversion? Maybe one of the reasons in 
the States that they are putting up metric signs is that there are so many Canadians taking holidays down 
there from Saskatchewan at this time, you know with the gas prices and that, they are getting prepared for us. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There is one thing about it. That's why I was disappointed. We were accommodating 
federal law. We got no assistance whatever from the federal government in this, and I think that when those 
people that are down there, we know a number of them are down there on holidays, they are quite happy to 
go down there enjoying whatever is to be enjoyed down there, but they certainly take out extra medicare 
insurance before they go and a number of other things they take, they are damned good and sure they take 
before they go and let's just not start into that one. I am 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1775 
 

not envying the people across the border, to the South or to the West. As a Saskatchewan citizen I'm $400 
ahead with my medicare and my insurance. That buys 40,000 miles of free driving and I say that people of 
Saskatchewan have got to go to beat heck to drive that 40,000 miles. So let's not quip about that. We are 
better off. The people of Saskatchewan are proud to pay their own way and they are not freeloaders. 
 
MR. PENNER: — I wonder if I could get back to the question I asked a minute ago. Some of the people 
will want to use some of that so-called free driving they are going to get by living here on that Highway 2 
that I asked you about. You answered about almost every other highway in the province and I'm really not 
surprised because you have to be embarrassed about Highway 2; you've got to be embarrassed about the 
so-called work that has been done on it. I wonder if you could give us some indication of how long it is 
going to be before that highway and the poor people who have to drive on it.. I only have to drive on it three 
or four times a year .. thank fortune. There are some people who have to drive on it every day. How much 
longer are they going to have to wait before they can get that upgraded at least to super grid status and 
hopefully into some kind of highway status? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well the member is being humorous or attempting to be. The program this year says we 
are going to pave from Holdfast to Liberty. We will be grading from Liberty to Imperial, which, as a share of 
the total highway program in Saskatchewan I think is very good. The road will be improved; it will be totally 
improved once it is finished. 
 
MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Chairman, first of all I want.. it is very indicative by the number of 
people in the opposition in the House tonight that the Minister of Highways has a pretty good program. 
 
I also want to thank the Minister of Highways for continuing No. 41 from Aberdeen to Wakaw. This 
certainly is going to help the city of Saskatoon that needs a lot of help. I also want to compliment the 
Department of Highways in the sincere effort they made in traffic safety. I think that anybody now that wants 
to make any political hay out of seat belts must look quite foolish. The results are very good. I know in 1974 
we had killed 318 people and now in 1977 we killed only 274. I'm looking forward to 1978 with still greater 
reductions. 
 
I also want to say that Carl Shields, the Director of Safety '77 did a marvellous job. I attended some of the 
meetings throughout the province, some on my own, some with the director and I must say that any place 
that we went people were really interested in the safety effort. 
 
I also received the Traffic Safety Report from Ontario, 1977, which was a very similar job to that we did in 
our traffic safety effort in Saskatchewan and you would have thought that they copied our report, but I see by 
the number of papers they went through they never looked at the Saskatchewan report. But they came up 
with the same recommendations. 
 
I want to say that from my constituency I received only one letter against seat belts and I tell you I was really 
proud of my group. In other communities where they were uneasy, where we held meetings, the remarks we 
would get there was, why can't we get meetings of that kind all over the province? Well, I want to say that 
any member of this Legislature who wants a safety meeting in their community should get in touch with Carl 
Shields. If they are scared of getting in touch with him, they can get in touch with  



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1776 
 

me or the minister and we'll arrange a meeting down there. 
 
I think that the attitude on roads this year has greatly improved. I think the few accidents that we have on our 
highways is a credit to the Department of Highways for the design and good roads. I am still looking forward 
to improving this attitude in our roads. I think it is not only our job on the government side but also the job 
of every member of this Legislature not to try to snip at the safety programs but join right in and put that 
sticker, 'Seat Belts Work,' on your bumper and get out there. You can't make another inch of politics out of it 
because the more you work against the safety program now the sillier you look. That's about all I have to say. 
I want to maintain that the Department of Highways is doing a wonderful job on one of the biggest highway 
systems in western Canada. It's a good system. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, if we may get back to where we left off before we were 
interrupted. You asked if we could comment on the charge for a map. My first reaction has to be under 
present economic conditions and I refer now to the gas prices in the province without pretending to sound 
political or critical about the gas prices. The fact that we are in a tourist deficit at the moment, I rather doubt 
that by charging for maps at this juncture, at this time that we would be creating too much good will in the 
province. I would say presently that we should probably give the maps out gratis but perhaps a year or two or 
three down the road when conditions are different that it may be a worthwhile recovery by charging for the 
maps. 
 
If I may ask a question under public communications. Do you have plans or do you have intentions to 
combine your highway winter road reports with MOT (Ministry of Transport) or are you working with MOT 
at this time? Or will you be? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Chairman, could we get agreement on item 1 and take that under its heading? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Mr. Minister, it's very difficult to hear you. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I was wondering, that is under communication, on item 7. Could we get agreement on 
number 1 then move forward on these questions in an orderly manner? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I am prepared to proceed that way but there was kind of the agreement at the 
start that you would go the other way. 
 
MR. HAM: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I was hoping that if I had the latitude I could finish up on item 1 and 
won't bother you later on anything else. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, I think it's a bit easier on my staff to get the answers if we went through the items 
one by one and get to your questions . . . . 
 
MR. HAM: — I'll mark these and get back to them after. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Let's try that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. HAM: — O.K. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you may be aware, in fact you may be one of the citizens 
that now use this system of driving, and when I use that term I mean a system whereby during the daylight 
driving hours you use your headlights. There are a 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1777 
 

number of citizens in the province, those who are generally concerned about driving safety and so on that are 
promoting the use of headlights during daylight driving. I am wondering if your department has considered a 
program of encouraging the use of lights during daylight driving and whether or not you have considered 
making overtures to the automotive industry to make a mandatory system whereby you start the car with the 
lights on kind of thing? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The transportation ministers of Canada have put that forward at a national level. It 
certainly has a great deal of merit. The problem that is raised by safety people is that when you have a large 
number of cars with their lights on, especially as it starts to become dusk, there's one character saving his 
battery, as he thinks, sitting in the middle of those then pulls out, it's a little difficult to see him. I believe that 
if we are going to move in this direction, we're going to have to ask for special switches to put in cars that 
automatically turns the lights on and off and that would make eminent sense. It is the government of Canada 
which established the safety standard that said that everybody has to pay $200 extra for a car because it's the 
law to have seat belts. We pay that, that's $22 million in Saskatchewan every year alone on new cars. That's a 
lot of money . It would be much cheaper to have a switch on all the new cars at least that would 
automatically turn the lights on and off. Because most people don't want to put their lights on because they 
forget them in the daytime. Then they wind up with dead batteries and they say they are not going to do this. 
The answer is, Yes, it's desirable but there are some things raised on a national level that indicate that it isn't 
all beer and skittles. 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — Just one question to the minister. I have been asked — As I drive down on No. 1 
highway, I find quite a few of the turn-offs have had for about 10 years a temporary approach sign. You've 
got me stumped. Why a temporary approach when it has been there for 10 years? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — A temporary approach was something that has been put there — I may need a little 
coaching from my staff  — been put there a number of years ago. I don’t know when it all started —  back in 
the 60s, about 66 — we started this when any road that may require later on a limited access, access every 
two miles. Those farmers have already been notified and that’s why the temporary access sign was put up so 
that when a service road was put in they will know that they will no longer have legal access directly on the 
highway. That’s what the temporary access sign is all about. It makes some people pretty angry. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Just one more question, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what 
responsibility does your department have with regard to the displays, if you like, on our border crossings, on 
our two major crossings, the Yellowhead route and the Trans Canada, with reference to advertising the 
province - here we are, we're coming into Saskatchewan? Very simply the question is, what responsibilities 
do you have in that regard, in your department? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — This is Tourism and Renewable Resources but I can give you a quick answer. As most 
people notice, there is a new universal logo being used on all letterheads and everything else so that all 
documents - it's a cost saving thing - all departments will use this. We need a new sign to be upgraded which 
will probably carry the new Saskatchewan logo with some other advertising which will update our prairie to 
pine signs which were very nice in their time but the Department of Tourism is working on that and certainly 
will be moving on it very quickly. 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1778 
 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you would agree that it would have to be Department of 
Highways crews that would have to do the installation if there were any new developments to be taking 
place? If you had to move something to that site, who is going to do it. Does the Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources have vehicles, transportation vehicles and that type of thing to do that type of work 
and employees to construct those projects? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — They may ask us for some assistance but they will initiate the work. We will do it for 
them actually on a custom basis if they can't do the work themselves. If they need some of our equipment 
they will simply pay back into our advance account for the amount of time we spent on it. They will initiate 
the work. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. ANDERSON: — I wonder, while you have a beautiful voice, if we couldn't read the items by numbers, 
not aloud. Rather than go through you reading all the numbers just say, item 5, is there any question, 
otherwise pass to — maybe that's not allowed. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, may I comment on that. I have some difficulty going clause by clause now so 
I would prefer that you carry on the way you are. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — It seems to be going that way and I have told the member if there is something he 
wants, if he wants a reversion, if he missed something but I am not pressing it either way. I would be quite 
happy to go either way. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — In the Planning Branch do you do any of the work that may have something to do with 
the causeway idea that has been brought up two or three times by some of the towns downstream from 
Saskatoon? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I don't know what you are talking about. A causeway, is that across the river? Are you 
talking about a causeway for a river crossing? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Yes. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There are no plans at this time for any of that type of crossing. There is a study being 
undertaken by the Saskatchewan Research Centre at the university and that is as far is it has gone. But as far 
as any planning or location there are none at this time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, there was some looking at this by the city of Saskatoon for the decision that a 
bridge would be better and there was some looking at it further downstream to replace some of the ferry 
crossings. The reason, I understand, that Saskatoon thought it wouldn't work was the up and down of the 
high grades and the destruction of the river bank. Yet it may work because of all the problems with the 
ferries downstream now. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I have no knowledge. I know there are studies going on at the university and that is all. 
As far as any planning in our department, there is none. If the city of Saskatoon has any, we have not been 
made aware of it. 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1779 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, I have a copy of a study done by DNS. Do you not have one? There is 
supposedly a causeway being considered up in the North by DNS. You have no record of that either? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — This is not DNS. It could be interpreted, a bridge study at Buffalo Narrows could be 
interpreted as a causeway because the approaches are going to be fairly lengthy, but it is still a bridge. Yes, 
you go across a long shallow narrow and that would be a causeway, but the current is far too strong and there 
still has to be the bridge clearance in the centre, so it is a bridge. Unless there is some other spot for DNS. 
This is our study and not DNS. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, O.K. I think we are now talking on the save wave length. The concern was with 
that type of concept in some other areas where the experiments have been to build the stones out so that there 
is a narrower centre because it is deeper. Now the suggestion is to move that step to just one section of 
arched area for the ice and so forth, because of that problem, and the swiftness. Are you considering any of 
these in any locations to replace ferries because of all the problems of the ferry closures, downstream from 
Saskatoon, from the Diefenbaker Dam? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No, not at this time, but if studies show that these are feasible, we probably may 
entertain it later, but I have to say, not at this time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Then, the second part of the question. Where would you handle ferries? Is this the 
right vote 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Municipal Affairs. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — They have nothing to do with Highways? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Not at all. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
ITEM 5 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I noted that you indicate you have staffing problems in the 
Planned Registration and Property Management Branch. Have these been solved? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I didn't hear the question. 
 
MR. HAM: — I say you note that you have indicated, under surveys, that you have staffing problems in the 
Planned Registration and Property Management Branch. Have these staffing problems been solved? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There is a shortage of some of these people in the wage market, but we have it under 
control. We are adequately staffed at this time in spite of the fact that this kind of people are difficult to get 
in Canada at the moment. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1780 
 

ITEM 7 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, if I could repeat that question that I asked earlier, whether or not your 
department, together with the Ministry of Transport, is considering combined weather forecasting or working 
in conjunction with each other for more accurate weather forecasting with respect to your hotline and so on? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, we use all of the information. The Ministry of Transport makes all of their 
weather information available to us and has done ever since their weather stations were established in 
Saskatchewan. They also assist us with the major airports with signalling and that type of thing. There has 
been complete co-operation from MOT in that area. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 
ITEM 8 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, this may not be the time and place to ask this question. You can answer it, if 
you choose. Can you indicate approximately how many metric signs were replaced as a result of mistakes — 
signs that were printed improperly or there was wrong information on them? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — There was nothing significant. The Signal Industries in Regina do all of this work and if 
there were any defects they would simply be sent back and corrected at their expense. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 
ITEM 9 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, I noted that in your report, under the operations division that there was a 
decrease in grading in the year 1976-77. Could you indicate why? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I will answer that. It is not under these estimates but I can answer that. The reason for 
the drop in rating last year was simply an unfortunate one of bad weather conditions in the areas that the 
contractor was in so that they had to be followed up and finished this year. That was the reason for the 
reduction and there is very little we can do about it — weather conditions just won't co-operate. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
ITEM 10 
 
MR. WIPF: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many part-time employees there are in this 
engineering branch. In summer, how many do you employ? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, this wouldn't satisfy me but they are talking in terms of 23 man months. Does that 
help you? 
 
MR. WIPF: — That is all right. Thank you. 
 
Item 10 agreed. 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1781 
 

Item 11 agreed. 
 
ITEM 12 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, I am curious. Do you have evidence that government outfits can construct 
bridges for less than private contractors? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well we have and have had, I guess since the inception of highways, a bridge 
engineering and construction branch. I think that the House and the members will know as well, that we do a 
considerable amount of work for municipalities. The question the member asks, can we perform that service 
for less money. My staff advised me that the type of work we do which is mostly in the area of smaller 
projects, yes. In fact, the city of Regina engaged our department to do the overpass because they were not 
satisfied at the price they were going to get from a contracting department. 
 
MR. HAM: — Do you have any studies, Mr. Minister, which determine to what extent studded tires damage 
road surfaces, and any plans to abolish the use of tire studs? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No. We have relied on studies done in Ontario and various other places but our 
department is not really too concerned with the damage done by studded tires. Some city jurisdictions are a 
little more concerned because of the pressure of traffic in some areas. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Minister, you say you are relying on studies from Ontario. I understand studs are illegal 
in Ontario. I am wondering how you could determine whether they are damaging or not if they are not using 
them in Ontario. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The matter is, whatever information we have is we're relying . . . Obviously the studies 
in Ontario were not sufficient to convince us to ban studded tires in Saskatchewan. We have not done so and 
we have no intention of doing so. 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I know you have heard about the 
problem in my area, numerous times as have numerous governments, about the causeway in the Tramping 
Lake. I do not want to go over all the details but I would like to ask you a couple of questions. 
 
First of all, would your department take a serious look at the problem of Tramping Lake area. It is one of the 
longest lakes, I am sure, in Saskatchewan and possibly in western Canada because you have to go at least 70 
miles around it to get to a place on the opposite shore and the lake is only two and a half miles wide or so. I 
would like to know if you could take a serious look at it. Would you and your department be willing to come 
and talk with the people of that area about their problem and, before that, would you be willing to discuss, 
with the Minister of Municipal Affairs, possibly an alternative to the road system around there, to put it as 
one of the priorities for the grid system? So that if this cannot be solved by putting a causeway or a bridge 
across it, would you discuss seriously, with the Minister of Municipal Affairs, some alternative to the road 
system around the area. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — In this case, and more so than three or four years back but responsibility for this kind 
of, as you indicated that Municipal Affairs is the department that should be doing something, if it is decided 
that this work is necessary. I agree, (interjection) don't, that's a long way from Tramping Lake. Anyway, the 
causeway, I'll tell 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1782 
 

you one thing, the causeway will accommodate a hell of a lot more traffic than the primrose path ever will 
and I agree with the member for Wilkie that there is a real need in those communities. I tried my best to 
initiate some activity there about five years ago and there were a number of people that were interested and 
then there were a number of people who as usual dragged their feet and they were on the east side. The 
municipality on the east side was something less than interested. But, yes, I'll talk about it but I would like 
you to raise it with Municipal Affairs as well because the transportation area, that is rural transportation is in 
Mr. MacMurchy's department. I would, well now the Minister, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I'm behind the times, the 
Department of Rural Affairs, let's call it what it is and if there is anything that we can do, if they arrive at 
some logical solution to this problem, I'd be very happy to see something done and I certainly have always 
been anxious to see this happen and I still am. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — One final question, how about, I realize the problems, I discussed it with many 
people between municipalities and funding and what you have often in the past but there are times, however, 
when a government department must be a leader and possibly I think this is one of the times when some real 
initiative and leadership between the two departments could really help this area and solve the problem that 
has been there for numerous years under both governments. I think it is time for leadership and some kind of 
incentive from your department and the Municipal Affairs Department. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I'll take a look at it again and see if I can build a fire. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I did want to ask a question under this subvote and I'm quite frankly glad I let the 
member for Wilkie go before me because her question is of much more value and importance than the one I 
have to ask, but it is a question I do want to ask and that is with regard to the research that you are doing. 
Sorry, Mr. Minister, if you are having difficulty understanding, I will turn up the volume a little. 
 
You are doing some research in a number of areas. The member for Swift Current has asked if you have 
done any studies with regard to studs and tires and possibly doing away with studded tires. You replied that 
you would be depending on the research from Ontario. In other matters we see that we are depending on 
research from the United States. I suppose what I am trying to say is that I am somewhat concerned, are we, 
or do you feel as the Minister of the Department, that we are doing ample research to make the necessary 
changes that we have to make as we progress. Do you feel we have enough going into research in your 
department? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I certainly do. In fact I think we are not depending on — I suppose I could have 
answered that question on studded tires, simply by saying, we are not concerned. The information we have 
on any studies has come from Ontario and it hasn't impressed us. That is simply because we are not 
interested. 
 
Now as far as our research division in Highways, I invite people to visit that department and take a look at 
the work that is being done there in asphalt, soil studies and so on, that has been going on over the years. 
 
This fall we established the first of its kind in the world - our highway test track, which is unique in the fact 
that it is a circular track, built and designed entirely in Saskatchewan between the Department of Highway 
staff and the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
I have a roadbuilders' magazine for all of western Canada and there is an article in there 



 
April 20, 1978 

 

1783 
 

of two full pages and pictures indicating the interest that is shown in this test track, which is designed to test 
all types of road, heavy pavement to lighter pavement, under certain weights and certain temperatures. I 
invite members, again, to go down to Park Street, where it is all enclosed in an igloo-type building there. It is 
a unique thing and it is a tremendous credit to Saskatchewan Research Council and our Department of 
Highways, at a total cost of only $375,000. That is something that I don't want to elaborate too much on. I 
have a pamphlet on it. I think it would save a lot of talking. You can pass it around. We have other 
pamphlets if anyone wishes them. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to thank the minister for the reply. I appreciate it. 
Thank you. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, if I may have permission, I have one question on item 8, as I wasn't in, 
if the minister would allow me. I believe that is right, otherwise I have to ask in every vote going down from 
13 to 20. 
 
On the maintenance of highway, I assume that is where the $45 million is where you charge flagmen and 
these type of people. Am I correct? On highways, like when you are working on a highway, is this the 
estimate to talk about them? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — O.K. I have a concern and I think the Minister of Labour will have the same concern 
of the people who are on Workers' Compensation, who are partially injured workers could, in my opinion 
and in the opinion of some of the Workers' Compensation people, make excellent flagmen in these kind of 
jobs. Now, is there any consideration within your department to work with Workers' Compensation with the 
partially disabled in one form or another but who are still capable of handling this job. Are you doing any 
work together to try to employ these people in these areas? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We have a tremendously good record in re-employment of people who are injured or 
trying to provide work for people who have handicaps. We have some people who are being picked up every 
day by the handicapped bus in Regina, Saskatoon; incidentally funded 75 per cent by this department by 
capital funding as well as a maintenance grant. I would want to be very careful in the area of flag persons. 
There are some awful, awful careless people on the highways and we have lost flag persons with two good 
feet under them because they haven't been quick enough to get out of the way. We have, and it's unbelievable 
but it's true. They have been seriously hurt and they have been killed and I believe that if it was a case of 
driving one of the trucks, we quite often use lead trucks; if they were able to drive, we could use them there 
and so on. But, in busy traffic I would want a young person that was alert and had two sound feet under him. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you've brought something out that I've never heard before. How many 
flag people with the department in Saskatchewan have been killed being flag men? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I can get you the historic figures, but we have had incidents. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — It is a rare, rare, rare, thing I would assume. 
 
MR. KRAMER — We had one, not one of the recent ones, on a marking machine moving down the 
highway, out here at Moose Jaw. One young man killed and one badly injured 



 
April 20, 1978 
 

1784 
 

and that is only about three or four years ago and there have been some incidents since. There is one 
gentleman in North Battleford, an elderly gentleman, that was crushed in between two, driven up right 
against the truck, and he has been on compensation for years because of the sheer carelessness and 
impatience of people going through. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — So you are saying when there is a construction crew going, people aren't considerate 
enough and because of that you are taking a risk on any of these types of people if you were to hire them as 
flagman and, therefore, for their safety you are saying, we have to back away? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We can employ them. I would say if there are incapacitated people there are places 
where the traffic is not high, it is not dangerous, there are places that we can. But on a busy highway, the last 
thing I would want would be an older person that couldn't move, or a young person that might have a 
handicap. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is there any specific area, for an example, people sit on a van and do a lot of counting 
of vehicles going by, for certain rates and destinations and things, are you using them for that area, where 
they are protected? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — We use them wherever we can and the only thing, if you know of handicapped people 
that are looking for work, tell them to apply to the Prince Albert office, get their name in, or whatever area 
they are in and they will not only receive consideration but they will be given priorities if they are 
handicapped. 
 
MR. WIPF: — What you are suggesting is that Workers' Compensation people who will then be able to 
work on some of the lighter type jobs (as I call them), seasonal in most cases, if they get their name in now 
to your department you will give them a consideration wherever possible? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I'm saying that's our policy, yes. 
 
Item 12 agreed. 
 
ITEM 13 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you or your officials tell me whether or not there are any 
plans to construct, or are you considering building a four-lane highway south of Swift Current to the 
Neidpath junction? There have been a number of accidents over the last several years and there have been 
pressure groups in to see me. Whether or not you have received correspondence or not I don't know, but I 
know there are a lot of concerned citizens live in that direction. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Chairman, may I answer that last question? There has been no correspondence as 
such that we are aware of and my people say that it is not considered to be of high priority at the moment. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 o'clock p.m. 


