



















































Hansard: May 02, 1978


2221 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 2, 2978 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I take great pleasure today in introducing 38 grade eight students from Westmount 

School in the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount. They are located in the Speaker’s Gallery and they 

are accompanied by Mr. Corey and Mr. Toles. I hope all members will join with me in making these 

students from Saskatoon feel welcome in the Legislative Assembly. I hope that they have an interesting 

day and safe journey back to Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce a 

group of students from my constituency. They are 10 in number; they are an adult upgrading class from 

the Poundmaker and Little Pine Reserve. They arrived here yesterday. I have already met with them this 

morning and I would like to mention they are grade eleven and grade twelve students, Mr. Speaker. 

They have already completed grade eleven and are now in grade twelve. They are seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery, the top row. I would like you to welcome these students from Little Pine Poundmaker 

and wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.M. Dyck (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to introduce to you and to 

this legislature, 44 students from the McNab Park School in the Saskatoon Mayfair constituency. They 

are accompanied by their teachers Mr. Schellenberg and Mr. Riechert. I had the opportunity a few 

months ago of visiting McNab Park School and I was very impressed with the integrated program they 

run there where handicapped children are taught in the mainstream of the school. I want to congratulate 

the staff for their dedication at McNab Park School and certainly the foresight of the Saskatoon Board of 

Education in running this integrated program which I think has been very successful at McNab Park. I 

hope the students at McNab Park School have an informative and worthwhile afternoon and I look 

forward to visiting with them for a short time in the rotunda area as soon as they leave the gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with my 

colleagues in introducing a group of students to the House today. I have, as guests of the House, students 

of grade six, grade seven and grade eight. I think there are about 40 in number from St. Dominic and St. 

Mark Schools in Saskatoon in the west gallery. They are accompanied by Mr. Exner and Miss Butz of 

St. Dominic - I hope I pronounced that correctly. I probably did not - and Miss Henderson of St. Mark. I 

know they have had an enjoyable tour of many of the highlights of Regina to date. I am sure they will 

enjoy the question period and their stay in the House and I wish them a safe journey back home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2222 

 

Tax Rates Under Bill No. 47 

 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 

question either to the Minister of Mineral Resources or the Attorney General. The Leader Post, in the 

last few days, has indicated that the government is applying to the Supreme Court of Canada to set the 

interest rate on the judgment that CIGOL obtained in the recent decision in that court. The minister was 

quoted as saying that it not only affected the CIGOL case but the appeal would also affect tax rates to be 

set under the regulations for Bill No. 47. Am I to assume by these statements of yours, Mr. Minister, or 

Mr. Attorney General, as the case may be, that the tax rates that will be set under Bill No. 47 will be 

approximately the same, and I stress the word approximately, as the tax rates that were set under Bill 

No. 42, and as well will have a factor built in to cover interest costs if any of those companies should 

decide to take the government to court under the CIGOL decision? 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is a bit too early 

to be precise about that. As the Leader of the Opposition has pointed out, the matter is subject to a 

decision of the Supreme Court of Canada. We are also currently carrying on discussions with the 

industry. We have had several meetings with them in regard to the regulations that will be required by 

Bill No. 47. Until, I think, those discussions have been concluded and/or the decision of the Supreme 

Court of Canada, it is a bit difficult to be positive in relation to the question the member asks. However, 

I can say, Mr. Speaker, that it is the intention of the government to undertake to approximate, under Bill 

No. 47, the revenues that were collected under Bill No. 42 and it would not be acceptable to the 

government of Saskatchewan to have moneys claimed in interest for any moneys that companies may 

feel were owing to them. There would be some measure then undertaken to assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that they would not lose that potential revenue which may be claimed in interest. 

 

Mr. Malone: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, will the minister confirm that the tax 

rates will not be set until the Supreme Court comes down with its decision on the recent appeal which I 

assume will be the case, but would you not agree that if you build in a factor under the regulations to 

Bill 47 to cover interest, then what you are in effect doing is asking those companies that paid taxes 

under Bill 42 to pay not only the same amount of taxes under Bill 47 that they paid under Bill 42 but a 

certain percentage more depending on whatever rate the Supreme Court sets, that is they could be 

paying 5 per cent, 8 per cent, 10 per cent more in taxes to the government under Bill 47 than they paid 

under Bill 42. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I do not want the Leader of the Opposition or the 

members of the Legislative Assembly to assume that we will not be making any decisions in relation to 

regulations until the Supreme Court has concluded its deliberations in regard to the interest question. 

That may or may not be the case but I do not want our position to be one or the other at this particular 

point in time. That is something that we are still considering. 

 

In regard to the rest of the inquiry of the Leader of the Liberal Party, as I noted earlier we are still 

undergoing discussions with the oil companies in relation to the regulations that will be required by Bill 

47 and it would be improper to conclude that we will undertake to establish a rate which will, in effect, 

bring about the additional charge of 10 per cent or whatever it is that the member makes recognition or 

note of. There may be, at the conclusion of these discussions, some other means of resolving that 

problem. I recognize that it is a problem. I think it was a problem that was recognized, a 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2223 

 

potential problem, when we introduced Bill 47. It is one that we have not come to a final decision on at 

this point in time. I think that we will have a decision which will be agreeable to most parties, if not all, 

when we conclude our discussions with the oil companies. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Final supplementary. Would the minister not conceive by building in this interest fact 

in Bill 47 that what you are doing, in effect, by so doing is you are penalizing those oil companies that 

did not challenge you in the courts and that those companies that were prepared to accept the rates under 

Bill 42 and to pay their taxes when they became due, and now going to be penalized because they didn’t 

follow the leader, CIGOL, and sue in the courts and collect the interest that they may have been entitled 

to? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that may well be the case if one was to undertake to build in the 

interest factor. I think that is obviously one of the means of resolving the problem. It is not at this 

particular point in time the decision of the government in fact to pursue that. There are other alternatives 

and I think that one will simply have to wait until we conclude our discussions with the industry to see 

which alternative it is we choose to introduce. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister who just sat down, would 

you comment, is there any further action pending - has any other oil company taken action because of 

the CIGOL decision? Is there any action being taken against the government right now? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Not to my knowledge, Mr. Speaker . . . but that was conveyed to the House during the 

course of the last session in the fall of 1977, but I know of no other since that time. 

 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. Mr. 

Attorney General, this morning in Crown Corporation an exchange took place between one of the 

members of the Crown Corporations Committee on the government’s side, the member for Kinistino. 

Granted that no records are kept in Crown corporations but as fate would have it, we happened to have a 

steno who happened to be taking notes and the words were something to the effect that the member for 

Kinistino directed to the members of the press who were in attendance, which went precisely, ‘I wonder 

who bought those people.’ Mr. Attorney General, the people of the press who were there were one Mr. 

Lowrey of the Star Phoenix, Mr. Robbins of CKCK Radio, Mr. Cheshire of the Leader Post, Mr. Rolko 

of Broadcast News. Would the Attorney General tell this Assembly whether the member for Kinistino 

was reflecting an official government attitude or was it merely reflecting a position of his party towards 

the press? 

 

Hon. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I was not in Crown Corporations, I have not talked to the member for 

Kinistino about what has or hasn’t transpired in Crown Corporations. Frankly, I just can’t answer that 

question. I think that is something which the hon. member for Kinistino will have an opportunity to 

explain at some later date as he chooses and as he sees fit. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I’ll take a new question, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

Poplar River Power Project 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2224 

 

Mr. R.E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister in 

charge of SPC. On Friday last the minister made it clear that his statement had misled this Assembly in 

answering a question on Monday, April 17, when he said SPC had permission to proceed with Number 2 

generator at Coronach. Unfortunately the media also carried the misleading story and I have heard 

concerns from citizens at Coronach, as well as from a person in the Department of Environment in 

Ottawa. I am wondering, will the minister immediately send a letter to the Government of Canada, the 

Government of the United States, the Government of Montana, as well as the chairman of the 

International Joint Commission and the chairman of the Bergstrom hearings, making clear his 

misstatement so that problems won’t arise from this misleading story. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, let me first say that it is inappropriate, I think, and in itself misleading to 

suggest that I undertook to mislead this legislature. I conveyed to the member as I did to the Legislative 

Assembly last Friday, that even though the records did refer to Coronach Number 2, that it was in error. 

I had in error said Coronach Number 2 for Coronach Number 1, that I wanted the records corrected to 

show what in fact my intentions were. I have undertaken to do that in this Legislative Assembly so that 

the records are, in fact, correct. Mr. Speaker, if that is the single largest mistake that a member of this 

Legislative Assembly makes, then I think that he should be forgiven for it. Let me further say, Mr. 

Speaker, that I also, because I felt that there might be some of those who may undertake to use that to 

mislead the people of Saskatchewan or other people, released a statement last Friday afternoon 

correcting any misleading statements that may be made relating to the utterances that were made within 

this Legislative Assembly. I believe that I have done virtually everything within my power to convey to 

the general public, to those parties that the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg relates to, so that if there 

was some misunderstanding it should now be cleared up. 

 

Mr. Nelson (As-Gr): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I did say his statement mislead this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, but I am wondering now, I have had concerns from rural municipal council of the 

municipality of Hart Butte that expressed concerns over statements made by the minister on a CBC 

Insight program. I am wondering if the minister shouldn’t straighten these statements out and make clear 

his meaning when he said they have no intention of spending the money necessary to reclaim the land in 

that area to a state as good as it was before. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, let me first say that I think that the RM of Hart Butte can undertake to 

convey their concerns to either Saskatchewan Power Corporation or myself as chairman responsible for 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I think that there is a very significant record of dialogue, both 

written and verbal in relation to the Coronach project. I am sure that if they are somewhat concerned 

about statements that may or may not have emanated from myself on the CBC radio program Insight, 

that they would communicate them to me. I said on that program as I have said in this legislature and at 

public meetings throughout Saskatchewan, that there are costs projected at this particular point in time to 

reach something as high as $1.5 million per quarter section if it was to be reclaimed to farm land and 

that it would seem somewhat inappropriate to now, before the total studies in regard to reclamation have 

been concluded, to commit ourselves to a reclamation cost of something which could approach $1.5 

million per quarter section. I have not said that we would not undertake to expend significant sums of 

money to reclaim the land that was stripped for coal mining but that we should be aware of the fact that 

it may not, because of economic reasons, be reclaimed to the 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2225 

 

status of farming again. 

 

Mr. Nelson (As-Gr): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I am wondering if the minister is presently 

saying that the people of Coronach or the people of the Hart Butte municipality have not the right to 

bring their concerns to this Assembly through their elected representative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I think the record of the elected representatives speaks for itself . . . 

(inaudible interjection and noise) . . . We would have, we would have, Mr. Speaker, I think if the 

member with good conscience had represented those concerns as I think a conscientious member should 

have, resolved a lot of the problems that were outstanding . . . some months ago . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Workers - Shortage 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — A question for the Minister of Social Services. A news report today 

indicated that, from the Canada Department of Manpower, that there was a severe shortage of farm 

workers in the province of Saskatchewan. I note your latest statistical bulletin, or the one for January, 

indicates that there are approximately 4,500 fully employable or partially employable Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan recipients. What specific actions is your department taking to direct those eligible or 

those employable assistance plan recipients to take such training as is necessary to assist the farmers 

with the shortage of farm workers? 

 

Hon. H.H. Rolfes (Minister of Social Service): — Mr. Speaker, let me first of all indicate to the 

member that I am aware of the fact that the staff enrolments are up. I indicated in the House before that 

we had anticipated this because of the action taken by the federal government in restricting the eligibility 

for people on the . . . 

 

Mr. Malone: — What about . . . 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, if the member from, if the Leader of the Liberal Party had the answers to 

the employment situation, I wish he would convey that to his national leader, Mr. Trudeau, who has to 

face this responsibility, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This province, Mr. Speaker, 

employment rate is very good compared to what you have in Quebec or what you have in Prince Edward 

Island or what you have in Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the employment 

record in Nova Scotia, where we have a Liberal government, I’ll compare our record any day, any day! 

And, Mr. Speaker, it will be a sad day in Saskatchewan when these people, when the Saskatchewan 

people would ever elect a Liberal government here again . . .(Loud noises) . . . It is true, Mr. Speaker, it 

is true that the record will show, the record will show, Mr. Speaker, in 1970 that the employment rate 

was low because 24,000 people left this province at that time and went to other provinces when they 

couldn’t find any work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — In answer to the member for Qu’Appelle, we have increased, Mr. Speaker, we have 

increased our budget for our Employment Support Program as I 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2226 

 

indicated the other day, by $1.6 million and there are going to be a number of people who are going to 

be on training programs so that they can develop the skills of either becoming partially employed or 

fully employed. And you can look at the record, look at the record of the Employment Support Program, 

you will find that about 80 per cent of those people are no longer on public assistance. I think we can 

continue that record. But, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier indicated the other day, there is no way we can 

supply the work for all those people who are coming in from the other provinces, where there is no work 

available and ask us to take care of them here. 

 

Mr. Lane (Qu’Ap): — I wonder if I could get back to my original question. 

 

Can the minister explain, after his long answer, why his department refuses to make it a priority of his 

employment programs that the employment training programs be designed specifically to meet the needs 

of the farmers of Saskatchewan, who are faced with a shortage of farm workers? Now, would you not 

admit that your policy should have been directed to that end in the first place? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, we are certainly not opposed to that and the ESP (Economic Support 

Program) is certainly adaptable to that. There is absolutely no reason why potential social service 

recipients cannot work for a farmer and receive assistance through the ESP, nothing at all to present that. 

In fact the program is so worked that that can happen and it is happening right now. We have many of 

our potential social recipients who are working for individual business people and if they get training, if 

they can prove to us that they are getting training so that their skills are improved and they then have the 

potential of being either partially employable or fully employable, the ESP Program will. In addition to 

that, Mr. Speaker, I think it is unfair for the member to expect the Department of Social Services, solely, 

to take care of that problem. As the Minister of Finance has indicated we have approximately $400 

million or $450 million of capital works programs which will, Mr. Speaker, to a large extent take care of 

the problem that the member for Qu’Appelle is referring to. I think over the next two months this will be 

proven. 

 

Mr. Lane (Qu’Ap): — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister has very pointedly referred to 

business and has very pointedly ignored answering the question with regard to farm workers. 

 

Would you not admit that in fact it should have been a first priority of your department that employable 

assistant recipients should have been directed to those training programs so that they could, in fact, be 

trained and be sent to the farms to give the farmers the needed support assistance that they are crying 

for? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I can’t disagree with what the member is saying and there is 

absolutely nothing that this department has not done to allow that. We are, right now, the director of the 

ESP Program is doing exactly that and there is no stone left unturned in order to provide employment for 

the potential social recipient, Mr. Speaker. I think our record shows that we have done a good job in that 

particular aspect. As I indicated before the ESP Program has been very successful. That is why I asked 

for an additional $1.6 million. This government made it available and I think the program will prove 

itself again in keeping hundreds, hundreds of people off of public assistance payrolls which otherwise 

would have been there. 

 

Gas Rebate - Distance from Customer or Dealer 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2227 

 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Revenue. In your gas statement 

last week I believe it was clear when it came to retail outlets but as far as the bulk dealers were 

concerned in Saskatchewan it has left many of them concerned as to how it applies. My question is, 

when there is going to be a rebate of 10 cents is the rebate going to apply by the distance that the bulk 

dealers are from the Alberta competition or is it going to apply by the distance that the customer is from 

the Alberta competition? There is quite a difference between the two. 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Revenue): — I am not absolutely certain but I believe it is from the 

distance of the bulk location of the plant. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — The distance then is from the bulk dealer. How are you going to in a situation where 

you have one person the dealer who is living in an area where there is a 10 cent rebate and then the next 

area two, three or four miles down the town on the other side of the dividing line where there is a 5 cent 

rebate, how agree you going to take care of the competition between the two dealers and prevent the 

fellow with the 10 cent rebate having a price advantage over the fellow with the 5 cent rebate? 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Obviously what you do is put your finger on one of the problems. It is apparent no 

matter what you do they are going to have that problem. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Supplementary then. It would seem then that the minister indeed has no solution. I 

would like to indicate to the minister that in the instance an example is the Maple Creek area where you 

have the two service stations on the Trans-Canada Highway which are eligible for the 5 cent reduction 

and just five miles down the road you have all the service stations in town which are just two miles out 

of the area. It would seem to me that possibly you should have used more of a trading area rather than 

such figures as an arbitrary distance and you wouldn’t have run into some of the difficulties that you 

have if you used the trading area. Would the minister not take it into consideration the fact that you 

might change your program so that you will deal with the trading area rather than just the arbitrary 

distances? 

 

Mr. Robbins: — I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, what is bothering the member. If he thinks Maple Creek is 

not included in the . . . it is included . . . well, it is. The distance from the town of Maple Creek to Walsh 

via grid roads is 46.6 kilometres and it is within the 48 kilometre range. 

 

Three Axle Trucks 

 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister 

of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, this question has come before this Assembly before and it seems to be a 

growing problem in rural Saskatchewan, one which I have received a number of letters of which you 

have a copy with even some support from the Ag reps and that is the growing trend in rural 

Saskatchewan for the purchase of the three axle trucks. The reason why as you know they are going for 

the three axle trucks or being encouraged to do so is because they are causing less damage to the roads 

than those overweighted two axle trucks. A number of petitions came before you this spring and again 

last fall about including the three axle truck in the way of the farm licence rather than the . . . (inaudible) 

. . . licence. Is your department and have you presented to the Department of Revenue your case to 

prevent this type of discrimination among the owners of farm trucks? 

 

Hon. E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — That is a question which comes up fairly 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2228 

 

frequently and one which has been under some consideration by the government but it is not one which 

we have been prepared to move on at the present time. There are all of the arguments which are still 

there about the fact that three axle trucks, which has not been proven by anyone that three axle trucks 

create less damage, in fact that is very questionable whether they create less damage. We also have a 

problem of three axle trucks being in competition with our commercial trucks and that still continues to 

be a problem and one which we have not resolved. At this point in time we have not prepared any 

recommendations. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Have you, Mr. Minister, as Minister of 

Agriculture made your own personal representation in cabinet to prevent this discrimination and 

secondly, Mr. Minister, would you not agree at this particular time that the amount of revenue to be lost 

as far as the Minister of Revenue is concerned is very small indeed compared to the discriminatory 

element. Have you done a study as to what the revenue loss would be for three axle farm trucks? 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — No, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t made that study. I think that’s within the purview of the 

Minister of Revenue. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we have, and let me repeat it, and I 

ask again this question. As Minister of Agriculture, a farmer yourself, would you not agree that when the 

recommendations are coming from the farm organizations and, indeed, the Ag reps within the province 

of Saskatchewan, where farm trucks where they are larger trucks, three axle trucks, that it is your 

responsibility to take this to cabinet and argue on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I know that it continues to be a continuing problem. It continues to be 

something which is being related to me by the agriculture community and I will be discussing it with my 

colleagues. 

 

Tax Rates under Bill 47 

 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, the minister said earlier that it is a bit too 

early to be precise about the regulations. I ask the minister when you will be bringing down the 

regulations to Bill 47? It is five months since the CIGOL case, three months since the legislation came 

in and five months since the Premier told us that it would be possible to bring in the regulations before 

the legislation was passed when he thought the legislation would be passed in December. I ask the 

minister how long he will hold up the development of the industry and continue creating problems in the 

industry by this delays? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I disagree with the member that there are problems with the industry and 

that there is hold up as far as development is concerned. The member need only look at the records of 

activity within the province of Saskatchewan for the first quarter to show that there is an increasing level 

of activity in Saskatchewan vis-à-vis last year. Last year’s activity was an increase of something in 

excess of 100 per cent over the previous year, 1976. There is not, Mr. Speaker, one shred of evidence to 

show that there is any reluctance to continue to explore and develop oil in the province of Saskatchewan. 

In fact it is the contrary, Mr. Speaker, I think it is only appropriate for us to complete our discussions 

with the industry before we announce what the regulations will be and those discussions are ongoing at 

this particular point of time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2229 

 

Mr. Dyck: — Mr. Speaker, when I introduced the students from McNab School, there were two 

students who were not present in the Chamber at that time and I would like to introduce to this 

legislature and to you, Mr. Speaker, Ron Schonberger of McNab Park, who is accompanied by his 

mother, Mrs. Schonberger and Cheryl Utli accompanied by her foster mother, Mrs. Utli. I would like to 

welcome them to this legislature and I’ll be meeting with them in a few minutes in the rotunda area. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Comments of the Member for Kinistino made in Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. R.L. Collver Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I would like to rise on a 

matter of personal privilege. Today in Crown Corporations Committee, a member of the legislative 

Chamber in referring to four members of the press corps stated and I quote: — ‘I wonder who brought 

those people.’ Mr. Speaker, I would like to give an opportunity to that member today to unqualifiedly 

withdraw those statements on behalf of the members of the press corps in the east gallery. The fact is, 

Mr. Speaker, that it was an unwarranted comments, I am sure, perhaps, unintentional on behalf of the 

member for Kinistino and I believe he should have an opportunity to withdraw those comments, totally. 

 

I understand the press gallery association is meeting on this matter this afternoon, that they are 

concerned about this matter. Mr. Speaker, I would like to see the member for Kinistino speak to this 

issue. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I simply ask Your Honour when you are considering the privilege, to 

determine whether in fact it is a member’s privilege. I was not in Crown corporations. My information is 

neither was the Leader of the PC Party. In any event even if he was there, the key issue is, is this a 

remark or an action which offends the privilege of any of the rights of the members of this House? 

 

It may or may not offend the rights of the press gallery or the sensitivity of the pressmen. That is 

something for them to concern themselves with. It may or may not offend the member for Kinistino, his 

views, that is something that he has to sort out with the press. 

 

My point with you, Sir, is that this is not a matter of personal privilege and as such cannot be considered 

since in no conceivable way affects any of the member’s privileges. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I would rule that the member’s so-called point of privilege does not qualify as a 

point of privilege. Therefore, I am not in position where I have to rule on the matter. It happened outside 

of this Chamber, in a committee. I am not aware of whether it was recorded by anyone, or any of the 

officials of the Chamber, so, therefore, I don’t feel it is a legitimate point of privilege. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 16 - Gas Tax Difference between Alberta and Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley) moved, seconded by Mr. Stodalka (Maple Creek): 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2230 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for failing to take action which 

would have substantially alleviated the serious financial problems faced by Saskatchewan 

petroleum dealers as a result of the gas tax difference between Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is indeed appropriate to pass some comment on the government’s attempt to 

absolve financial difficulties created by Alberta reducing its gas tax, in view of the kinds of questions 

that the member for Maple Creek (Mr. Stodalka) has put to the minister today. If anything was 

accompanied by his questions here in this legislature, it was to certainly outline to anyone who was 

interested in observing the procedures here that the minister, while he may be somewhat unsure of 

himself at this very minute, two hours ago his department was completely unsure about what they were 

doing with their own regulations in an attempt to absolve the problems with respect to the Fuel Rebate 

Program, to eliminate the discrepancy in price between Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

The government was faced with a difficult situation indeed, as a result of Alberta’s action. They do, 

however, have the responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to try to take action which would 

provide the best possible solution to the difficulties faced by the people of Saskatchewan, in this case 

those dealers bulk or retail that live along the Alberta border, whose livelihood depends on their sale of 

gasoline to their customers, along the central Saskatchewan or the western part of the province. The 

government had that responsibility to resolve those problems and what have they done with it? Well, 

there is little doubt that the minister’s own staff is unsure of, in fact, what application of regulation will 

be done in Saskatchewan. The member for Maple Creek contacted the minister’s department several 

hours ago, to ask them if in fact, the community of Maple Creek and service stations that lay within the 

town limits of Maple Creek qualified under the grant program. The response of the minister’s 

department was that, no they never. The member for Maple Creek said, why not? Your employees told 

him that the reason was that the distances were measured along the highway and that Maple Creek was 

52.17 kilometres from Walsh, Alberta, it’s nearest competitor. Therefore the town of Maple Creek 

would not qualify, although two service stations lying on the Trans-Canada Highway, five miles north of 

Maple Creek, would qualify. 

 

The minister now stands up in this legislature in question period and says and points out with a sarcastic 

note in his voice, that of course the community of Maple Creek qualifies, because when one takes the 

grid road it is only 46.7 kilometres from Walsh, Alberta. In fact, the suggestion that the member for 

Maple Creek made to your employees earlier today that they try to consider that access to the Walsh 

retailer rather than going on the highway. So the minister is lurching from one hour to the next and the 

employees of his department are lurching one hour to the next. 

 

I was interested as well to hear the minister say that he was not sure, but he thought perhaps that the 

application of the grant with respect to bulk dealers would be to apply it to where that bulk dealer was 

located rather than where the farmers were located, or those people that he served. The minister wasn’t 

sure though. A crucial situation with respect to the grant program and the minister isn’t sure and I’ll tell 

you why it is crucial, because if you are going to apply the grant to where the bulk dealer is located, you 

can scratch about 25 or 30 bulk dealers along the western boundary of Alberta and Saskatchewan, with 

their application of the grant system. I will tell you why, because a dealer living in Richmound in 

Saskatchewan, living 13 miles from the dealer in Fox Valley, would have a five cent a gallon advantage 

over his competition 13 miles away. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2231 

 

They serve exactly the same area. Where are the farmers going to buy their gas? Richmound - I got that 

one myself! 

 

The minister should be paying attention to this because these are problems which he certainly hasn’t 

resolved in his own mind and which apparently many of the members of his staff, that are required to 

deal with this, may not have resolved in their own minds . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister’s 

staff pointed out to the member for Maple Creek that the grant rebate would not be applied where the 

dealer was located but rather where the farmer was located. Again, a rather serious rift in 

communication before the minister and his own employees. The minister who, supposedly, had to go to 

cabinet and sell this program to his cabinet members, it’s no wonder you had so much difficulty in doing 

that. If you didn’t understand it yourself, how are you supposed to convince your own cabinet colleagues 

that you had a worthwhile workable program to bring in? 

 

We have some other serious problems, just as serious as the question of whether or not bulk dealers are 

assigned the grant program according to their location or according to their customers’ locations. Firstly, 

this program does in no way take into account those sales that dealers, retail gas dealers and bulk dealers 

along the Alberta border, lost from April 1 to the time this program was brought in. The minister made 

an attempt to have the program retroactive; the grant will be retroactive and payable on each gallon of 

gas, taxable gasoline sold. But what does that do for these fellows who had a 60 per cent drop in the 

volume of their gasoline business from April 1? They get no retroactive grant on the business they lost. 

So there has been no attempt by your government to deal with that. You had the example of Tisdale’s 

Esso Service in Kindersley that lost money every day it was open from April 1 on. You’ve done nothing 

to deal with that and I know that you are not particularly interested in any suggestions that members on 

this side of the House may have. That may be the particular problem with your grant program. You 

weren’t prepared to go out and ask anybody what you might do about it. You never contacted those 

dealers living in Kindersley to find out if they had any suggestions about things you might have done to 

alleviate this problem. 

 

Local farmers in Saskatchewan will be in a position, apparently, of being able to buy their bronze gas 

cheaper than their neighbours depending either on where the bulk dealer is located or where they are 

located. Once that’s done, what happens? There is nothing to prevent any member of the community 

living along the Alberta border to go to one of his farmers and say, I’d like to buy 250 gallons of bronze 

gas from you. I live 60 miles east of your Alberta competition, you can buy the gas 10 cents a gallon 

cheaper than I can, will you buy it and I’ll purchase it from you. The minister had better be aware that 

that problem is going to exist in Saskatchewan. Not only that, every gallon of gas that these farmers buy 

they can claim as an income tax deduction, bronze gas. Two-thirds of it, if it’s for use in their 

automobiles and all of it if it’s for use in a four ton tandem grain truck or a gasoline operated tractor that 

they decide to burn bronze gas in. The minister had better be aware that that problem exists. I doubt it in 

view of the record that he has at this time in this legislature of informing us about his program. I would 

assume he hardly knows how to get to his office these days. 

 

What about the dealers in Saskatchewan that are badly hurt by the reduction in gas sales? Does your 

program even attempt to help all of them? No, it doesn’t. What did the minister do? He established an 

arbitrary border, 48 miles from your nearest Alberta competition, pardon me, 48 kilometres, as an 

outside limit. Did he bother to check with all those dealers in Saskatchewan who might lie outside that 

boundary who are badly hurt? Not at all. I can only assume that the minister was either unaware that the 

problem 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2232 

 

existed, in which case he should be condemned for not paying enough attention to what’s going on, or 

he didn’t care. One or the other. Take again Tisdale’s in Kindersley, lying about 40 or 50 miles away 

from its nearest Alberta competition, badly devastated financially by the reduction in the Alberta tax. 

The minister knew that because I brought it to his attention before he ever announced his program in this 

House. What did he do about it? Not a thing. He has ignored the problem in Kindersley. The fact that 

there are 14 employees working for that one dealer alone, that saves possible lay-offs, apparently 

doesn’t concern the minister. He’s not too interested at this particular moment. He wasn’t too interested 

about them when he was drawing his program up. His only defence is to say, oh, well, it’s such a 

difficult problem. We’ve done what we can and we should be thanked for that. The fact that we haven’t 

done all we can, that’s no fault of ours because it’s so difficult. 

 

You have taken a half-hearted stab at this problem, not because you had any serious compassion for 

people who were in trouble as a result of the Alberta tax reduction but because you are in the 

government and you obviously felt you had some responsibility to keep these people in business. But 

you weren’t serious about it. I’ll guarantee that. You never considered the difference between travelling 

on an interprovincial highway, like No. 7, and the distance on that highway from your nearest Alberta 

competition or travelling on a grid road. Mr. Speaker, 48 kilometres on a grid road for some farmer who 

doesn’t live in Alberta nor does he want to travel to Alberta. Not the least little bit of concern about the 

people in that situation. 

 

I would have liked to have heard that the minister or some of his staff would have phoned the dealers in 

Kindersley and said, has this problem affected you? These dealers are Saskatchewan citizens, they don’t 

live in Alberta. They didn’t come here from the United States to set up business. They are Saskatchewan 

people trying to run a business and provide a service for Saskatchewan people. What did their 

government do for them? It ignored them, either out of stupidity or lack of compassion, one or the other. 

I say you should be faulted for that. Maybe there is no easy solution. Obviously not, but I’ll tell you one 

thing, that if the Liberal Party were in power today we would have done a darn sight better at tackling 

this problem than you did and you had better believe that that’s a fact. The fact that you didn’t have the 

incentive to go out and find out how serious the problem is, is a clear indication of your own 

incompetence, either in spirit or in ability. I say you had better be prepared to bring in some amendments 

to this program. You better be darned prepared because you haven’t done a job here. If you think your 

answer is to apply a rebate system, then make it available for all people who are legitimately harmed by 

the reduction in the sale of gas, not just those that live within a 48 kilometre range. Why the 

discrimination? I would like to hear the minister explain that to me. Why does someone in Alsask 

qualify and someone in Kindersley not, when the Kindersley service station is hurt just as badly as the 

Alsask service station? Answer me that. Did you not apply your mind to that? Did you not ask your 

people in your office to tell you how serious the problem was? You completely ignored that service 

station in Kindersley. As a result of your ignorance they are faced with laying off many of their 

employees that were formerly employed there fulltime to pump gas - gas business that they have lost. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Horse feathers! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — That’s the absolute truth. If the Minister for Highways would ever undertake to 

check the highway situation out there, he might have to buy gas in Kindersley and he would find that 

out. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2233 

 

Now I say to you, you have an opportunity to make some improvements in your program here, I am 

suggesting one of your improvements would be to go back out and find out just how many dealers were 

seriously hurt, because you haven’t gotten them all. You might have fixed up most of the dealers in your 

NDP constituency of Cutknife-Lloydminster, you might have fixed up those dealers that had the 

advantage a few years ago, or a year ago, of having a 10 cent gallon differential, or 9 cent differential. 

But you didn’t fix those dealers that were hurt after April 1, that had good businesses before. You should 

be again faulted for that. I hope you are man enough to consider making some changes to that program. 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move this motion to condemn the government. It 

would give me just as much pleasure to stand up here a month later and congratulate that minister for 

bringing in amendments which would make this a more equitable application of a program to dealers in 

Saskatchewan - just as much pleasure to get up and congratulate you if you would do that. I hope you 

are prepared to stand up here and say, no we’re not done with the program. We have introduced a basic 

program, we know there will be faults in it and we are prepared to look at it and bring in new changes if 

they are necessary. You have some obvious areas where they are necessary. As I say again, I hope you 

are man enough in your cabinet post to bring them in. I so move. 

 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka Maple Creek): — Just a few comments that I would like to make. First of all, I 

would like to thank the minister’s department for the quick work that they did after my phone call this 

morning in checking out the distances that are in the Maple Creek area, recognizing the fact that Maple 

Creek was to be included. To me it seems that really, I suppose, one of the basic problems is that this is 

one of the prices that we have to pay for the fact that politicians on the other side of the House are able 

to go around the province and say that we don’t have a medicare tax in the province of Saskatchewan. It 

seems to me that it would be possible for the two levels of government, both the Alberta and the 

Saskatchewan government to get together and choose the same tax basis. Here we have in Alberta a 

situation in which we have no sales tax and we have no provincial gas tax and we have a medical tax of 

some $300 per family. Really it isn’t. I suppose always $300 per family because often the company will 

pay a portion of the medical care premium that the individual has. 

 

On the other hand in Saskatchewan what have we got over here? In Saskatchewan we have decided that 

we shouldn’t have any medical care premiums. It is very attractive politically at election time to go 

around and tell the people of Saskatchewan that we haven’t any medical premiums and other provinces 

have $300, $400 or $500. But on the other hand then we have to have revenue coming from other 

sources. Where do we get it from then? We have to get it from provincial gas taxes. We have to get it 

from such things as the sales tax of 5 per cent, a differential in income tax. I am the first to realize 

probably that we cannot compare with Alberta with some of the revenues that they have that we don’t 

have. But certainly it would be much more appropriate I feel, if you could get together at the provincial 

level and choose the same tax basis, at least your differentials wouldn’t be nearly as sharp as they are at 

the present time. 

 

You might say, and I suppose when you try to take this thing through your cabinet some of the problems 

that you had was that consumers in the western portion of the province are really getting some 

advantages. We all know that the 5 per cent sales tax isn’t applicable in Medicine Hat when one makes 

purchases in that area. Now of course, we are going to be purchasing gas with less than the 109 cent 

provincial sales tax. The real people that are hurt and this is a short-term advantage I might say because 

the real people that are hurt are the businessmen who are trying to compete in the small 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2234 

 

villages and towns along the Alberta border. It is just another one of these disadvantages that they will 

have to compete against. They, of course, as I say it is a short-term advantage because of the fact that we 

don’t know how long these businesses will be able to survive and if the businesses are eliminated in the 

end and have to go to Medicine Hat or some Alberta centre for all of your purchases then, of course, any 

advantage that we have at the present time is lost. The other comments I would like to make are in 

regard to the pricing system. I did contact a person in your department and asked him whether or not at 

the bulk dealer level there was going to be a rebate at the station level or at the customer level. There are 

problems really I suppose whether you use either way. If you could develop some sort of combination it 

may help. 

 

I would just like to outline a couple of problems that the member for Kindersley touched on. If you take 

and move the - I will speak as if I am a bulk dealer in the town of Maple Creek. If you did it by the 

location of the customer then that dealer would have to keep track of people who were 15 miles from the 

Alberta outlet, 30 miles from the Alberta outlet and beyond 30 miles from the Alberta outlet. When he 

delivered his sales into the country he would then have to adjust his price accordingly. So if you live 

beyond 15 miles west of the Maple Creek area you would get a 10 cent rebate, if you were between 

Maple Creek and the 15 to 30 miles range you would get the nickel rebate and if you were just east of 

the Maple Creek area you would get no rebate. Now, there are contractors who work in the area. There 

are farmers whose areas spread throughout both of the areas. You are going to have problems in that 

rebate system no matter how it applies. That is why I suggested in the question period that possibly one 

of the better ways would have been if you could have done it somehow through a trading area rather 

than through the staggered area. I don’t know how you would administratively keep track of delivering 

it to customers. It would be rather difficult. You would have to put a lot of onus on the individual who is 

the dealer to keep track of it and then you couldn’t prevent people from getting somebody in the 10 cent 

area from purchasing taxed gas for them, particularly people who weren’t interested in keeping track of 

costs for income tax. You might say there would be a 10 cent advantage in getting somebody in that area 

to purchase for you. On the other hand by going into the pricing by the station then you run into the 

situation where you have a price differential between two centres that are rather closely located. The one 

fellow then would get the price advantage over the other. Speaking of that area which I am very familiar 

with, it’s Fox Valley and Richmound. In the Richmound area the dealer will get a 10 cent rebate and in 

the Fox Valley area he is going to get a 5 cent rebate and the area between is 13 miles apart and they 

service the same area. So naturally you are going to have somebody with a 5 cent differential in the case 

of taxed car gas or this gas having to be used in trucks that are larger than four tons. So it is really going 

to create some problems and that is why I don’t know how if you move along the entire area, I suppose 

along the boundary you will run into more problems as you move in the area. But in our area, the great 

sand hills, you know sort of form an almost natural division. There are no outlets on the east side; most 

of them are on the west side. Probably if the rebate could have been standardized on that side, some of 

the difficulties in that area might have been eliminated. Again, that is only one area and I am not 

completely familiar with some of the other areas. 

 

I realize it is a very complex problem and was very difficult to deal with. I just would hope that the 

minister if he find that some of the things in the next few weeks are not working out the way they should 

will make considerable changes. 

 

Mr. Robbins: — Mr. Speaker, at least the last speaker admitted that there were very severe problems in 

relation to attempting to do anything. Therefore, he is a much more fair-haired boy than the fellow who 

sits behind him. The fact of the matter is that we are 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2235 

 

not the only province that has very severe problems in this respect. We have had contacts with the 

British Columbia government with respect to the problems they have in relation to gasoline taxes and 

they have done nothing about it so far. I don’t know whether they will do anything about it. But they 

also have very severe problems. They also have severe problems in relation to cigarette taxes, taxes on 

tobacco and they have just as severe problems as we have, in fact, more severe problems than we have 

in relation to our sales tax because their sales tax is 2 per cent higher. 

 

The problem is a significant one when there is a substantial differential between the tax bases of two 

provinces. Now, I think one of the members suggested that we should have consultation with them. 

Obviously we would also have to be in consultation with British Columbia at the same time because 

there would be a differential there. We have differentials between Manitoba and Saskatchewan in terms 

of cigarette taxes for example. Should we be in consultation with them? The fact of the matter is, that 

what we did so was return the 9 cent differential to those people most closely affected by the change in 

the past. Now it is true that you can levy criticism all you like in relation to main highways and those 

other arteries. The members over there were the people who were telling us to hurry up and get on with 

the job. One member said that we were not out consulting with anybody. We did consult with people in 

Macklin and places like that, reasonably close to the border. It is true that we did some checking in 

Kindersley as well. The fact of the matter is that although we hear the distress stories with respect to the 

situation in Kindersley, I can find distress stories with respect to station operators in the city of 

Saskatoon. I can show you a 6 cent differential one block apart, on Broadway Avenue. The station that 

had a 94.9 cent gasoline price on it last Saturday has a sign up on it since Monday morning saying 

‘Permanently Closed.’ Now, should we be rebating something to those people simply because they are 

caught in the difficult situation as well? 

 

We know the vendors have problems. We know they have problems but I think the member for 

Kindersley has accentuated them and exaggerated them a good deal. We have also had members within 

the zones where we were going to apply some rebate to say that we should not have bothered at all. We 

have had some of those members say we should not have bothered at all, even though some of them are 

within the 10 cent zone. 

 

Actually $82 million of revenue from gasoline taxes is vitally important to this province. In our direct 

taxes, we collect or estimate that we will collect about $204 million in E&H tax, $82 million in gasoline 

tax and about $21,600,000 in tobacco tax. Those are the direct taxes that we can list. There are some 

others but they are minor ones. They total about $344 million. If we are going to continually erode the 

tax base - I have even had members say you should abolish the gasoline tax altogether. Well, that would 

be very nice would it not? $82 million gone. We spend about $154 million a year on highways. Where 

are we going to get the money to spend on highways? If we did not have that $82 million, the members 

over there would be the first to be yelling about the fact that we were cutting back drastically on the 

highway program. 

 

We do not say it is perfect. We have never suggested it was perfect. We said that we would help the 

people who had been hurt the worst and we think that is true. Now, the member was critical of the fact 

that I was not completely aware of all the rules and regulations and the mechanics of the thing. I do not 

think that is a fair criticism either. It is true that we are feeling our way to some extent with respect to 

those regulations. We have to, I think it is fair to say that we are going to do the very best we can in 

relation to, I think it is 33 points that are now covered under those clauses, and it is going to cost 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2236 

 

about $1 million a year in terms of revenue back to about 112 or 115 operators. We are going to use the 

best possible means we can get to assure that those people get the results from the program. 

 

It does not matter where you go. If we had come to Kindersley, there would have been people in 

Netherhill saying they should have had it too, or in Fiske or D’Arcy or Rosetown or Saskatoon, right 

down the line. It is a fact of life that we had to cut it off within reasonable proximity of the border. I 

think the member is well aware of that fact and he knows, despite his criticism, that we did not say the 

program was perfect by any means but it is at least an attempt to ameliorate it. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

am going to propose an amendment, moved by myself and seconded by my seatmate, Mr. MacMurchy: 

 

That all the words after ‘Assembly’ in Resolution No. 16 be deleted and the following be 

substituted therefor: 

 

congratulates the Government of Saskatchewan for taking some action to reduce the impact of 

the elimination of the Alberta gas tax by providing assistance to fuel vendors who face 

competition from Alberta fuel outlets. 

 

Debate continues concurrently on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. R.H. Bailey Rosetown Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I was one of the first ones to raise 

this problem in question period and I raised a number of questions. Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out 

that during the month of April and now we are into May, I must admit that I, personally, had no remedy 

for the situation. To be quite honest with you, I didn’t hear any remedy for the problem facing the 

government from anyone on the opposition side, including this caucus. 

 

We have a very difficult situation here as the Minister of Revenue has admitted. I suppose there is some 

criticism in the time that the minister took to finally come up with the problem. I know that he was 

having difficulties in the caucus. It is one of these things, Mr. Minister, something like the school 

starting age where you set yourself off a mileage limit and it varies from place to place and yet a line has 

to be drawn some place. I know this is obviously going to cause some problems. 

 

Just speaking as a Saskatchewan citizen I have some very nasty thoughts about the removal of the 12 

cents sales tax in the province of Alberta, because being a native of Saskatchewan I could condemn 

them very strongly for doing this and make some recommendations to that government where they could 

have done some other cutting back. But it is very difficult, of course, for this Legislative Assembly. We 

are not here to try to tell any other province what they should have done. I suppose there are three things 

that come to mind. 

 

The first thing I would do, as a Saskatchewan citizen, is say, look why don’t you keep the 12 cents on 

there and get your No. 1 Highway built up so we can drive on it. That would be a logical thing to say as 

a Saskatchewan citizen. We could also make the point about the fact that maybe it would have been 

more beneficial, totally, socially, to take a look at their hospitalization premiums or something else. But 

be that as it may, I personally feel that for Saskatchewan we have been somewhat hurt by this. I don’t 

think the government can remove the gasoline tax in the province. I don’t think we have the revenue; I 

don’t think we can continue to operate without having the gasoline tax. I have 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2237 

 

not heard a solution to the problem. 

 

I read with interest and studied further the proposal made by the government opposite. The minister 

admits that it is not perfect. Two of my colleagues in the Liberal Party have mentioned some of the 

difficulties with it. I suspect that in the year that lies ahead there may be some modifications necessary 

to it. I regret that we find ourselves as a province, in a very difficult situation and I want to say that I 

appreciate the effort that our Minister of Revenue has put in to try to save, at least, some of the potential 

business on the Saskatchewan side of the border. Until I hear of a better plan, until I hear of a more 

logical approach to this situation, I will have to say that I appreciate what the Minister of Revenue has 

done. 

 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I want only to make a couple of brief 

remarks about the matter and I, Mr. Speaker, will be begging leave to adjourn debate. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I think it must be apparent to everybody in the province that from the level of 

expenditure - a little over $1 million - that this is sort of a niggling attempt by the government to avoid a 

very major problem, not a problem of their creation but a very major problem for a large number of 

people. And the level of expenditure itself demonstrates how little the government is prepared to do. Oh, 

the government is prepared to make a good stab at protecting their own constituency, a constituency that 

has been NDP for decades but they are prepared to do very little to protect other dealers and other 

people in the service station industry up and down the border. 

 

The second thing, Mr. Speaker, that I think the minister will find is a tremendous problem as time goes 

on, is that it will be possible, under this legislation as the minister describes it - if the minister was 

correct in question period when he said that the question for a bulk dealer is not where the purchaser is, 

but where the bulk dealer is located - it would be possible for a farmer to deal, say, with a bulk dealer in 

Lloydminster, get an 18 cent reduction and then have his gas, not his farm fuel, but his ordinary gas 

truck, perhaps 500 gallon lots. A 500 gallon tank, Mr. Speaker, is not unusual, a 1,000 gallon tank is not 

unusual, to buy in Lloydminster, to buy in Lloydminster, even though that person might live, for 

instance, in North Battleford or perhaps even in Saskatoon and get that 18 cent benefit. The other 

possibility and I suspect this will, indeed, be happening, is that people will be buying in Burstall to 

supply themselves in Swift Current. So what you will have now, is the tendency of people from some 

distance away from the border, to go to the border for the benefit that is available. We had assumed, Mr. 

Speaker, as a result of certain questions to the minister’s officials, that, in fact, the bulk dealer would 

have to react and base the entitlement to the benefit based on the location of the buyer. Now in question 

period the minister says that, no, that is not the intention. It may well be then, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister was wrong in question period when he speculated and I suppose I shouldn’t criticize the 

minister for speculating. I appreciate him at least trying to answer the question. That’s a very major area. 

If it is the way the minister thinks it was, when he mentioned it in question period, you are going to have 

some extremely large problems to overcome in the way that bulk dealerships operate. If, on the other 

hand, the program operates the way your officials have described it to some of us, particularly the 

member for Maple Creek you are inundating the dealers with more paper work, more problems, more 

difficulty. Typical, Mr. Speaker, the way the government treats business, frankly, that they don’t seem to 

mind how many papers and how many forms and how much difficulty you have to deal with. Mr. 

Speaker, either way, it is going to create some very real problems. I said earlier, I don’t visit upon this 

government the creation of the problem and as the 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2238 

 

member that just spoke indicated, he doesn’t particularly have any solutions to the problem but I suggest 

to the minister that what has been advanced is not a solution, not a good solution to the problem and I 

don’t know what happened in the cabinet room, I don’t know whether the ideas which the minister and 

his officials had were repeatedly shot down in the cabinet or not. I know that I watched the minister say 

in the electronic media that he’d have a solution, that he had the solution then and he was sure it would 

be passed the next day in cabinet. Well, the next day came, that was Tuesday, three weeks ago, then 

another Tuesday came and obviously the suggestions of the minister were again rejected by cabinet and 

then some days after that the hodgepodge solution that is now presented was presented in this House. 

Mr. Speaker, as I said I have further remarks that I would like to address to the matter and I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 

 

Return No. 19 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Merchant that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for Return 19 showing: 

 

(1) The recidivist rate of former inmates of the provincial correctional system on a yearly basis 

commending with 1970 to the present. (2) The recidivist rate of inmates of the various racial 

origins of the provincial correctional system for each of the years on an annual basis starting in 

1970 until the present. (3) The names of studies of possible integration of the provincial 

correctional systems and the federal penitentiaries system now in the possession of the 

department. (4) The studies reported in answer to (3) above. (5) The dates and nature of 

discussions or negotiations regarding integration of the Saskatchewan correctional system and 

the federal penitentiaries system proceeding with the federal government. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments before I move an amendment to the motion before us. 

Mr. Speaker, it is not that I don’t want to make the information available to the member but my 

understanding is that information simply isn’t available that he is asking for. Information that I received 

from our officials is that this government approved in 1976 to establish an automated information 

system which has allowed the ongoing recording of each offender as he comes in the correctional 

system. This ongoing record permits the assessment of the recidivism to be made for 1976 and 1977. 

However, prior to 1976 each incarceration of an offender was recorded as a separate case in the manual 

filing system. To determine the recidivism for 1970 to 1975 it would be necessary to leaf all the cases by 

hand and the information I received from our officials is that this would require an exhaustive review of 

about 40,000 case cards and this would be a momentous task and really a great expense, so that portion 

simply cannot be answered and I will move an amendment to that effect. 

 

Secondly, when the member asks for a comparison of this recidivism rate, I think it must be remembered 

that recidivism is not, is simply not measured the same by any of the provinces or by the provinces and 

the federal government. So any statistics for example, that I would give him, simply would be like 

comparing apples and oranges. In 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2239 

 

the federal government, I am told, after five years simply the case becomes inactive, or the file becomes 

inactive and it no longer exists, which is not the case in many of the provinces. I am told, however, that 

the recidivism rate for the federal government is around 70 per cent to 80 per cent, which would mean it 

is about 10 per cent to 20 per cent greater than that of the Saskatchewan correctional system. Now that is 

not surprising since they deal with real hard core criminals and in many instances, we do not. So that I 

think is quite understandable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other questions that the member has asked. He asked also, I believe, for the 

ethnic origins of some of the inmates. I believe that this information is available. The minister in 1972 

agreed with the FSI that we should keep of record of the ethnic origin. I think that information is 

available and will be forthcoming. 

 

The member asked us to give the names of the studies that are going on right now on integration of the 

provincial correctional system with the federal penitentiary system. Mr. Speaker, I simply am not at 

liberty to give him the names of those studies. That would have to be an agreement between the 

provinces and the federal government and the territories and I think that this simply is not forthcoming 

at this time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that short explanation I would move, seconded by the member for Saltcoats, Mr. 

Kaeding, that the motion made by Mr. Merchant for Return No. 19 be amended: 

 

That all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(1) The rate of recidivism for inmates of the provincial correctional centres on the yearly basis 

commencing with 1976 to the present. (2) The rate of recidivism of inmates of native ancestry 

versus others in correctional centres on a yearly basis commencing with 1976 to the present. (3) 

The names of studies of possible integration of provincial correctional systems and the federal 

penitentiaries system now in possession of the department. (4) The dates and nature of 

discussions or negotiations regarding integration of Saskatchewan correctional system and the 

federal penitentiaries system proceeding with the federal government. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Would he answer a question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I take it . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I take it that it is intentional not to incorporate (4) of the original motion which reads: 

— ‘The studies reported in answer to (3) above.’ The minister knows the way the current motion is 

worded, a return would follow by which you would automatically be tabling with the House, the various 

studies that are in your possession. I take it, it is intentional that you not release and make public those 

documents. 

 

Debate continues concurrently on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, prior to the closing of debate by the hon. member for 

Wascana, I attempted some time ago to have the Legislative Library get from the Department of Social 

Services the recidivist rate for the province of Saskatchewan, in the correctional centres, and no such 

rate was available and this was within the last two months. 

 

My comment is that I will acknowledge that the use of the recidivist rate is not a highly 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2240 

 

accurate indication of the success for the correctional system, that in fact it can mean an indication of 

better police enforcement, for example. I acknowledge that, but I think the lack of one indicates that the 

Department of Social Services corrections branch really has no way to monitor or to judge the 

effectiveness of its programs. I think that is one of the failures. I think that that is one of the failures of 

the federal penitentiary system. I would hope that the minister would undertake to supply to the 

Conservative caucus, as well, his answers to the particular matter so that we can start to judge the 

effectiveness of the department. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I am very disappointed to hear from the minister a reluctance to provide the studies 

of the proposition of bringing together the national and provincial correctional systems to some extent. 

 

I believe that it would be very useful for us to change the date of division, that the date of division of 

two years that was appropriate in 1867 is not appropriate now. I think that it would be appropriate for 

the public and members of this House to start to judge the likelihood of some change of that date of 

division, a date of division that was set by the BNA Act and may have been appropriate then, but I don’t 

think is appropriate now. 

 

It is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I am disappointed that the minister has decided not to release the 

studies that have been requested. 

 

I, secondly, Mr. Speaker, just want to make a brief mention of the rate of recidivism, which I am sure 

will emerge. As the minister says it is going to be about 60 or 70 per cent. That is for everybody. I think 

my understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that it is going to be about 85 or 90 per cent for native people, that 

the recidivist rate is far higher for native people than it is for whites. It, again, demonstrates that we are 

just not doing the job for the Metis and Indian people in this province. We are not doing the job in a 

number of ways and I don’t visit that in a particularly political sense upon the government. That is 

something about which we have to do something and it is something that requires far more attention 

than it is receiving now by this government. I believe, perhaps there is too little attention by the national 

government although at the Metis level the national government has not previously, at least, been 

considered to take some part in that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other than that I suppose that the amendments are satisfactory. I am sorry that we are not 

going to get information that goes back to the early ’70s, sorry for this reason, not because I think this 

information that will be forthcoming will assist me to score any political points. That is not really the 

purpose of it. Sorry because I think that members and the public would be surprised to find that the 

recidivist rate is going up. That is my belief. That what is happening is we are recirculating the same 

criminals more often, rather than developing new criminals. Perhaps that is a positive way to say we are 

not developing anybody new, but we seem to be recirculating the old over and over again. When the 

minister says that his recidivist rate is going to be in the 50 per cent to 70 per cent range and the federal 

is 70 to 80 per cent, that, of course, is because a large number of the people from the provincial system 

get graduated to the federal system. After flunking grade five and grade six four or five times they 

finally get graduated to high school. 

 

The whole thing, Mr. Speaker, the numbers that I believe are going to be forthcoming and regretfully 

probably won’t be forthcoming for six or eight months. I would have said I may not be here, but I may 

be. I think, Mr. Speaker, the public will find those figures to be very surprising and very disappointing. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2241 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. H.H. Rolfes (Minister of Social Services): — Have I spoken on this before or could I speak on - I 

can’t speak on it now after the amendment has been disposed of? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You’re right. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Resolution No. 2 - Compensation for Injured Workers 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution as amended, moved by Mr. 

Merchant (Regina Wascana): 

 

That this Assembly commends the government and the Workers’ Compensation Board for the 

fair and just manner in which compensation is provided to injured workers, and for the efficient 

mechanisms which have been developed to ensure that Workers’ Compensation Fund payments 

are more equitable and more flexible than compensation awarded in the courts. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, it is rather typical of the government across the way in 

their arrogance to change a motion that was put in with good faith in what the people of Saskatchewan 

really believed which is the government should be condemned not complimented for their actions re the 

Workers’ Compensation Board. I realize the individuals and as we discussed it last night, are trying to 

do a job but unfortunately the only thing that the Minister of Labour said yesterday is we’re not in debt. 

We don’t have a fund that’s short of money to pay out. That’s the big thing he was arguing last evening. 

Yet by doing that he’s giving people inadequate pensions for the accidents that they received and they 

are unable to work. People that were receiving a good income on good jobs, working hard, are now 

being denied the right to live even anywhere near their former standard or even in an adequate standard. 

In one case I remember a person being told, go on welfare if you can'’ live on what we pay you. What 

kind of attitude is that? Workers’ Compensation should be paying fair and adequate compensation to 

those who are hurt on the job. They are there giving their service. It’s not their fault that they have been 

injured. I think this motion and it is unfortunate the government has changed, where it says that this 

Assembly commends, it should be condemns and this government’s fair treatment of injured workers 

should be unfair treatment of injured workers. The government is playing a game with this. It is 

unfortunate that they can’t be told when they are wrong and accept the hand slapping and try to improve 

the situation. No, they have got to use that big majority over there to pat themselves on the back when 

they are totally wrong. Therefore, I think you should be condemned and I will not vote for this motion. 

 

Motion as amended agreed. 

 

Return No. 22 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Merchant (Regina 

Wascana) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 22 showing: 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2242 

 

(1) The requirement imposed on hospitals, penal institutions, nursing homes and special care 

homes, within the province of Saskatchewan, regarding the use of fire resistant bedding 

materials. (2) The funding being considered to assist in the transition in hospitals, penal 

institutions, nursing homes and special care homes, to facilitate the replacement of current 

bedding materials with appropriate fire resistant bedding materials in those establishments. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, again on this particular motion I have a few comments on it before I move 

an amendment to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regard to the requirement imposed on hospitals and penal institutions, nursing homes, 

etc., I just want to make a slight amendment to state a legal requirement in this particular aspect. I think 

that it is also important even though much of this has been done by regulation and through policy and it 

may not be any particular law that’s required to do anything specifically, the government has taken 

many actions in order to do exactly what the member opposite is asking us to do. For example, Mr. 

Speaker, in the are of the sprinkler systems for nursing homes, we have I think over the past three or 

four years spent in the neighbourhood of $500,000 to $600,000 to assist nursing homes in providing 

sprinkler systems in their institutions. In fact, the government pays up to 90 per cent of the total costs 

involved. There is nothing, as I said before, that requires us by law to do so, but the government thought 

it was imperative that we do so. 

 

Some of the homes, Mr. Speaker, that have received sprinkler systems are such as St. Anthony in Moose 

Jaw, St. Joseph’s in Prince Alberta, Pioneer Village in Regina, Santa Maria in Regina, Salvation Army 

in Saskatoon, CNIB, St. Mary’s in Weyburn, CNIB in Regina, and so on. As I indicated, the cost to the 

government is about $600,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in the correctional centres, the Department of Social Services took upon itself to 

replace 700 mattresses in the correctional centre which would be fire resistant to the tune of about 

$30,000. I am not sure, Mr. Speaker, that this would satisfy the member for Wascana but we are 

attempting to do the best we can to give him the type of information that he is requiring. Therefore I 

move, seconded again by Mr. Kaeding for Saltcoats: 

 

That all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(1) The legal requirement imposed on hospitals, penal institutions, nursing homes and special 

care homes within the province of Saskatchewan regarding the use of fire resistant bedding 

materials. (2) The current operational practices of hospitals, penal institutions, and special care 

homes administered by the province of Saskatchewan, which may assist in the replacement of 

present bedding materials with appropriate fire resistant materials in those establishments. (3) 

Other protective measures, for devices being utilized to provide fire protection for these 

institutions. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, this basically supplies the member with the information that he desires. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 14 - Federal Crown Corporations 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2243 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Nelson (Yorkton): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to establish a Crown Corporations 

Committee similar to the Saskatchewan committee so that the business of all federal Crown 

corporations may be effectively examined and controlled. 

 

Mr. Lane (Qu’Ap): — The motion moved by the member for Yorkton, urging the Government of 

Canada to establish a Crown Corporations Committee similar to the Saskatchewan Crown Corporations 

Committee so that the business of all federal Crown corporations may be effectively examined and 

controlled indicates a complete lack of awareness in the operations of the Crown Corporations 

Committee by the member for Yorkton. Perhaps it is his inexperience, the fact that he is a new member 

that he has not seen fit to watch his own government’s activities on the Crown Corporations Committee. 

Why the hon. member for Yorkton would want to compound a felony, so to speak, by having the same 

type of operation in Ottawa as they have here in Saskatchewan, is far beyond the comprehension of any 

rational member of this Assembly. For the stonewalling that goes on in this Crown Corporations 

Committee and the ability of the present Crown Corporations Committee structure in Saskatchewan to 

effectively stop the opposition from getting information or, in fact, getting to the to the financial 

operations of the Crown corporations, I think it indicates, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member is in fact 

just plain ignorant of the Crown corporations operations and for that, I suppose, being a new member we 

can somewhat forgive him. 

 

I would have hoped that, in fact, the hon. member would have taken a more positive approach, keeping 

in mind that it is fundamental for the operation of Parliament that Parliament should have the capability 

as well as the right to review public expenditures. 

 

I would be prepared to suggest to the hon. member that perhaps with the great growth of Crown 

corporations that Crown corporations should be brought under a similar in operation to the Public 

Accounts Committee. I think that this could be done by having the committee meetings in-camera; that 

the cabinet minister not attend; that the general manger of the Crown corporation be subject to the 

operations of the committee. 

 

Well, the hon. member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) he laughs at that proposal and I can see 

why he would laugh at that proposal because he has so much to hide over there, with potash and every 

other thing that is going on, that he should be laughing at the operation. I think, Mr. Speaker, the very 

fact that that member is laughing at the proposal indicates the fact, the realities of the situation in 

Saskatchewan. That in fact the present Crown corporation is totally inadequate when it comes to having 

financial responsibility and public review of government expenditures. It is totally inadequate and I 

think all members if they were sincere would recognize that fact. 

 

Now I have given to the hon. member, what I think would be a workable proposal and that is that the 

Crown Corporations Committee be similar in structure to the Public Accounts Committee. Let it be 

in-camera. I agree, reluctantly, but I think if we are going to get into in-depth studies of Crown 

corporations and if it is to be with the general manager as opposed to just being a political arena, that, in 

fact, it has to be in-camera. 

 

I think that in fairness to the government that it would not function in other way, shape 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2244 

 

or form. But due to the great growth in Crown corporations the idea of having just a political forum open 

to the public. Crown Corporations Committee, where it is the opposition asking questions; the minister 

saying it is not in the public interest, a motion coming up and it then being defeated by the government 

majority, serves none of us any good whatsoever. I don’t think we do ourselves proud with the 

operations of the Crown Corporations Committee. I don’t think that opposition members if they have to 

criticize the government in open form, and the government for obvious political reasons having to 

defend itself, serves the institution of Parliament in any way, shape or form. I think the growth of the 

Crown corporations necessitates a whole new format for a review of public expenditures. And to suggest 

that we propose the same system to Ottawa, I think avoids, or fails to recognize the complete change and 

fails to recognize the growth of Crown corporations in Canada. 

 

I think what we should return to is what Parliament was established or grew to in the first place, and that 

was for public review of government expenditures. If that is our goal, and I suggest to you that that is 

what it should be, then surely we have no choice but to look at a committee similar to the Public 

Accounts Committee or perhaps a new structure altogether, but to merely have a political forum or a 

political arena as we have, as I say I think it serves no one any good. I think, really, it is the public that 

suffers as a result of it. I think we have seen the great growth of Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. I 

think we have seen the inability of oppositions to get information on the government’s investment in the 

Potash Corporation. I think the failure of the previous government when it was in operation to try to get 

information on SEDCO loans with regard to the PA pulp mill, I think emphasizes my point. I think, that 

again, Crown corporations are becoming the norm instead of the exception and I think that the present 

political forum has proven totally inadequate to deal with public review of government expenditures 

through the Crown corporations. I suggest a new structure perhaps, the hon. member on reconsidering 

has a better suggestion. I’m certainly prepared to hear what he has to say in conclusion, but to perpetrate 

the present system in Ottawa, you as an opposition party in Ottawa would be so hamstrung and so 

unable to get to the expenditures of the Crown corporations in Ottawa that you would find very quickly 

that the present system doesn’t work and would serve you no good as a federal opposition party. I 

suggest that I’m going to vote against the proposal because I think it fails to recognize the great growth 

in Crown corporations. I think as I say it just compounds a felony, I think it perpetrates a bad system in 

Ottawa and I think for that reason that in fact the member should withdraw his motion and really come 

back with a new proposal that recognizes the realities of the great growth of Crown corporations in 

Canada and Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 15 - Building and Mounting of School Bus Bodies 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Bailey 

(Rosetown-Elrose): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan, through the Department of Industry 

and Commerce, to conduct a feasibility study into establishing an industry in Saskatchewan for 

the purpose of building and mounting of school bus bodies. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2245 

 

Hon. N. Vickar (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond this 

afternoon to Resolution No. 15, moved in this House by the member for Rosetown-Elrose. The 

resolution, Mr. Speaker, urges the Department of Industry and Commerce to conduct a feasibility study 

into establishing an industry in Saskatchewan for the purpose of building and mounting of school bus 

bodies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the resolution is not without merit. I appreciate the interest of the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose in seeing industry develop and expand in Saskatchewan. Throughout the term of this 

government, economic diversification has been described as the key to future economic stability and 

prosperity in this province. I’m delighted that this message has not been completely lost on the members 

of the opposition. As I am sure that the member for Rosetown-Elrose recognizes successful industries 

such as the one manufacturing school buses do not just happen. A combination of the ingredients are 

necessary. Capital, the right decision, the right equipment, the right location, a suitable market, 

experienced management and so on. The Department of Industry and Commerce as this House is aware 

recently introduced five new programs for the purpose of which to encourage the development of new 

businesses and the expansion of existing businesses in Saskatchewan. Some of these new programs such 

as the small business interest development programs, the product development program and the 

management development program have the potential to assist in the development of an industry in 

Saskatchewan to produce buses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my department first examined a similar proposal six to eight years ago. Information on the 

usage and replacement of school buses was not difficult to obtain at that time and I’m sure that this 

could be given a current review. At one point some years ago, a local entrepreneur sold and leased 

buses, was interested in manufacturing such vehicles, but his interests changed and the project faded. An 

existing Saskatoon manufacturing company may currently be the most logical firm to be considered for 

such a project. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, some studies would have to be carried out before any entrepreneur could be 

expected to make a commitment to such a project. A similar industry in Manitoba has had perennial 

difficulties and has required financial support from the Manitoba government. Fairly stringent 

requirements are necessary to ensure safety and durability in school buses. Clearly good design and 

competent construction would be essential at the outset to achieve market acceptance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given a reasonable proposal such as this one, the Department of Industry and Commerce 

now is able to assist an interested entrepreneur from the start to the finish of a project. Initially we can 

cost-share feasibility and market studies. If these studies prove positive then the department can share 

the cost of the necessary research and development to prepare a suitable design. The department can 

arrange capital financing. Finally, the department can provide ongoing services to assist with manpower 

training, marketing and financial management, and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cannot afford to be indifferent to such proposals. Any serious proposal 

should be carefully considered. I want the member for Rosetown-Elrose to know that I agree with his 

resolution, as far as the resolution goes. I intend to see that the Department of Industry and Commerce 

approaches the various Saskatchewan manufacturing companies to pursue this question further. I might 

also say, Mr. Speaker, that any serious proposals made by any other member of this House would also 

be welcome. With the introduction of the five new programs I mentioned earlier, the Department of 

Industry and Commerce is directing its efforts to a 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2246 

 

substantial degree to the identification, the analysis, promotion and implementation of new 

Saskatchewan industrial projects. I hope all members will encourage their constituents to participate in 

the new Industry and Commerce programs. 

 

Manufacturing enterprises in Saskatchewan since the early ‘70s has been growing at a rapid pace, much 

ahead of the national rate, and has contributed significantly to the province’s economic prosperity in 

recent years. We must do everything we can to foster further manufacturing growth. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that with a small change in Resolution No. 15, it will be perfectly acceptable to the members of 

this House. Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by my seatmate, the member for Moose Jaw 

North (Mr. Skoberg) that Resolution No. 15 be amended as follows: 

 

That all of the words after the word ‘Assembly’ be deleted and the following be substituted 

therefor: 

 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its initiative in introducing five new programs 

to support and encourage the development of Saskatchewan businesses and that this Assembly 

urge the government through the Department of Industry and Commerce to investigate the 

possibility of an industry being established in Saskatchewan which would be for the purpose of 

manufacturing school bus bodies. 

 

Debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 6 - Delay Legislation on Legalizing Marijuana 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to delay any legislation that would legalize 

the sale of marijuana until broader research has been conducted. 

 

Hon. D.L. Faris (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this resolution was on the order paper 

during the last session. I was surprised at the form which it took at that point. I was pleased to see on 

that occasion the Attorney General rise to change the resolution into one of opposition, to the 

legalization of marijuana and at the conclusion of my remarks I intend once again to do that. I am 

surprised to see the question raised in this form because while the question of decriminalization of 

marijuana is under 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2247 

 

discussion in the country, I would hope there is not very wide support in the country or certainly not 

wide support in this legislature for the legalization of marijuana which is a different matter. There has 

been a great deal of research done in regard to the harmful effects of marijuana and I want to read into 

the record a recent press report from Vancouver which is entitled: — ‘Tests Support Doctors in 

Marijuana Warnings’. This is from the Leader Post of April 29: 

 

Doctors who had warned of the dangers of marijuana use now are being supported by results of 

recent scientific tests, the head of City Hospital’s Psychiatric Department said Wednesday. Dr. 

Conrad Swartz of St. Paul’s hospital told the annual meeting of the Alcohol, Drug Education 

Service that mounting scientific evidence backs up longstanding medical warnings against the 

use of the drug. Marijuana is quite clearly a drug that develops tolerance, he told the group, a 

voluntary organization combatting alcohol and drug abuse. He said that in early stages of use, 

people might need progressively less marijuana to get the same effect but as usage continues, 

more and more is required to produce the same sensation. Until 1970 only about 340 tests had 

been performed, said Dr. Swartz, but now there are so many studies that a special conference on 

the subject will be held in France this summer. Dr. Swartz said tests showed that in pregnancies, 

marijuana’s active ingredient passes through the placenta to the fetus. He said it also passed 

through breast milk and rats and rabbits produced fatal abnormalities when tested with the plant 

from which marijuana is harvested. 

 

Other conclusions, he said, showed chromosomal breakage in test subjects which had not used 

other drugs, decreased formation of DNA, the essential ingredient for cell growth and memory 

and lung damage, moodiness and reduced sperm count. Dr. Swartz said if dosage problems could 

be solved, marijuana may aid in immunization of cancer and eliminate rejection of transplanted 

organs. Although some glaucoma sufferers have claimed relief through the use of marijuana, Dr. 

Swartz said there are alternatives available which do not induce redness of the eyes. He said 

United States soldiers stationed in Germany smoked up to 50 grams of hashish a month over a 

six month period suffered the same lung damage as people who smoked tobacco for twenty or 

thirty years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to read that into the record because it is quite clear that there is growing evidence 

of the medical problems associated with increased marijuana use. It should be clear to all members 

present that if we were to legalize marijuana, we would find increasing social problems much along the 

same lines as we now have in our society with widespread use of the legal drugs, alcohol and tobacco. I 

think it is quite clear that if most citizens in our society were to face the question of whether alcohol and 

tobacco should be newly introduced into our society or our culture at this point, that is if they weren’t 

already deeply in our cultural society, most people who would look at that question intelligently and 

with concern about the effects on humanity, would say that those drugs should not be legalized and 

introduced into our society. 

 

We face a particular problem because they are legally available in our society and our culture and deeply 

embedded in them and we face special problems because of that. But I think it would be a very serious 

mistake for our society to introduce another drug, marijuana, which as this article indicates is 

increasingly showing signs of having a lot of the very same sort of medical problems as alcohol and 

tobacco into our society and so, Mr. Speaker, without any further comment I want to move, seconded by 

the member 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2248 

 

for Saltcoats, that in Resolution No. 6 the word, ‘delay’ be deleted and replaced by the word, ‘oppose’, 

and that all the words after ‘marijuana’ be deleted. 

 

Debate continues on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — I have been in this Assembly long enough to know that no 

member in the opposition can propose a motion without an amendment to it, regardless of how good that 

motion is. I was questioned as to why I put this motion in the same this year as last year, knowing full 

well that no matter what way I redrafted that motion, it would be changed opposite anyway. I am in 

complete agreement with the Minister of Education as to what he said. I think he recognizes this as well. 

I think he recognizes as well my sentiments in regard to this drug are exactly as his. It is however 

somewhat frustrating that I happen to have two motions here, one which the Minister of Industry and 

Commerce replied to, but even that motion couldn’t be left alone, we have to get into this, we commend 

the government. I don’t buy that but it does get a little bit disappointing after a while when a person is 

very sincere and really wants to contribute something in the way of what I think, is good debate, good 

healthy debate and good recommendations for the government, that we have got to change this thing 

around. I want to tell the Minister of Education that is exactly why the original motion that appeared last 

year . . . I will take full credit by saying it was badly worded. When I was asked even by my own people, 

what did you do this for, to show them that no matter how you word a resolution, they are going to 

reword it anyway and I am glad you reworded it because that is exactly the way I wanted it to be 

worded. But if I had worded it that way, you would have changed it anyway, just like the Minister of 

Industry and Commerce as well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hope that everyone, I hope that 

everyone will support this particular motion. Thank you. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, speaking to this motion I think I find it very interesting. 

In attending several conferences, one of the problems in the question of hard drugs is when they are 

taken in combination. Some parts of the world are plagued with it. It is very difficult for a police officer 

to identify without taking the person to a doctor and the combination of both alcohol and drugs is the 

most devastating. I think that in some of these problems pertaining, especially to marijuana, they say, 

well, people are using it anyway. People are committing murder too and we are not going to legalize it, 

either. Now, in the schools that I have attended, the conferences I have attended, the stand is very 

definite, no. I hope that this legislature will take this stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — And I hope this legislature will appoint a few members from every side of the House 

to study the question of hard drugs before they move. So you can have a few people in here who know 

what the hell they are talking about. And I don’t think that we should be led by high pressure salesmen 

to legalize a thing because they are using it anyway . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well . . . (laughter) . . 

. we’ll leave them alone for a little while. That is enough for one day . . . (laughter) . . . Mr. Speaker, I 

have no doubt you see, there is no doubt in my mind that I am going to support this motion. I want to 

congratulate the member for Rosetown for introducing the subject in the House. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2249 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 13 - Equality for Saskatchewan Women 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Allen (Regina 

Rosemont): 

 

That this Assembly go on record as supporting the principle of equality for women in 

Saskatchewan, and further commits itself to continue taking positive action, in the future, in 

furtherance of this principle. 

 

Mr. J.L. Skoberg (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the resolution introduced 

by my hon. colleague for Rosemont, I must say that it is a tremendously worded resolution with a lot of 

weight to it, a lot of thought behind it and something that this party has stood for, ever since its 

inception. I might also say that I think it is only fair that we remind this House at this particular time, of 

some of the accomplishments that this party has brought forth in this legislature and legislatures in 

bygone years. 

 

Going back a few short years ago to 1972, we see there that the government of the day, the New 

Democratic Party, brought in legislation that provided for equal pay amendment to The Labour 

Standards Act. This enabled the Department of Labour to refer an equal pay dispute to the Human 

Rights Commission for a formal investigation and appropriate penalties for non-compliance where 

necessary. The Fair Employment Practices Act and The Fair Accommodation Practices Act were 

amended to prohibit sex discrimination. This government here in Saskatchewan was one of the first 

governments to bring that type of legislation before the people of this province. 

 

In 1973, under the equal pay amendment provision, it provided that an employer could not discriminate 

between male and female employees by paying either a lesser rate of pay for similar work performed in 

the same establishment, requiring similar skill, effort and responsibility performed under similar 

conditions. The exception occurs where seniority or a merit system is in effect. 

 

In a second provision there was an attempt to clarify previous equal pay provisions which defined equal 

work as work of comparable character and a difficult one to assess and manage. Now we agree that that 

is a difficult one to police at this particular time. 

 

In 1973 a further amendment, under the maternity leave amendment provision, provided that maternity 

leave of 18 weeks was established and generally taken as 12 weeks preceding the birth and six weeks 

immediately following that birth. 

 

A further one provided that reinstatement in a comparable job with no loss of benefits was guaranteed 

under the provisions of the act. 

 

Another one was that the suspension or dismissal of an employee for the sole reason of her pregnancy 

was prohibited. I must say, that has been a benefit to the people of this country, the people of this 

province, and other provinces have followed suit since that time. 

 

In 1974, a day care program was initiated. It was developed by the Department of Social Services, which 

makes available subsidies for parents who require them. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2250 

 

Another one provided that a Family Planning Committee was established in 1974. 

 

A further one, the Advisory Council on the Status of Women was appointed to identify concerns related 

to the status of women for which the Government of Saskatchewan has responsibility and to make 

recommendations to the government with regard to these concerns. 

 

At that time in 1974, and since then, funds for the operations of the Advisory Council have been 

administered through the Department of Labour and liaison has been maintained between the 

government and the council by means of the women’s division. Anyone who questions the capability of 

the women’s division I am sure is out of touch today with the society in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1976, under the establishment of the women’s division, a new full fledged division was established, 

inheriting and expanding the responsibilities of the former women’s bureau of the previous years ahead 

of that 1976 date. 

 

The new division was created to consolidate and expand efforts of this government to achieve equal 

opportunities for women and eliminate discriminatory practices and attitudes towards women in the 

labour force. The new public education programs were developed, using workshops, speaking 

engagements and special publications. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that at this particular time the women’s 

division and the establishment of the women’s division into a full fledged division has been well used in 

the province and there has been that type of debate and understanding throughout Saskatchewan which 

was not evident before. 

 

In 1977, a new Labour Standards Act and flexible leave provision was established. It provides that a 

woman may take all or part of her 18 weeks leave after the date of the birth of her child. 

 

An equal pay section was strengthened when an amendment was made which would disallow an 

employer who had been in violation of the equal pay legislation, from reducing the rates of pay of 

employees on the grounds that subsequent work was being done only by members of one sex. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague for Rosemont has suggested that more has to be done in the future and I am 

sure that, as we read the resolution before us at this particular time, all of us will agree that there has to 

be further work done in so far as supporting the principle of equality for women in Saskatchewan and 

their rights. I am sure that this government stands committed for that purpose and to that purpose in such 

a way that that type of achievement will be brought about. I highly urge this Assembly at this time to 

adopt the resolution supported by my colleague. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed listening to both the mover and now the next 

speaker on this motion. I think that there is a common saying that goes, the government speaks with a 

forked tongue. They seem to indicate that they are just ‘dirt right’, what they say is what they do but it 

seems strange that in the labour situation - an example I will use is a hospital job evaluation study where 

it was proven that it was a fact that women were being paid less than men. It’s the government again 

that’s responsible for that one, therefore I want to get that information and bring it in the House as soon 

as I can so I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 12 - Freight Assistance for Livestock Exhibits 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Katzman (Rosthern): 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2251 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to establish freight assistance for livestock 

exhibits to Canadian Western Agribition on the same basis as for the Toronto Winter Fair - i.e. 

75 per cent of the total cost of shipping. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Kaeding: 

 

That all the words after the word ‘Assembly’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan for undertaking negotiations with the Government 

of Canada to establish freight assistance for livestock exhibits to Canadian Western Agribition 

on the same basis as for the Toronto Royal Winter Fair - i.e. 75 per cent of the total cost of 

shipping. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, speaking to the amendment, it’s interesting to note that 

the government again does their usual thing and says how great they are and how they are perfect and do 

everything, yet it’s interesting that the government itself is now removing its support for organizations 

that go to other fairs. For example, let’s use the Toronto Royal which is part of this motion. The motion 

seems now to compliment the Government of Saskatchewan for taking a part in negotiations to arrange 

for the 75 per cent funding to Western Agribition the same as the Toronto Royal Fair. But it’s interesting 

to note that the Government of Saskatchewan is now refusing to pay any portion of the costs to go to the 

Toronto Royal Fair. It says, we want you to pay but we are not willing to assist our people to go 

anywhere else. So, it’s once again the old problem, we are going to pat our back and everybody else is 

going to pay the bills; we are going to take the credit, but when it comes time to pay the bills they are 

pulling their support away. 

 

Let’s for an example take this year 1977 and the Toronto Royal shipment again, and look what the 

federal government be it Liberal it’s been there for many years as a subsidy. I doubt that, Mr. Member 

for Lakeview. Another example, Prince Edward Island in 1977 received $7,000 from the federal 

government to send to the Toronto Royal and assuming that they would then ship to Saskatchewan, they 

would require additional funds. Nova Scotia which never comes to this show because it’s just too 

expensive, it receives funds of $2,320 in 1977. New Brunswick never comes to Western Agribition but 

it would be nice to see them here, received in 1977, $1,568. Quebec, I haven’t seen Quebec people at the 

Agribition, they have been at Toronto for years and I hope I see them start coming west. This is a 

country, a nation of all provinces and therefore we would like to see their livestock display here for the 

international markets. Quebec $10,621. Manitoba which we see a few of them here in the Saskatchewan 

Western Agribition, $26,474 of subsidy re the Toronto Royal. 

 

This gives you some kind of indication what kind of subsidy we are asking for, for the people coming to 

Western Agribition. Saskatchewan got $19,985, and I believe the subsidy from Saskatchewan towards 

that was somewhere in the neighbourhood of $15,000. 

 

Saskatchewan now is saying, no more subsidy to send our livestock to the east, and yet we are going hat 

in hand and saying we want the east to assist people to come here. And this you think is good and fair? 

Alberta, $15,478, we see Alberta cattle at Western Agribition, maybe the shipment will be larger. BC, 

they have the mountains to come across, it’s a little more expensive. But, they receive $6,467 from the 

federal 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2252 

 

government to assist them to the Toronto Royal. In other words, the federal government gave $89,934 in 

the year 1977 to assist livestock exhibits on freight subsidy to the Toronto Royal. That’s just I think, an 

indication of approximately the cost, what it cost the federal government to assist those coming from the 

east and the west to Western Agribition. And I think that’s important that we get these displays from all 

parts of Canada to exhibit their livestock. And it’s an unfortunate situation when a government will 

suggest that it’s pulling back its support in one area, two shipments and yet asking for payments for 

shipments identical to this province. It is unfortunate when the livestock people and Western Agribition 

take up a case and suggest to the federal government, we would like assistance like the Toronto Royal. 

But then who stands up in the House to take credit? The NDP. Give the credit where credit is due - 

Western Agribition, they are the people who started the negotiations. They are the people working for it, 

not the Government of Saskatchewan. So why always try to take the credit for things that you don’t 

deserve credit, yet when there is some blame to come on you you don’t want to accept it. It belongs to 

somebody else. 

 

All that I am suggesting, Mr. Minister, may be that we should amend the motion to condemn your 

government for the suggestion that it may be removing its assistance to go to other fairs in Canada and I 

would suggest the Toronto Royal. May I suggest that the minister and the government reconsider its 

amendment and maybe defeat it, which is not a normal practice to defeat their own amendments and to 

approve the original resolution, which says that we try to negotiate and to get this arrangement, rather 

than to pat yourself on the back because one of these days you are going to break your arm trying to 

reach your back and I would hate to see the minister do that. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — . . . circus. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Oh, we heard the man about the circus again. I think that is the same member that is 

getting a new zoo and I understand that he is going to be the prime exhibit in that zoo in the Moose Jaw 

area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion, I think, deserves one comment. The government is once again patting its own 

back and taking the credit away from the organization that did the hard work and deserves the credit, the 

Canadian Western Agribition and I will not support this amendment. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Mr. W.J.G. Allen (Regina Rosemont) moved second reading of Bill 34 - An Act to amend The 

Industrial Accountants Act. 

 

He said Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 34 be now read a second time and referred to the Select Standing 

Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition) moved second reading of Bill 62 - An Act to 

prohibit Saskatchewan Telecommunications from interfering with the Delivery of Programming 

by a Cablecaster. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2253 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words about this bill before moving second reading 

and I can appreciate why the Attorney General would like this bill to be dropped and for it to go away, 

but unfortunately that is not about to happen. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, at the outset that this bill does not in any way deal with the controversy 

between community programming network and the CRTC licensees. What this bill tries to deal with is 

something in our view of more significant nature. 

 

What this bill tries to do is to, firstly, illustrate to the people of Saskatchewan in a very real way that the 

Government of Saskatchewan, through its Crown corporation Sask Tel, is in our view breaking the law. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it was necessary to put this bill on the order paper so that we could debate the 

issue of what Sask Tel is doing and whether it is appropriate or not. 

 

As you know the members opposite, during question period, have refused to answer the questions about 

Sask Tel’s activities on the excuse that this matter was before the courts. I understand, after reading 

Beauchesne and hearing Mr. Speaker’s rulings, that by putting a bill on the order paper it opens the 

matter up and allows us to debate it when the bill comes before the Assembly. 

 

Let me make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that we view with suspicion the actions of this government. We 

say that the government and in particular the Attorney General, and I will come to him later, is defying 

the law in two ways. Firstly, they are defying the laws of Canada. There is no doubt in anybody’s mind 

in Canada and in Saskatchewan that the CRTC is the duly licensed agency to control broadcasting. Now 

members opposite may take exception to that law and, indeed, many people across Canada are debating 

the issue as to whether or not the CRTC should be in charge of broadcasting across Canada but that is 

the law at this time, whether members across like it or not, whether other people in Canada, particularly 

in Quebec, like it or not. Indeed, I can’t help but reflect, Mr. Speaker, that the only two governments that 

have really seriously challenged the CRTC’s mandate in Canada are the Party Quebecois of Mr. 

Levesque and the New Democratic Party of Mr. Blakeney. So we say by the actions of Sask Tel 

whereby they are actively jamming the signal that has been put forth by the private licensees, Cable 

Regina in Regina, Saskatoon Telecommunications in Saskatoon and the private licensee in Moose Jaw, 

that Sask Tel with the government’s approval, with the government’s direction is defying the laws of 

Canada in not allowing those duly licensed licensees by the CRTC to provide the message which they 

are authorized to provide to people in Saskatchewan. 

 

We are saying, as well, Mr. Speaker, that they are breaking the law in another way. They are breaking 

the law by now complying with the contractual agreement that was entered into between the duly 

licensed CRTCs with Sask Telecommunications. Once again I want to put on record, Mr. Speaker, a 

letter that was sent, in this particular case, to Mr. C.C. Forester of Saskatoon Telecable Ltd. This letter 

was dated February 24, 1978, signed by the general manager of Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 

 

Dear Mr. Forester: — This is to confirm our recent telephone conversation. Sask Tel guarantees 

on or before April 7, 1978 at noon, signals originated by the Saskatoon CPN will be removed 

from channels 2 to 13 inclusive on the 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2254 

 

local cable distribution system. Between now and the time of the CPN signal move, Sask Tel will 

not connect any new CPN subscribers to the distribution system. Following April 7, Sask Tel 

will stop CPN subscribers from receiving Saskatoon Telecable signals within a reasonable and 

practical length of time. Between now and April 7, Saskatoon Telecable will not take action to 

interfere with Saskatoon CPN signal. I trust this is your understanding of our agreement. Yours 

truly. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that’s old news. Everybody in Saskatchewan knows of that agreement. Everybody in 

Saskatchewan also knows that after April 7 at noon Sask Tel did not take CPN off the airways and 

perhaps more important than what this bill that is before the House now seeks to deal with, Sask Tel 

deliberately went out and attempted to jam the signals that were being presented by the CRTC licensees. 

Let me just reflect upon that for a moment, Mr. Speaker. The Attorney General is a man who is 

experienced in radio. He spent many years, I’m told, in Saskatoon acting as a disc jockey or a news 

reporter or whatever and, indeed, in June of 1979 he’ll have an opportunity to return to that profession if 

he chooses to do so. But was when the Attorney General on the radio in Saskatoon I think he would 

have been appalled if the opposition in Saskatoon, another private radio station, had tried to jam the 

signal that his particular station was putting across the airways. I think the people of Canada would be 

appalled as well if CTV tried to jam the signal of CBC or vice versa, although that may be desirable 

from time to time as perhaps the member for Rosetown is pointing out. 

 

People in Canada realize that there are laws for the conduct of broadcasting and that those laws, if they 

are not obeyed will create chaos in the whole broadcasting system of this country. I only know of one 

person, a body corporate, that has attempted to get around those laws and that, unfortunately, is 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications. A company that is not a private company, a company that is not 

just a bunch of individuals getting together to try to make a dollar because of a service they can offer but 

a company that is controlled on a daily basis by the Government of Saskatchewan. I say that the 

government, Mr. Speaker, should be hanging its head in shame for its actions. I don’t think that there has 

been a government anywhere in the country that has directed a Crown corporation or a government 

agency or a government department to break the law, to break contracts, to every way possible defy the 

federal government and the powers that they have under the British North America Act and under 

statute. That’s why it is necessary, Mr. Speaker, to bring this act before the Assembly; that’s why it is 

necessary to get something before the people of Saskatchewan, before members here, to demonstrate 

that Sask Tel is defying the law. Where is Sask Tel getting its instruction from? We have asked a 

number of questions in question period which the government has either refused to answer or which they 

have dodged to try to determine who is instructing the officers of Sask Tel to take the steps that they 

have been taking. We know from question period that the minister in charge of Sask Tel is not being 

allowed to answer any questions about this matter. But every time we ask a question about telecable or 

cable TV, the Attorney General rises to his feet and attempts to answer the questions that we put to him. 

We believe that we can only make one logical assumption from the government’s actions, that the 

conduct and the actions of Sask Tel are being directed by the Attorney General and in doing so and in 

directing them in the way that he is, he is breaking the laws of Canada and we believe breaking the laws 

of Saskatchewan. We say that for any minister, Mr. Speaker, to have been acting in such a way is 

shameful indeed, but when it is the Attorney General, a man who takes an oath to uphold all laws, not as 

he would like them to be but as he finds them when he takes that office, for him to be acting in such a 

way is contemptible. I hope that the Attorney General will get into this debate. I hope that he will stand 

in his place and try to explain 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2255 

 

his activities in this regard and indeed try to explain the activities of the Government of Saskatchewan in 

this regard. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that he won’t because those activities and those actions are 

inexplainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this matter is not going to go away. We know that the matter before the courts has now 

been adjourned until later this week and a decision is going to be rendered at that time. No matter what 

decision is rendered by Mr. Justice McLeod, it is still going to put the government in the position that 

they are going to be in breach of contract. If the learned Justice finds in favour of CPN, then Sask Tel 

will be in breach of contract with the private licensees. If the judge finds in favour of Cable Regina and 

the others, then Sask Tel is going to be put in the position of being in breach of contract with CPN. The 

reason the government finds itself in this position is basically from stupidity, basically because they are 

a bunch of little children who didn’t get their own way before the CRTC so what they are saying is if we 

can’t get our own way, we are not going to play by the rules of the game. We are going to do everything 

we possibly can to hinder the CRTC applicants and to make life just as miserable as we possibly can for 

them. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the actions of the government in this regard are contemptible, that the 

ministers who have directed those actions are contemptible. I say that the people of Saskatchewan are 

entitled to an honest government, a government that will abide by rules and regulations, that all other 

provinces, all other companies, all other individuals, are required to be bound by. For the government to 

be acting in the manner that they are, they are just actually trying to act above the law, the laws that they 

passed. The laws that they are sworn to maintain apparently do not apply to the government when it 

does not suit their purpose to have them apply. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, it’s giving me pleasure to 

move second reading of Bill No. 62. 

 

Hon. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will want to say a few words on this bill and tell the members at the 

beginning of the remarks that I intend to adjourn the debate, because I will have a lot more to say about 

the position of the Liberal opposition and the PC opposition in this entire controversy and I will also 

have a lot more to say about the position of other parties related to this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few preliminary remarks before I do adjourn the debate. First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, this is I suppose, in the category of being a lawyeristic observation or perhaps a technical 

observation. But I think nevertheless that it deserves being brought to the attention of the House. And 

that is, in my judgment this Bill No. 62 does not do what the Leader of the Liberal Party says it intends 

to do. In fact, it totally and incorrectly misses the base of what he says Bill 62 was intended to do. 

 

Under paragraph 2 of this bill, the word interpretation, the word cablecaster, is said to include both the 

word community and the word commercial cablecasters. The latter two terms were given identical 

meanings under this bill to those appearing in The Community Cablecasters Act of 1977. That is the 

way this bill is drafted. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if one looks at the meaning of community and commercial cablecasters as defined in 

that Community Cablecasters Act of 1977, one will see that that bill refers only to wholly closed circuit 

undertakings and specifically excludes licensed cable television undertakings. If I were to play lawyer, I 

would I suppose, get up and say, I can support this bill in toto, since what the bill does, is it protects the 

close circuit operations, those that are defined by The Community Cablecasters Act, from being 

interfered with by any kind of another operation. But, Mr. Speaker, that I think is in the category of a 

technical argument and I suppose it is not worth very much of a submission other than the fact that if 

one was looking at this in pure black and white, 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2256 

 

the bill would be tossed out almost immediately as not achieving what the Leader of the Liberal Party 

says it does. 

 

I think another observation must also be made and this, I think, I am motivated in this remark primarily 

from this big lecture on obeying the law. Because, Mr. Speaker, even if the Cablecasters Protection Bill 

which we’re debating here, did apply to CRTC licensees, as the Leader of the Liberal Party says he 

would want to apply but does not of course, because of the totally serious error in drafting - if it did 

apply to CRTC licensees, one might argue, Mr. Speaker, that the bill itself was ultra vires of the 

province to enact, since according to the Leader of the Liberal Party, we have been doing everything 

within our might to interfere with a federally licensed undertaking. That is not good for us, but for him 

to move in with a bill called Cablecasters Protection Bill, which tries to give certain protections or other 

statements for those same federally licensed operations and that is good and is intra vires for him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that any act that the provincial legislature might pass trying to deal with federally 

licensed cable TV undertakings in as direct a manner as the hon. Leader of the Liberal Party says this 

bill was intended to do but does not do, might very well be argued as being ultra vires of this legislature 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, as a consequence, one could say that the Leader of the Liberal Party’s position 

is, ‘Do as I say but don’t do as I do.’ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one or two other observations. First of all, the Leader of the Liberal Party . . . and I 

don'’ think any big deal has to be made of this because the answers have been stated in question period 

ad infinitum but the Leader of the Liberal Party does not accept those answers. This question is who 

directed Sask Tel to do what it is doing? I’ve been asked that question on daily question period. If I have 

been asked it once I must have been asked it at least a half a dozen times and I think my colleagues, the 

minister in charge of Sask Tel has equally been asked a half a dozen times. And the answer by all of us 

has been that the decisions taken by Sask Tel are the exclusive decisions taken by Sask Tel and not 

ministerially. That doesn’t carry any weight with the Leader of the Liberal Party. He is determined to 

make the argument that somehow there was a political direction here on Sask Tel to do whatever it is 

doing and the result is that this is contempt above the law. I’m not going to be bothered by the facts or 

the answers contrary to the fact that I don’t have a shred of evidence or anything to support my point of 

view. I simply maintain he says that there was some political interference. And I say again, I don’t think 

much needs to be made out of that issue at all other than the fact that it keeps on coming up and coming 

up again and I think it indicates that the Liberal Party and the PC Party are intent on making this as big a 

political issue as they can, notwithstanding the fact that the political facts don’t lie to support their 

position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make one other observation, if I can about the general thrust of the opposition’s 

position on this whole communications cable closed circuit debate. Because this bill, and in the remarks 

made by the Leader of the Liberal Party speak directly to that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that as 

minister in charge of communications for the province of Saskatchewan that the Liberal Party in 

particular aided and abetted by the PC Party and certainly by Cable Regina as one of the licencees . . . I 

think it varies in terms of licencees exhibited an unparalleled paranoia about CPN and an unparalleled 

paranoia about the imagined activities of government with respect to CPN and as it relates to Sask Tel. 

 

An example of that paranoia, Mr. Speaker, is this repeated remark that it must have been the politicians 

who directed Sask Tel to do what they are doing, which is now the 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2257 

 

subject of a court case, notwithstanding the denials and the facts and notwithstanding that there is no 

other shred of evidence applicable whatsoever. 

 

I think of the extreme haste with which the Liberals and the PCs have jumped in support of those who 

alleged that The Liquor Act amendments, the subject of another debate, are unconstitutional. They argue 

that we shouldn’t be doing it, that we are hassling the Cable Regina and cable companies on The Liquor 

Act amendments. This is another example of that paranoia of which I speak. Notwithstanding that the 

Alcohol Commission supports what we are trying to do in The Liquor Act amendments, notwithstanding 

what I believe will be the support of church organizations and community people who are 

knowledgeable in this liquor problem; notwithstanding the fact that it is a natural and logical extension 

of section 114 of The Liquor Act, the paranoia, Mr. Speaker, is there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody tells me, in this House from the members opposite, that CPN is a disastrous 

economic mistake. It can’t succeed in the market place; it will get wiped out by the conventional cable 

operations. When I talked privately to some of the conventional cable operators they say the same thing 

and yet, Mr. Speaker, the opposition and some of the conventional cable operators are afraid of letting 

CPN out on the market place to meet that competition which they value and hold so dearly. 

 

They are afraid, Mr. Speaker, of allowing CPN to meet that challenge. All they argue, even supported in 

some way by the press, that this is a government backed organization - CPN is government backed. In 

every newscast the announcer gratuitously adds the last sentence, ‘CPN is a government backed closed 

circuit co-operative.’ Well, I guess that is a fact in the case of government backed, but again, every other 

co-operative goes through a Co-op Guaranteed Board whether there is a guarantee of that loan and, of 

course, there is no suggestion that those other co-ops are government backed with all of the aspects of 

them. 

 

Even is that is so, the suggestion that somehow the guaranteeing of that loan has placed CPN at an unfair 

advantage in the market place as against the cable operators. 

 

Mr. Lane (Qu’Ap): — Government cable. 

 

Hon. Romanow: — Government cable, the member for Qu’Appelle says. Why doesn’t he, Mr. Speaker, 

get up and you have a chance in the course of this debate, and say the same thing about government 

conventional cable and Cable Regina where there is also a substantial government guarantee of that 

co-operative venture? Why doesn’t the media of this province get up and say, Cable Regina is a 

government backed operation? The same Cable Regina which is issuing the press statements about the 

liquor ads and the same Cable Regina which is taking this matter to court the way it is. Why don'’ they 

ever do that? Why don’t the media ever report that side of this government backed Cable Regina. Mr. 

Speaker, or this government backed North Battleford cable operation? We never hear that. Mr. Speaker, 

they talk competition and they introduce competition but they, in fact, say monopoly. They talk 

competition but they want to protect these particular areas by this proposed bill, which of course misses 

the entire operation. Why, Mr. Speaker, they are as much private enterprise by the Cablecasters 

Protection Act as I am. Mr. Speaker, this is not private enterprise or competition, this is protection. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2258 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that to stand by the Liberals in promotion of liquor advertising in cable television, to 

stand by the Liberals and the PCs in promotion of the conventional cable operators, to stand by the 

Liberals and the PCs in the selective discrimination of their facts with respect to financial loans and the 

like in this area belies a very deep fear that, in fact, CPN can meet in the market place the conventional 

cable operators. And, Mr. Speaker, I find that very strange, so-called free enterprisers. I find that to be a 

fundamentally difficult position for them to justify. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to adjourn the debate because I want to say a lot more on this and I want 

to say a lot more in quite detail about the position of the PC Party, how the PC Party and the Liberals 

are, in effect, killing the possibility of closed circuit television to rural Saskatchewan by trying to stop 

CPN. I am going to try and talk in detail about the actions of that liberally dominated agency of the 

CRTC and what they do with respect to communications. I am going to talk about the actions of the 

Minister of Communications with respect to Saskatchewan Communications and the Liberal Party. I am 

also going to talk, Mr. Speaker, about The Liquor Act amendments which is what this is designed in 

great substance to do and the positions taken by the PCs and the Liberals in the promotion of liquor 

advertising in the province of Saskatchewan by this operation. And they, Mr. Speaker, can laugh but as 

the chairman of the Saskatchewan Alcohol Commission himself said today, we oppose those who 

oppose the amendments which are being made by The Liquor Act operation. We will see how the 

Leader of the Liberal Party lasts in the next two or three weeks when the debate on The Liquor Act 

amendments to the cable operation, which is the logical extension applied with respect to this bill, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, I want to say a lot more on this bill, therefore I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Labour - Vote 20 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Before we left estimates the other night, the member for Regina Wascana had asked a 

series of questions. If it is the wish of the committee to delay my response to him until a little later, 

perhaps that is the best way to go. O.K., good enough, good enough. I had intended to reply to the 

member for Regina Wascana but I see I am talking to an empty seat which is fairly gratifying at that. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — I think, Mr. Minister, we can assist you by making sure that we are still on item 1 

until 5:00 o’clock p.m., which is in only six minutes so that you can reply to the member - sorry, 10 

minutes until 5:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

The job evaluation is becoming a very important part of labour negotiations now. Is there any work 

being done within your department on recommendations of types of job evaluations? Which ones are 

you recommending that are finding no problems? Which areas of job evaluations are giving problems? 

Are you working with any of the particular groups - am not saying unions. I am saying the different 

styles of job evaluation, be it a manual formula, be it a work formula, be it a qualification formula. 

Which ones are you involved with, if any? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all it will be remembered by some members of the House 

that in 1976, the government agreed to establish a job evaluation study which was participated in by the 

Health Care Association, by the Canadian Union of Public Employees, and the Service Employees 

National Union. The survey was done of all of the hospitals and following that, a series of negotiations 

took place and only recently did they consummate a collective agreement which took into account all of 

the 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2259 

 

terms and conditions of the job evaluation which eliminated throughout the hospitals with one 

exception, the exception is the Wascana Hospital, the job evaluation study. So we can say that portion of 

job evaluation has been dealt with and has been completed to the general satisfaction of all those that are 

involved. 

 

With respect to the whole question of job evaluation, it’s a complex and a detailed arrangement which 

provides that evaluation be done on the basis of skilled effort, responsibility and working conditions as 

between two individuals in one work establishment or in one work place which I think the member will 

know creates a large number of problems and leaves a number of questions that are unanswered. 

 

Accordingly, some time ago, we embarked on a route to clear in our own minds if you like, the direction 

in which we should be travelling with respect to job evaluation throughout the province generally and 

determine, I suppose, whether it had any real practical application in the province of employers that are 

generally, I’m saying in the main, small employers. I don’t know whether job evaluation in the private 

sector has any real practical application. That’s something we want to find out for ourselves. So the 

Department of Labour has been doing a good deal of background work, has prepared a slide 

presentation, has done a good deal of statistical work and other work prior to putting into motion the 

actual job evaluation study committee. In the meantime, a number of people have been contacted from 

the trade union groups, from the business community and elsewhere in order to see if they will act on the 

committee which we presume will be in motion and will be doing a detailed study of the whole question 

of equal pay for work of similar value by the province of Saskatchewan and at the end of their 

deliberations they will be reporting to us and making recommendations that the government can 

consider at some time in the future. I expect it will take a considerable period of time, but we are 

interested and concerned particularly in light of the fact that the federal government in an amendment to 

one of its federal statutes recently has in effect enacted a piece of legislation that provides for equal pay 

for work of equal value without even a glimmering of an idea or a shadow of hope of implementing it 

because it has no real terms of reference and no guidelines and they are actually I think, in a position to 

do nothing in the event that an attempt is made to put into place the concept of equal pay for work of 

equal value. That is where we are at this moment. We are in the process of having done a good deal of 

background work, some slide presentations for public presentation, we have been in the process of 

establishing a committee and drafting for them their terms of reference in order that we will be able to 

begin the job evaluation study that the committee will conduct in the not too distant future. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — You say you’re still drafting the terms, is that correct? You are still drafting the terms 

of reference for this committee? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Yes, we generally have the terms of reference together. I will give them to you if you 

like. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Well, I was just going to ask you, if in the terms of reference you have made some 

special recommendations re the service industry, and when I refer to the service industry I mean the 

non-manufacturing type of industry versus the manufacturing industry, for which the formula will be 

quite different I think and the evaluation will be quite different. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I am not at all sure that we have made any attempt and if my memory serves me 

correctly I am not sure if we attempted to draw any distinction between the service industry, the 

manufacturing industry or whatever. I think the terms of reference 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2260 

 

as I recall them, are very broad and would . . . I’ll read them if you like for your consideration. They are 

not terribly lengthy. The terms of reference to the committee are as follows: 

 

To identify problem areas regarding equal pay for work of equal value which requires study. 

 

To develop a process of public information and consultation with organized labour, business, 

women’s organizations and the general public. 

 

To evaluate the results of studies and public input, and, 

 

To make recommendations to the Minister of Labour regarding whether or not the changes in 

legislation are appropriate and what those changes should be. 

 

Those are basically broad terms of reference which I think give the committee an indication of, I think a 

good degree of latitude within which they can operate freely. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — In my own personal opinion, I believe job evaluation will become an everyday 

involvement at the bargaining table in the future by the looks of the indications today. It seems to 

withdraw the favouritism of individuals within a job place that developed over the old system of 

reclassifications. As one who was involved with Local 59 job evaluation when it was first started, and I 

understand it presently is in the last couple of days in dispute with the city of Saskatoon, on the formula 

that ended up being used, it looks as if there is going to be some judgment calls being made before 

people get into job evaluations. The reason I say that is in the 59 study the decisions that were made at 

the start were with individuals getting into it for the first time and the recommendations coming from 

management side, a very inexperienced area, from the union side they had some experts come in to 

assist in the drawing of the formula to do the rating manual. The decision on how you develop a rating 

manual effects the end result of the whole process. My concern is, are you doing any recommendations 

so that down the road anybody who gets into a rating system is not locked into something that will just 

blow itself totally out of proportion. For an example, one of the problems that I saw in the Local 59 job 

evaluation that has come to light, in the over-emphasis in certain areas and the under-emphasis of mental 

strain, versus physical strain. It is a hard thing to relate what the responsibility of an individual, who is 

responsible for a $500,000 operation of building a plant, versus the fellow that is responsible for a plant 

of maybe $60,000, but more physical labour. 

 

That, down the road, has become a real problem in making the final adjustment on a job evaluation 

program. My concern is that there has to be somebody - and in this case I think maybe the government 

will be one of those somebodies, who will make some recommendations to those that are considering 

going into job evaluations, in the loopholes, in the spots that you don’t want to move to, the pitfalls to 

look out for. I am concerned, are you doing any work in making recommendations. Look, your industry 

is so multi complex that maybe you should have one rating manual for manual labour and one rating 

manual for special skills, for example, inside/outside comparison if you wish. Are you looking at these 

problems, because I think down the road there are really bad pitfalls. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Well, I think the hon. member draws attention to the complexity of the problem in 

attempting to reach a major judgment in the whole job evaluation study. 



 

May 2, 1978 

 

 

2261 

 

This committee that I drew attention to and the terms of reference that I mentioned to you, will be under 

the direct supervision of, chairing that particular committee, Lynn Pearson will be chairing that 

committee and is very much aware of the problems that you draw attention to that have been plaguing us 

for some time. At the same time we are very conscious of those pitfalls that you draw attention to 

because of the experience that we have already had with job evaluation in the hospitals system, but in 

addition to that, some of the difficulties that have been experienced in Saskatoon in the job evaluation 

that was done between the Canadian Union of Public Employees and the city of Saskatoon. So we are 

not going into it entirely blind and without some concept of the difficulties and the problems involved. 

However, it is as you say, an item that is front and centre and one I think we cannot afford to ignore. It is 

something that deserves a concentrated study and a recommendation by all segments of the community 

and that is what we are attempting to arrive at with the study that I have drawn attention to. 

 

So all the things that you have drawn attention to in your remarks are foremost in the thoughts of those 

people who are currently putting the study together and drafting terms of reference for that committee. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 


