



















































Hansard: April 18, 1978


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 18, 1978 

1631 
 

Evening Session 

 

Second Reading of Bill No. 33 - An Act respecting the Right of the Public to Government Information 

cont'd. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — It is in respect such as these, Mr. Speaker, that shows that this 

government is becoming fast one of the most reactionary governments in the country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Is this the body that used pride itself on its sort of small 'l' liberalism. It is now in my 

view and in my submission to members and this shows it as they say is becoming one of the most reactionary 

governments. The whole notion of freedom of information has taken over in the United States in 1964 with 

the passage of an act there which was revised in 1974. The United States with its massive federal 

government now has a freedom of information act which is working and working very effectively there. In 

Canada the province of Nova Scotia passed legislation albeit rather weak legislation but nonetheless has 

legislation of this variety on its books. The province of Ontario is in the midst of conducting a thorough 

study of this whole area of freedom of information. The national government put out a white paper some 

time ago, a green paper with respect to it, which is drawing comment; legislation was passed in some areas. 

So a good start has been made although we have to go a lot further on the national level as well in this 

respect. Now we have yet to hear a peep from this government about freedom from information. So whereas 

other governments and jurisdictions in Canada including the national government are devoting themselves to 

this area, and searching for some answers. This government has not even begun to look at the questions. Mr. 

Speaker, the basic framework of this act would be to give the citizens of the province the right to apply to 

government for information, either information respecting that citizen or information about the public 

business of the province. The government then would have a reasonable period of time in which to respond 

to the request for information. If it in fact said, no, we are not prepared to give you the information, or 

neglected meeting the application, then the citizen would have the right to go to the Ombudsman and lay a 

complaint about not getting it. The Ombudsman would have the power to go to the government and say, in 

effect, I want the information. If the government was not prepared to give it to him the onus is on the 

government to show him that it falls within the exceptions provided for in the act and is information which 

should not be released. Members, I want to deal for a moment with the exceptions of the act. Mr. Speaker, 

there are four of them which are major exceptions — circumstances in which the government would not 

have to provide the information. Those four are these: 

 

1) Where a statute expressly provides that information is to remain secret. 

 

2) Information with respect to an investigation concerning the administration of the law or legal opinions 

within government. 

 

3) Communications between public officials in the government that are clearly confidential and those 

between this government and other governments which have traditionally been confidential. 



 

April 18, 1978 

1632 
 

4) Where the information relates to the private affairs of a private citizen and where the Ombudsman would 

determine if, on balance, it is better that that information be made only available to that individual and not 

the public at large. 

 

Those are the four major exceptions. There are three minor ones, that is, where the information is available 

elsewhere, secondly, where the request is so trivial relative to the cost of providing the information that is it 

is not reasonable it should be done, or thirdly where the request for the information is frivolous or vexatious. 

So I have given the government those seven exceptions where they would not have to respond or at least 

could go to the Ombudsman and give him ample reason why they shouldn't provide the information. Four 

major ones and three minor ones. Unless the government could sit itself within those exceptions, the 

Ombudsman would have the power to order that the information be made available to the person making the 

request. I did that, as I said, earlier this year because last year when I introduced this act you indicated that 

you could not accept it because it was interfering with ministerial responsibility. I say to you that giving the 

Ombudsman this power is a practical way around if you are still concerned about ministerial responsibility, a 

practical way around that particular problem. There is another provision in this act which would provide that 

there is no cost to be attached to an inquiry by the Ombudsman, that is no cost for the citizen in requesting 

the information. It provides a quick way for a citizen to get the information from the government and a way 

that doesn't cost the citizen anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lastly there are provisions in the act that if anyone within the government refused an order of 

the Ombudsman he would be subject to prosecution and the maximum fine of $1,000. Mr. Speaker, by way 

of concluding comment, I want to read to members briefly from a publication of the Department of Labour 

with respect to the workings of the United States act and here is the fundamental premise upon which the act 

in the United States was based and the importance of that act to us is that that government is so large and has 

so many things surely of a far greater import in terms of its information retention than a government of the 

size of the government of Saskatchewan. Yet they found there that they could do it and we find here that we 

somehow can't do it. That was based upon, in the United States, this premise the bureaucracy of power has 

always tried to maintain secrecy beyond those specifically qualified areas where it is a necessity. They do so 

out of a sheer power instinct; it is not a democratic practice. The state should not be an entity unto itself; it 

should acknowledge the people's right to know. It must justify its decisions for not granting access to 

information rather than requiring the public to justify its need to know. The state should be regarded not as 

the owner of government records to be disclosed as it sees fit but as the custodian to serve society. That is 

the fundamental upon which the United States Freedom of Information Act is based. 

 

As I say, there are now developments going on in other jurisdictions in Canada. All jurisdictions in the 

country, I believe, are far in advance of this government and that is why in this respect it is showing a 

reactionary approach to this whole question. It is something which, in due course, this province is going to 

have to face inevitably because as I said at the beginning of my remarks, the idea clearly is an idea whose 

time has come. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to move that this bill be now read a second time; that is the bill to provide for 

access to government information. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1633 

 

MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of pleasure in saying a few remarks about this bill that 

was moved by my colleague, the member for Regina South. I want to state my position very clearly at the 

outset though, Mr. Speaker, that I intend to ask for leave to adjourn debate after I have made my few 

remarks. My intention is not to stop a full-fledged debate on the proposal by the member for Regina South, 

but indeed to encourage further debates as the weeks go ahead on this particular bill. It has been the custom 

of the government opposite, when we have a bill of this nature which is embarrassing to the government, to 

simply get it into their name and stand it off the Order Paper until we finally adjourn sometime in May or 

June. So I don't want that to happen, Mr. Speaker. Members on this side of the House, members of both 

opposition parties, I am sure have many things they want to say about the bill, both critical and in favor of it 

and I think that the House should be able to debate this bill at its leisure over the next few weeks. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the first things that I said on becoming Leader of the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan was that we are not only going to oppose, we are going to propose; we are going to bring 

about legislation in a positive way, resolutions in a positive way, dealing with the issues of the day. I don't 

think there is a person probably in Canada, that does not realize how big government has gotten, how much 

they are put at a disadvantage when dealing with the big brother of government. This bill as proposed by the 

member for Regina South, I believe will deal in perhaps a small way, with protecting the rights of individual 

citizens, individual voters within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We in the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about the rights of individuals. We believe that perhaps 

all members in this Legislature are concerned about the rights of individuals. At a time in our history when 

government has become so big, perhaps necessarily so, unfortunately the rights of individuals are often 

ignored and trampled over by big government such as the members who sit opposite me today. We believe 

that a bill of this nature will go a long way to protect the rights of individuals to determine what records 

governments have about them, whether those records are in order, whether those records contain the true 

facts. It wasn't too long ago, Mr. Speaker, that I believe a bill was introduced in this Legislature saying that 

people who do credit checks on individuals must make those records available to those people when they are 

concerned about the records that these companies have. I believe when that bill was presented to the 

Legislature it received unanimous consent of everybody here at the time. It was considered to be a good 

thing, it was considered to be something that would get over the evil of having records available to citizens 

that were not available to the people that were directly concerned. 

 

The bill that has been presented by the member for Regina South, I believe takes into the public sector the 

same rights that have been given individuals in the private sector. I believe it is a good bill; I believe that all 

members should be voting in favor of it; I look forward in the days ahead, Mr. Speaker, to having other 

comments from members of this side of the Legislature, both the Liberal opposition and the Conservative 

opposition. I believe that we should give this bill a thorough airing and in order to do that, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe we must keep that bill in the name of the opposition and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South) moved second reading of Bill No. 35 — An Act to 



 

April 18, 1978 

1634 
 

amend The Ombudsman Act, 1972. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in every annual report of the Ombudsman, since I have been here, he has put his finger 

on a weakness in The Ombudsman Act and that is that he doesn't have power to inquire into the affairs of 

government when he receives a complaint beyond the doors of middle level civil servants. In other words, 

when he conducts his inquiries, when he reaches the door of the Deputy Minister, that door is closed to him. 

He can't get beyond it and into it and into the information that is there, or ask anybody any questions there, 

because it is denied to him. That is a fact — that is a fact. If the Minister of the Environment would read the 

act, here is what he will find. In some respects you have given the Ombudsman the power of nothing more 

than a powder puff — that is what you have given him by way of power to inquire into and investigate the 

government. When he gets his complaints and he goes to make his investigations, he has access to the lowest 

levels of government. He has access to middle level, when he gets to the most important level of all of 

government, the deputy minister and the minister, the door is slammed closed. That is why I say you have an 

Ombudsman who you have armed with little more than a powder puff in terms of getting to where it really 

counts. 

 

In every annual report by the Ombudsman in the last three years, that is two different Ombudsman who have 

occupied the office, they have said, 'I want an amendment to the act.' There is need for the Ombudsman to be 

empowered to enter the deputy minister's office and ask him information and require of him a reporting in 

terms of his investigation. Each year, the government has said in response to that report and questions from 

the annual report, 'Yes, we think there is merit to the proposal." (I think that was the Attorney General's 

words two or three years ago), 'Yes, there is merit to the notion. We are looking at it — it is something we 

ought to be able to do something about before very long.' And yet, the years come and go, again nothing is 

done. Each year when he files his report with us, he renews his request for the additional power that is 

denied him now under the act. So I thought what I would do is finally bring the matter to some head, that we 

draw something more from the government than these happy little assurances — 'Yes we think there is some 

merit in the notion, we will look into it, perhaps we will do something about it.' 

 

The Ombudsman, when he is saying he doesn't have sufficient power, I say to the members of the 

Legislature, he is saying that to you directly. Because he isn't an official or an employee of the government, 

he is an employee of this institution right here — he reports to us — he is our servant. And he has said to us 

in each of the last three years in two different persons, 'We need the additional power.' You can see there 

needs to be additional power — and yet, as I say, we nothing except sort of half assurances from the 

Attorney General and the Premier that, 'Yes, there is some merit to it — we are looking at it' but three years 

have gone by — so now we have a bill before us, the government will be required, Mr. Speaker, to indicate 

in some more firm way than what it has done in the past, about what it intends to do about this request from 

the Ombudsman. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving that this bill, An Act to amend The 

Ombudsman Act, 1972, now be read a second time. 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I take a good deal of pleasure in being able to 

speak to the bill that has been proposed by my seat mate, in part for the reasons suggested by the leader of 

our party a moment ago, because I think it is a positive step in improving the entire situation within the 

province. I think that the remarks made by the minister in charge of Sask Tel, indicate the need for all 

members to have the opportunity to peruse the remarks of my seatmate. There is obviously some 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1635 

 

misunderstanding about the powers the Ombudsman now enjoys, and I would expect, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister and other members opposite, would want the opportunity to peruse that, to consider it. I think the 

position that the member for Regina South has taken with regard to this bill is a very appropriate position 

and in order that all members may have the opportunity to take a look at it, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South) moved second reading of Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Development Fund Act, 1974. 

 

He said: Well, Mr. Speaker, members can see the . . .  

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, my point of order is as follows. 

 

I submit to you and to the House, Mr. Speaker, that this bill is out of order, inasmuch as it proposes the 

expenditure of public funds, and this is the pith and substance of the bill, particularly under Section 18, 

which is Clause 3 of the printed bill, subsection 2 note the words, 'All moneys advanced to the corporation, 

whether advanced before or after the coming in to force of this section by the Minister of Finance of the 

consolidated fund or otherwise, shall bear interest to be paid by the corporation.' and so forth and so forth. 

That is a charge on the public purse and I say, Mr. Speaker, the rules are clear that a private member does not 

have the power to move a money bill. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Any other comments with regard to the point of order? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I would like to say this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker should first understand the 

proposal in brief terms. The consolidated fund. The Minister of Finance out of the consolidated fund, has 

been advancing money to the Saskatchewan Development Fund without interest. What this bill would 

require is that those amounts that are advanced now and in the future, should have to bear interest. It is not a 

charge, Mr. Speaker, upon the public purse. It is to provide the public purse with some revenue which it 

ought to have had throughout all these years with that money being advanced interest free. My point there is 

that it doesn't cost the Consolidated Revenue Fund or the government money. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it will 

put money in their hands. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Any further comments on the point of order? I'll reserve my judgment on the particular 

matter and refer back to the House at a later date and ask the matter to stand for the time being. 

 

MR. M. KWASNICA (Cutknife-Lloydminster) moved second reading of Bill 38 - An Act respecting 

References in the Statute Law to 'Cutknife'. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it's indeed a privilege for me to bring in this bill, The Cut Knife Reference Act, 1978. 

Before I begin my explanation of the principle involved in this bill, I want to say that the constituency that I 

have had the honor representing for the past 10.5 years, is the finest in Saskatchewan. The people are hard 

working and friendly and I thank them for their excellent co-operation and loyal support. The constituency is 



 

April 18, 1978 

1636 
 

bordered by the North Saskatchewan River on the North and runs some 62 miles along the Alberta border 

and then proceeds straight East some 80 miles to the outskirts of Battleford. It is very rich in oil, as we know, 

Lloydminster is the heavy crude capital of the province. It is famous for its find breeds of cattle, top quality 

grains including rapeseed, buckwheat and mustard as well as agricultural industries such as a honey plant 

and an alfalfa cubing plant. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say the constituency has consistently elected 

CCF-NDP MLAs for the past 34 years. And since 1917 when the first provincial election was held, the 

constituency has elected progressive members 10 times out of 15 elections. The first progressive MLA 

elected was Andrew James MacAuley who ran under the Farmer-Labour ticket and he was succeeded by Mr. 

Toby Nollet who represent Cutknife for 20 years, 18 of these as the Minister of Agriculture for the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The principle of this bill, Mr. Speaker, is simply to correct the spelling of Cutknife to two separate words . . 

Cut Knife. This act changes the spelling in two acts pertaining to the Legislative Assembly. The first is The 

Election Act, 1971 wherever the name Cutknife-Lloydminster appears, as well it corrects the spelling of 

Cutknife-Lloydminster immediately preceding the description and in the first line of that description in The 

Representation Act of 1974. 

 

The second principle in this bill is that a reference to Cutknife as one word in any statute, order or regulation 

shall be deemed to be a reference to Cut Knife spelled as two different words. In doing the research 

necessary for this bill, Mr. Speaker, I would like to place on the record some of the evidence that I have 

found. The Canadian Permanent Committee on Geographic Names which is the federal agency that records 

and sanctions names and name changes, recognizes Cut Knife as the proper spelling of the town, the RM, the 

creek and the hill. This federal agency concerns itself with physical features such as lakes, river, bays, 

streams and man-made landmarks like cities, towns, villages, right down to settlements, post offices and 

trading posts. 

 

Cut Knife is steeped in the history of the plains. During the inter-tribal wars of the late 1840s, Cut Knife, a 

Sarcee chief was slain in conflict with the Cree under Poundmaker on a high hill overlooking the creek. 

Indians named the hill Cut Knife Lookout. It is only logical for the province to follow the decisions of the 

federal agency in order to bring consistency to the spelling of the name. I have letters on my file from the 

town of Cutknife, the council and the RM of Cutknife requesting me to bring in this bill to correct the 

spelling. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. L.R. Barr, descendent of the Barr colonists of 

Cutknife for his help in providing me with pictures and maps indicating the proper spelling. I wish at this 

time to express my sincere appreciation to him. With these few, short explanations, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased 

to move second reading of Bill 38. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE - TOURISM & RENEWABLE RESOURCES - VOTE 39 

 

HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Chairman, I am 

pleased to introduce my officials. To my right is my Deputy Minister, Mr. Art Hartwell. Behind me is Mr. 

Ray McBride, the administrative officer. The seat behind that to my right is Mr. Lyle Lensen, director of 

Regional Services. To his left is Mr. Walt Bailey, director of Forests. Then seated at the back to the far right 

is Mr. George Couldwell, director of Fisheries and Wildlife. Next to him is Mr. George Rathwell, 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1637 

 

director of Assistance Programs. Next to him is Roger Franklin, the director of Tourism and Development 

Branch. 

 

ITEM 1 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister, in the preceding 

months we have seen where we have been bypassed by such services as Night Hawk Services. We have been 

left out of a certain amount of tourism pamphlets that have been put out by the departments such as CPR, Air 

Canada. Do you have in your department a special lobbying effort or do you make a special effort to provide 

information and materials to these departments or to Air Canada, to travel agencies to sell Saskatchewan to 

be sure that we are included in such brochures or do you sort of leave it to chance? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to providing information and assistance in developing 

tour packages in the province the Tourism and Development Branch of the department functions in that area. 

Mr. Roger Franklin, the director of Tourism and Development is one of the officials that is very closely 

connected with the development of tour packages in Saskatchewan and his branch and colleagues work very 

closely with the provinces as well as Canada as a whole, and for that matter, outside of Canada in developing 

tour packages within the province of Saskatchewan. We have attempted to work very closely with Air 

Canada with respect to providing tour packages that Air Canada might be able to use in the development of 

tourism and travel in the province. I might say that I have made representations to the federal Minister, Mr. 

Jack Horner, with respect to including the province of Saskatchewan in the low cost travel tour that Air 

Canada has developed. Apparently Air Canada has ignored our representation to a degree. Nevertheless we 

continue to press on Air Canada and the federal minister to include the province of Saskatchewan in their 

travel packages and I am very pleased to report that only recently the report has come through in the 

Star-Phoenix indicating that air travel into Saskatchewan by Air Canada is going to be changed and 

consideration will be given to including Saskatchewan in the tour packages that Air Canada is developing. 

 

MR. ANDERSON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We have down in the southwest the proposed Grassland 

National Park. The study and the question has been before the people of the area for the last 16 years. As a 

result of this proposed park we have had a moratorium on any lease transfers, we have had the possibility of 

units being transferred so that the people in the area don't know whether they are going to be allowed to 

ranch there, whether they are going to be allowed to live there or whether they are going to be moved out. 

We were promised last year in Estimates by the minister that we'd be having the final decision in June of last 

year. Up to this point in time there has been no decision and I wonder if the minister could enlighten as to 

whether there will be a decision and when it possibly could be. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — With regard to Grassland, Mr. Chairman, I would like to report that the tourism and 

recreational study of southwest Saskatchewan has now been completed and our officials, as well as the 

federal officials, are reviewing the study and are going to prepare a summary of it as well as a summary of 

the recommendations with regard to that study. Following that, of course, we are going to consider it at the 

ministerial level, provincially and federally, and hopefully then we can come to some decision. I had 

indicated some time ago that I was hoping the decision could be reached by this summer, June sometime. I 

am still looking at the month of June of this year for a decision but whether or not this is going to come is 

very difficult to say 



 

April 18, 1978 

1638 
 

because there are certain areas that we have not come to an agreement on. One of the areas is, of course, the 

gas and oil exploration. Another area is the matter of protecting the interests of the municipalities in the area 

as well as the interests of the ranchers. 

 

I might also report that I had an opportunity to meet with the federal minister, Hugh Faulkner, about three 

weeks ago or so and we have discussed these outstanding issues. Hopefully, we might be able to either come 

to an agreement with them or at least come to a decision sometime this summer, or whether or not we are 

going to proceed with the park. But I agree with you that the matter of making a decision as soon as possible 

is very significant insofar as the ranchers are concerned. It has been some time since they have been waiting 

for a decision for that area. My sympathies are with him and I am hopeful that following the review of the 

study and the review of the outstanding issues, that we might be able to come to decision sometime this 

summer. 

 

While I am on my feet, I would like to respond to some of the allegations that have been made here earlier. I 

didn't have an opportunity to respond to them. These are the allegations that were made by the hon. member 

for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Nelson) with regard to the gas and oil explorations in the southwestern part 

of the province. I think it was very unfair that these allegations have been made because we are still in the 

process of negotiating with the federal government. Through these negotiations we are, in fact, assuring the 

future interests of the ranchers in the area, the local communities, the rural municipalities and the people of 

the province as a whole. In the negotiations to date we have received a commitment from the federal 

government that they will share the costs of a tourism and recreation plan for the entire southwestern part of 

the province. This, of course, will be shared on a 50-50 basis. 

 

Now it was agreed before conditional approval for the proposed park was given to the federal government 

last June that a final decision would not be made until the review was completed on the recreational potential 

of the southwest. As I indicated earlier, the study is now completed. We have also received commitments 

from the federal government that the acquisition of land for the park will take place only through voluntary 

sales and provisions have been made for ranchers to pass ranches on to their sons and daughters. 

 

There are, however, a number of concerns which are still being negotiated and agreement may only be 

reached after these are satisfied. One of these, as I mentioned, is the cost share with the federal government. 

Another one is the matter of the interests of the municipal government and the provincial government for 

that matter, and then of course the oil and the gas exploration costs. 

 

Now, the hon. member's statement at the time in the Legislature was that the province has agreed to share the 

costs of exploration and any return for oil and gas discoveries in the 72 sections of the core area with the 

federal government and that in the 300 sections in the surrounding area the province will bear the full cost of 

exploration but share returns with the federal government. Now this is totally wrong. The province has not 

agreed to share returns from oil and gas, either from the 72 square miles of the park core area or the whole 

park. I would suggest that the hon. member check the agreement and he will find that this is not included. I 

don't know where the hon. member gets his information, but certainly that is not part of the agreement. What 

the provincial government has agreed in the memorandum of intention was to share in the gas and oil 

exploration costs, but certainly there was no agreement which with regard to sharing of the returns. 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1639 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Chairman, I don't know where this minister has 

been, he couldn't have been at his own press conference last June 29, 1978, he said these very words, he said 

that he would share in the 72 sections, he said he would share in the outer area. It's right and I have it in my 

office and I will bring it down to you any time, read your own press report, Mr. Minister. Secondly, he says 

now they are going to have a study, why did he say last spring that they would have a settlement by June. 

Why did you say that Mr. Minister, now you are going to wait for a study and why are you going to consider 

what's going on after all this study when last June you said you would have a settlement? You said again last 

fall you would have a settlement. For 20 years your government and the other governments held this over the 

heads of the ranchers in the area and you say you are going to wait till the oil exploration and you know right 

well, Mr. Minister that there will be no oil exploration until you sign a memorandum of agreement with both 

the federal government and the provincial government. I don't know where you have been, Mr. Minister, but 

you are definitely absolutely out of line, read your own press reports. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I will certainly read my press reports and my comments and I would 

like to read them to you as well. I want to say too, that I think you should take a careful look at the 

memorandum of intention, the agreement has been signed, all that it indicates here is not the sharing of the 

returns but the sharing of gas and oil exploration costs. Oh, now you have read something into it which is 

absolutely incorrect and they are two different things. 

 

MR. NELSON: — I was at this conference. I listened to you then I got a copy of your report, ask the press, 

they have it too. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask if they you have 

forecast what the price of gasoline is going to do to the tourist business this year, have you made any forecast 

on what it will cut down tourist industry in Saskatchewan this year? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think any costs related to travel will certainly have an effect 

on travel and tourist trade in the province or in the area. Although, I want to suggest the fact that the travel 

costs are going to increase, we are looking forward that more of Saskatchewan people will travel in 

Saskatchewan and visit in Saskatchewan, but I think it's fair to say that any increase in travel costs will 

certainly have an effect on travel in Saskatchewan and the tourist trade. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me if you have concentrated your advertising then towards 

tourism to Saskatchewan people to stay home, have you played any special concentration towards 

advertising for our local people? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, we have been advertising to try and persuade and encourage people to remain in 

the province and visit in the province. We have also advertised outside the province, in Canada and outside 

of Canada by various methods. We have used the news media advertising as well as sport shows and I think 

you will find that our advertising budget has been increased the last couple of years. One of the other 

services that we have that we think is a very good promotional item is the tourist services trailer that makes 

its rounds earlier in the spring in the southern part of the continent in the United States and then gradually 

moves into Canada and finally into Saskatchewan and we think that the trailer has done a lot to promote 

Saskatchewan. We say this because we have had quite a number of visitors. I don't know what they run into 

but they run into thousands of visitors that go through our trailer and show an 



 

April 18, 1978 

1640 
 

interest in our province through the comments that they make. 

 

MR. LARTER: — I would like to ask the minister if this change back to the former rules on income tax on 

the American scene, as far as conventions are concerned, where they can deduct on conventions in Canada 

for their income tax, can you tell me if this has made any difference at all to Saskatchewan? Do you foresee 

anything at all on this end for this province? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I don't think that we are able to tell just yet; it is a little too soon to tell. I think one of 

the other things that we must consider is that we are in strong competition with many of the other convention 

centres. There is Winnipeg, Edmonton, on the west coat Vancouver and there is Toronto and so on. 

Nevertheless, that doesn't mean that there aren't any of the national or international conventions held in 

Saskatchewan but I think it is really too soon to tell whether it has much of an impact. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister can you tell me if your department has any kinds of courses for either the 

public or the private sector as far as learning how to handle tourists — hospitality? I think that your 

courteous treatment by people working in both the private and the public sector is our best form of 

advertising. I wonder what you have done in this line. Have you done anything in order to promote this in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in participating in the program of the hospitality industry, our 

department works very closely with the hotel and restaurant industries in participating in their workshops. 

Officials of the department participate by providing for lectures as well as some financial assistance. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, are you satisfied that this is going far enough though to do the job for the 

tourist industry in Saskatchewan? Do you think it should be extended? The restaurant and hotel courses or 

seminars that are put on, do they really match up with at we need in the tourist industry here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I believe that you can go a long way in attempting to improve the training in the 

hospitality industry; there is no question about it. Our department has been working very closely with both 

the hotel and the restaurant industries and it is continuing to do so. If there is a need for improving and 

expanding in the training and the courses, our department is quite prepared to do so. As I said earlier, I think 

there is really no end to learning and no end to training. I think we should also recognize that if we do have a 

very specialized course in hospitality, I would then of course presume that the people graduating from these 

courses would of course expect to receive much higher wages and then again you run into the problem of 

wages, high wages and so on. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, that answer does not surprise me a little bit. I am very surprised to hear 

that if they do have these courses they would be demanding higher wages. I thought it we were going to go 

after the tourist industry in Saskatchewan we should have really good people working, for instance, in the 

resorts. I would like to know if you have any special courses for students that are working at either provincial 

or regional parks. Do they take any special courses as far as meeting the public is concerned and what is their 

training? Do they just get into the booth there and sell entrances to the park? Is that their complete training? 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1641 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, most of our full time staff in the parks have the two year resource 

course that is provided for at the Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon. The part time people that are hired during the 

summer, of course, don't have this training. Some do, but most of them don't because they're hired as 

students from the university that is really not related to resource area. But all those that are hired on a full 

time basis certainly have the training and they receive their training at the Kelsey Institute and most of them, 

of course, would be the two-year graduates. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, I agree with you that your people at the parks that are 

full time employees are well trained. I have no quarrel there at all. I'm asking these questions because you do 

employ a lot of students during the summer and I just wonder if they don't get some kind of initial training 

when they go on to this job of meeting the public in the case of Last Mountain Park, Kenosee. They need 

twice as many people as anywhere else in Saskatchewan. I think these people should have some kind of a 

briefing, some kind of a course in order to meet these people. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — With regards to the summer staff that we hire, that's the students, they do have a very 

short course, about a week, with some of our officials. That of course, covers park administration as well as 

public relations. 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — I would just like to make a few comments in line of what the 

member for Estevan has been saying. It seems to me that the latest change in the provincial gas tax in 

Alberta has just added one more thing to the many disadvantages that the people in tourist industry have to 

work under here in the province of Saskatchewan. I think when most people start thinking of a holiday, 

particularly if they're going to be camping, some of the things that they like to look at, for instance are the 

moving along, finding a campsite or probably staying in a hotel. The women probably like to do a bit of 

shopping. There's a fair amount of driving in it. The odd time, I think a few of them have refreshments 

around a camp fire at night. I just like to point out some of the things in Saskatchewan that our tourist 

industry people are really faced with. 

 

For instance, if you're moving along the Trans-Canada Highway, shortly out of the city of Medicine Hat, they 

have a camp-site there that you find most summer nights is absolutely packed, because it's free. There is no 

charge. If you moved along a little father you'd find Killibrook which is a very elaborate camp-site. If I 

remember last year, the rates to stay at Killibrook were about $1.75 a night. Then if you proceeded along 

towards Bassano on your way to Calgary you had another free camp-site. In Saskatchewan, again the one at 

Maple Creek, which is a fine camp-site, I believe our rates are something like $4 or $5 per night to stay in it. 

We also have a 5 per cent sales tax on all our hotel rooms. We have the 5 per cent sales tax on commodities 

that people shop for or buy. Then we have, of course, the 19 cents provincial gasoline tax that we have in 

Saskatchewan, that we don't have in the province of Alberta. These are so many of the things that are sort of 

adding up. I just can't see how the minister can feel that there's going to be anything but extreme hardship in 

the tourist industry in the province of Saskatchewan this year. I would like to know what the minister has 

done in Cabinet to recommend that some change be made, particularly in the idea of maybe, eliminating the 

5 per cent sales tax on hotel rooms as they've done in the province of Ontario, I believe, or something along 

the idea of a reduction in gasoline tax to encourage people 



 

April 18, 1978 

1642 
 

to come into the province of Saskatchewan. Has the minister made any representations at all to the Cabinet 

to try and help out the tourist industry? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, certainly in my capacity as the Tourism Minister, I'm certainly 

concerned and hope that there is improvement in the industry as it relates to Saskatchewan. Nevertheless, I 

think that the member will realize that we as the government have to consider all sorts of priorities and 

therefore our budgets are set according to priorities. Certainly, tourism is being considered as well. With 

regards to the effect that travel costs may have on tourists, I want to say that the travel patterns do change 

and I think that tourists do consider the costs of travel but they, I think mainly consider the destination that 

they want to go to, rather than just simply the travel costs. Travel costs is one of the factors. I think the 

destination is probably one of the top considerations. Sometimes they may travel thousands of miles without 

consideration as to the cost of gasoline and their stay in hotels, at other times they will only travel a short 

distance because of the fact that is the destination they would like to reach. I agree with the member that all 

these have a certain amount of impact on the tourist travel. But as I mentioned earlier, the government has to 

consider its priorities and therefore the financial considerations are set accordingly. I might report to you that 

last year, from our statistics, it is indicated that the hotel business has been quite good and the hotel receipts 

have been up. The same thing applies to the motels and the same thing applies to the restaurants. So, perhaps 

this could have improved with reduced costs but nevertheless the trend is there towards improvement. 

 

MR. STODALKA: — I realize, too, that a government has certain priorities, but certainly the tourist trade 

in Saskatchewan is probably one of our larger industries and there should be some consideration given here. 

I could have mentioned also that in the line of alcoholic beverages, the differentiation that exists between 

Saskatchewan and Alberta right now; some of those things I don't know whether they have an effect or not 

but certainly they are another factor. 

 

I would like to go into another area. In the south west we have been, the last few years, talking about the 

Grasslands Park, and then moving down to the provincial park in the province of Saskatchewan, and then we 

moved to the Fort Walsh Park, then we moved to the west block to the Cypress Hills Provincial Park, then 

we move into the Cypress Hills Provincial Park in the province of Alberta — a sort of real recreational area 

you might say, really a sort of part and parcel of one large area. Now there have been some suggestions in 

our area that possibly one of these areas will not be part of that park concept in the future. The minister I 

think will know what I am going to ask him by now and that is about the west block of the Cypress Hills 

Provincial Park. There has been some indication that possibly in the matter of Indian land claims settlement 

—- I know that the Minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is the person responsible for 

Indian land claims but seeing that the west block of the Cypress Hills Provincial Park is under your 

jurisdiction, I wonder if the minister would give us some assurance that this very beautiful park, a park that 

as I say really belongs to the total area, will not be transferred out of the parks system as the matter of 

settling Indian land claims. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, with regard to the west block that the hon. member refers to, and the 

Indian land claims related to it, the Indians in the area have identified the land as a possibility for claiming it 

for their land. This, of course, is their business, and they are doing that right across the province. 

Nevertheless, there is no commitment on the part of the government to release this land to settle any land 

claim at this point in time. I am of course hopeful that that land will be kept within the parks as occupied 

Crown land for park purposes. 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1643 

 

MR. STODALKA: — The minister then is saying, what I understand, is that his own personal position then 

is that he will do his utmost to see that the west block of the Cypress Hills Provincial Park will remain as 

part of Saskatchewan Cypress Hills Provincial Park. (Inaudible interjection) Could I also pursue this just one 

step further. There are grazing permits that are issued in this west block and I believe these are yearly permits 

that are issued. Again would the minister assure us that these grazing permits would continue as they have in 

the past? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, the grazing permits will continue in the park on an annual basis. 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Minister, you are in the enviable position of being 

the minister in charge of the second largest industry in Saskatchewan, which lost around $10 million last 

year. I feel sorry for those that are in charge of the others that are below yours. But Mr. Minister, we have got 

to encourage tourism into our province. I am just wondering what percentage or what part of your 

advertising budget is spent nationally and provincially and internationally. What type of advertising 

campaigns have you got going or will you have that will try and encourage people to come into our province 

for their holidays and spend a little bit of their money here? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, let me first of all correct the hon. member with respect to tourism 

being the second largest industry. I hope it was and I hope that we can strive for that but it is the third largest 

industry in Saskatchewan at this point in time. 

 

With regard to advertising in the province, tourism advertising in the province, I have mentioned some of 

these earlier. We have the development of packaged tours within and to the province, an advertising tour 

incentive program for carriers and tour wholesalers for the development of Saskatchewan programs and then 

there is the showcase trailer that I have mentioned earlier. The statistics expect the number of people who 

will likely go through the trailer this coming season will exceed something like 100,000. So there is quite a 

number of people that go through it. We also have our Sask Travel information service; I am sure you are 

aware of that. This information provides a direct response, both by telephone and letter, to some 70,000 

Saskatchewan travellers every year. Our staff maintains 6 travel information centres to serve the travelling 

public in an attempt to divert the traffic off the major routes in the province. Then we have our showcase, 

travel show program which has been increased to 16 shows, an increase of 7 over the previous year. 

 

Now, with regard to dollars in advertising, direct media advertising on tourism in Saskatchewan, the 

department spends $109,000 in round figures. The total promotion effort, which includes such things as 

travel counselling, publications, sports shows, custom tour program and a community and regional tourism 

development program runs into $617,044 and if you include the staff that is involved in this, it is well over 

$1.4 million. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, just before I forget, I would like to express how pleased I was with a film we 

saw the other night which was done by your department, I believe on the Yellowhead route, and that is an 

exceptional film. I believe that films of that type will be a great promotion to try to get people to stop in 

Saskatchewan. As you said, there are a lot going through, but it is the idea to get them to stop here. Your 

advertising budget is fairly high. Can you break this down into regions for me? What dollars are spent in 

each 



 

April 18, 1978 

1644 
 

region and now much in each region? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — About the only program that we might be able to break down for tourism promotion 

is the Regional Tourism Development Program which covers the 6 regions and that is $20,000 per region. 

But in terms of publications and advertising we don't have the breakdown. When these are published they are 

of course provided for wherever there might be a demand for it. It makes it very difficult to get an accurate 

figure on a regional basis. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, there is a general feeling in the northern part of our province, that is on this 

side of the northern administration district and across the, I guess you'd call it the central part of the 

province, that you could be doing some more advertising to increase our tourism population up there. I have 

been asked by the people in that part of the area to encourage you to do more advertising, to get more people 

in the central part of Saskatchewan instead of having them come through on the No. 1 highway. Many of the 

advertising packages just leave Saskatchewan flat — like it seems like all Saskatchewan is in the south part 

of our province in the prairies here. 

 

Mr. Minister, the regional grants of last year were $20,000 and I understand there was some talk about 

increasing that. Is the $20,000 going to be increased? I believe, and I stand to be corrected here, that the 

Prince Albert area is going to be a region by itself, they are going to opt out of there. If they do, do they 

receive $20,000 like the other 6 regions do, or where are we at on that at this time? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, may I first of all answer the member on his first concern and that is 

with regard to advertising and promoting the entire province rather than the southern part, the central or 

southern part. I think that in our advertising we are promoting the entire province, in almost every 

publication that we may have — I would like to refer to one publication, or one advertisement that we have 

and this one is in the Reader's Digest, where it promotes the entire province. As a matter of fact, it is the 

Prince Albert National Park, that is a northern park but it is a national park which we could promote as a 

provincial park but it promotes the entire province of Saskatchewan. This piece of advertising cost the 

government $13,000 because there is quite a lot of advertising in it  . .(inaudible interjection) . .That refers to 

the big and the small and it refers to the single and the family people. Now with regards to the $20,000 

allotment that was provided for to the tourism regions, we are continuing with that this year. There is no 

increase in that sum per region. 

 

With respect to Prince Albert and the northern region, my understanding is that the Prince Albert city and 

area is holding discussions with northern people, the northern outfitters and until the time they might be able 

to resolve their differences and come to some sort of an agreement as to how the northern part of the 

province should be promoted, I don't think there is too much that we can do. We, of course, are participating 

with them and work with them in an attempt to try and resolve some of the problems they may have there 

and, perhaps, come to some sort of an agreement with regards to promoting the northern area. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, you have had, I understand, or I believe, some presentations - quite a few 

presentations - made to you with the idea of increasing this $20,000 grant, which really doesn't go that far in 

the regions now that they are so large. Can they expect a little softheartedness from you, for the upcoming 

year to try and bring more tourism into our area? There was a question here, before, I hope that they can 

expect it, but there was a question before about the training of your staff at these parks. 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1645 

 

What has been the increase in the staff at the regional parks over the last two years? What has been the 

average increase? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Are you referring to regional parks or provincial parks? 

 

MR. WIPF: — Provincial parks. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Last year the staff in the provincial parks was increased by 16 permanent and 28 

temporary and we are continuing on the same basis. There is no increase this year. 

 

MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister. Again, I want to encourage you to put together some special packages for 

central Saskatchewan, for our area up there that is hurting because of the lack of tourists coming into the 

most beautiful part of the province and show the people who are coming to Saskatchewan that there is more 

than prairies. 

 

The other area that I want to talk about is the Duck Mountain Park, over in your constituency. Is your 

department involved in the building of that ski hill that is to be put in there? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I am proud of Duck Mountain Provincial Park, but it is not in my 

constituency. It is in the constituency of Pelly. I suppose the hon. member would remember when he was 

working in the Pelly campaign. With regard to the development of the ski slope, I think this is what your 

question was, I might say that that area, the proposed ski area, was established as a regional park so, 

therefore, the assistance to the ski area, the development of the ski area, is going to be provided on the basis 

of regional park formula, which is at present, 60 per cent capital and 50 per cent maintenance. 

 

MR. WIPF: — The 60 per cent capital and then the other capital is going to be supplied by the 

municipalities. Is that it? Is the town of Kamsack involved in that? Are they putting any money into it? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, they are. 

 

MR. WIPF: — How much? What percentage? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — There are two RMs that I think are involved and I believe there is a village. 

 

The municipalities are going to be committed to provide $108,000 and that includes the three RMs, the town 

of Kamsack and, I believe, the village of Veregin as well. But we don't have the breakdown as to how much 

the town of Kamsack will provide. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, on this particular ski slop and the development that you are doing in this area - 

you said that is a regional park where the ski slope is? Is that within a provincial park? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The land in that area is going to be leased to the regional park authority for the 

purpose of developing this ski slope. 

 

MR. WIPF: — What plans does your department have, or the government have, for 



 

April 18, 1978 

1646 
 

development in that area? What other development is going to go ahead? Are you going to build a chalet or a 

hotel or motels? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, that area is under the jurisdiction of the regional park authority and of 

course that is going to be their plans. I think they have laid out some of their plans with us, nevertheless, they 

are the ones that make a request for approval of their plans for development. I understand that the ski slope 

of course is going to developed as well as a chalet in time. The major projects of development there are 

going to be the ski slope and the chalet and of course the development of the ski trails, as well. 

 

MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister, there is some development going on there and you said it has been 

referred to, I forget the name of the committee. Are those people here and could you tell us what other 

development, if that motel is going in there or what other developments. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, there will be no hotel or motel development in that area. As a matter 

of fact, we don't approve of developing hotels and motels in park areas. 

 

MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister, that is what I wanted to hear you say, that there would be no hotel or 

motel development in that general area. Are you going to be running a road or putting a road in over to join 

the highway in Manitoba — now I forget the number of that highway that runs up to the The Pas, the west 

side of Manitoba. Will there be a juncture or a road going over to meet that one — that highway? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, there are no plans for a road development suggested by the hon. 

member. An access road has been provided from the park core area onto the ski area. That is the fire guard 

road — it has been referred to as the fire guard road. Nevertheless it has been improved and could be used as 

an access to the regional park area. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I am sorry to interrupt but I wonder if the members to my right would 

please keep the noise down just a little bit. I am finding it very difficult to hear what is going on. So if they 

will please confine  .. Proceed. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the one question that I want to give and 

then I should be finished here. There is some concern in the Kamsack area through a meeting that was held 

with I don't know, some of your officials or government officials, that had indicated to the people they would 

or could take over this resort, even though the surrounding municipalities and the town of Kamsack had put 

money into it. Is there any fact in that you can eventually take this over without compensating the RMs and 

the town of Kamsack for the moneys and the energies that they put into it? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, there is no intention of the province, and no indication has been given 

to anyone, that the province would be taking it over after it was developed or half way developed, for that 

matter. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I want to change the direction of the 

questioning and bring to the attention of the minister and ask him a few specific questions. But first of all, I 

would like to make a few comments. To me for the 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1647 

 

Department of Tourism, certainly one of the major problems in Saskatchewan, is located right here in the 

city of Regina. And of course I speak about the Regina airport. Mr. Speaker, the tragedy of it is that if there 

is anything that is destroying or hindering tourist expansion, not only within the province of Saskatchewan 

but the holiday opportunities outside the province of Saskatchewan, is the complete stagnation of the Regina 

airport program. In fact, what has bothered me very much, is that I think it is about time that all the people of 

Saskatchewan mounted a general protest, and I think it is also about time that the minister of Tourism and 

the government of Saskatchewan led the fight concerning the Regina airport — and for some strange reason, 

the only person that I hear making any kind of a fight at all, is the member for Regina South . . . (Noise and 

comments) . . . Now let's for a moment, and if you have a guilty conscience over there, boys, restrain 

yourselves, particularly the Minister of Consumer Affairs, the Attorney General and any of those MLAs who 

are located or live in Regina. I sympathize with them because they should have a guilty conscience! Let us 

just stop for a moment and examine it. (Inaudible interjection) I say to you that . . . just then the Minister of 

Finance has got a guilty conscience to . . . We may think . . .  

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, order please! Any member will have an opportunity if they so wish to 

speak but while the other one is speaking I would certainly prefer if they would listen and be as quiet as 

possible, so .. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Chairman, we senior members recognize that some of those young upstarts 

over there have a very, very difficult time. 

 

I want to sit down for a minute and start off by saying, I would suggest to you that the only capital city in 

Canada without an international flight out of, that can leave and return to the capital city in Canada, is the 

city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan. This is the only one that I know of. Now I know that you can 

out of Halifax. I think you can out of St. Johns or Gander in Newfoundland. I certainly know you can out of 

Montreal, Toronto, Winnipeg, Calgary, Edmonton, Vancouver, but in the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan there isn't a single opportunity, particularly the city of Regina, to go on an international flight. 

Now what is the reason for it, Mr. Chairman? It is because there is a complete lack of customs facilities. 

 

(inaudible interjection) 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — No you can't blame Otto Lang; it has been here for years and years but it is about 

time that we started to do a little fighting about it, Mr. Speaker. We have no customs facilities in the city of 

Regina and you know what happens if somebody wants to take an international flight or if some group wants 

to charter an aircraft to Las Vegas or go to Hawaii or wherever it may be, the first thing you have got to do is 

to fly to Calgary on your return home and clear customs. 

 

(inaudible interjection) 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Now listen to the Attorney General sitting up there just yakking away and you 

know it is about time he gets up here and . . .  

 

(inaudible interjection) 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — His city has that opportunity unfortunately, but he doesn't give that opportunity to 

the Queen city and the capital of Saskatchewan  .. city of Regina. Not only that, Mr. Speaker. 



 

April 18, 1978 

1648 
 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, and shame on whoever is responsible, but the biggest problem is that the 

government of Saskatchewan has sat quietly by and ignored it. That is the real problem, Mr. Speaker. We 

have, all of a sudden, a new policy in relation to air fares in the Dominion of Canada — something that is 

protested by Canadians right across the country is that domestic fares are very, very high. It costs as much to 

fly to Halifax as it does to fly London, England and that happens to be a fact, within a few dollars. All of a 

sudden now, Canadians are resenting the fact that domestic air fares are going up and so all of a sudden they 

call for a new kind of air fare so all of a sudden they have introduced the charter class fare and all of a 

sudden they have introduced the Night Hawk. But who can't fly on the Night Hawk? The citizens of 

Saskatchewan and the citizens of Regina, and that is unfortunate. 

 

(inaudible interjection) 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well maybe I would, or some people who can't afford to fly first class like the 

Attorney General in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(inaudible interjection) 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — That's right. People who have to pay their own way, Mr. Attorney General. They 

don't get the taxpayers to pay it. So there are some real problems in Saskatchewan. I know that you can go, 

and the government, if you ever turn around — if you want to look up in Public Accounts the NDP last year 

spent over $.5 million on air fares to Air Canada and that is not counting all kinds of other air fares. There is 

no question about it. You can fly, and you don't want to fly Night Hawk, but there are a lot of poor people in 

Saskatchewan who would like to go to Toronto at the same kinds of fares that the people in Calgary and 

Edmonton and Winnipeg can. Those are the kind of people who should have that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thee is another problem, and you know that is unfortunate that I haven't even heard anything 

from the Member of Parliament for Regina; that's right. That is why we are going to have a couple of new 

ones after the federal election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, the one member and candidate who is trying to fight for this problem 

happens to be, as I said, the member for Regina South. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, there are some problems and I think the members over there should look at them very 

seriously, and that the government should be taking the leadership and providing some kind of an opposition 

and an organized opposition; there should be a research program to indicate the number of people who want 

to fly on the Night Hawk; there should be the number of people who fly internationally out of the province of 

Saskatchewan and are unable to do so out of the city of Regina. We should be able to find out how many 

international flights go out of Winnipeg, Calgary and Edmonton which are denied to the province of 

Saskatchewan and particularly the city of Regina. We should look very carefully at the causes and there are 

several causes. The number one, of course, is that we need expanded runway facilities — no question about 

that. We can find that 747's can land in the city of Saskatoon but they can't land in the capital city of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Regina, Mr. Chairman. 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1649 

 

There is another thing of course — our airport. The actual facility itself needs expansion and needs growth 

and whether it needs to be moved or what, I don't know and I am not trying to get into the problem of where 

the airport should be located but I do know this, that it is a tragedy that when you come from Minot or the 

United States, the maximum number of people who can clear customs is 30. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Now that is a shame and this happens to be the capital city of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, I don't know whether the Minister of Tourism is writing letters but he is being 

very, very silent on it. I don't know if the government of Saskatchewan is making any kind of a massive 

protest but certainly the people of Saskatchewan don't know whether they are. And I want to say to the 

Minister of Tourism, if you want to help the tourist industry in the province of Saskatchewan then number 

one, let's have a gateway city in the capital city of Regina and we can then fly international. That is the first 

thing we want to do — let's have a gateway city. The second thing, let's have the kind of custom's facilities 

here that will accommodate the international desires of the people of Saskatchewan. Anybody, for example, 

flying to Hawaii flies from Regina to Calgary or Edmonton or to Vancouver, then they go or they have to 

land in Calgary, Edmonton and Vancouver. And I'm not going to tell you how many thousands of people 

today are flying internationally out of the province of Saskatchewan and unfortunately they are denied the 

same kind of privileges as the travelling public in every other province in Canada. And I want to ask the 

minister to indicate to me if he has a permanent lobby in the federal capital with the CRTC or the Canadian 

Transport Commission who has a responsibility there. I want to ask the minister when is the last time he has 

had a meeting with the Minister of Transport in regard to this. I would like to ask the minister if he would 

mind tabling for the members of the Legislature the kind of correspondence that has been written to the 

Minister of Transport in order to try and obtain these kind of facilities. I'm not talking about joining with the 

delegation from the city of Regina or any of the normal things. I'm asking whether or not the minister is 

actively taking a leadership role in this and I'll tell you this, Mr. Minister, if you can accomplish those things 

for the city of Regina and the province of Saskatchewan you will do more than doubling your budget as far 

as tourism in the province of Saskatchewan is concerned. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with a lot of the things that the hon. member has said except 

criticizing me and the provincial government. I think that we have done as much as we can do. We have 

made representation, I have made representation to the federal authorities with regard to the facilities, the 

poor facilities that we have, the custom facilities that we have in the Regina airport. I have attended the 

minister's conference in Ottawa a couple of months ago with regard to better transportation facilities and 

tourism industry as a whole. I personally have indicated to the conference that if we are going to expand 

custom clearance facilities that one of the first considerations should be the capital city and this has been 

agreed by the ministers at the conference. It was indicated very clearly to the minister that very serious 

consideration be given to designating each and every capital city in the province of Canada with international 

airport status. I think what is necessary, if the hon. member would talk to his federal colleagues with such 

vigor and strength as he is doing here this evening, that too would help. I think that a shaking up of the 

Transportation Minister and the Minister of Industry in Ottawa would certainly assist and I think we have 

done all we can. As a matter of fact I think that the release that I pointed to you earlier with regard to the air 

travel plan may be changed. I think this has come about by my representations 



 

April 18, 1978 

1650 
 

being made to the federal ministers and indicating our dissatisfaction and objection that Saskatchewan has 

been left out, out of the Share Canada Program and out of the Night Hawk Program. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Thanks very much. It's nice to have the minister say, if the member would speak as 

strongly to the Minister of Transport. I will be glad to speak as strongly, but you happen to have the 

responsibility in the province of Saskatchewan to speak to the Minister of Transport. Can the minister tell 

me exactly when he had the last meeting with the Minister of Transport or the Department of Transport in 

Ottawa to discuss No. (1) the customs facilities in the city of Regina, No. (2) the expansion of the runway, 

No. (3) a new airport and No. (4) the Nigh Hawk Service? Can the minister tell me? I'm not interest in a 

press release. You are free to speak strongly. I will speak strongly. You tell me when the last time you or an 

official of the government of Saskatchewan had a meeting with the Minister of Transport or the Department 

of Transport to discuss these problems. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — One of the problems meeting with federal ministers is that it is difficult to get a time 

for a meeting. We were hoping that at the time of our tourism conference that the Minister of Transport 

would be at hand along with the Minister of Industry. The Minister of Industry, Jack Horner, was there but 

apparently the Minister of Transport wasn't available for that meeting and this is one of the difficulties that 

we are having. Nevertheless I have corresponded, communicated with the Minister of Transport with regard 

to the problem that we are addressing ourselves to. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Well, I'm going to give the minister the opportunity to speak a little more strongly 

and all the members of the government to support a simple motion and I'm sure it should receive the 

approval of all members of the Assembly and it is related, of course, to this committee and the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan, calling upon the federal government to do certain things. 

 

Before I move that, I would like to ask the minister one more question. Can he tell me if there has been any 

proposal or any information provided to the government of Saskatchewan by the Department of Transport, 

nationally, which would indicate when a solution might be anticipated for the citizens of Saskatchewan in 

relation (1) to customs facilities; (2) improved runway facilities? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, we have no commitment from the federal minister. There might be a 

possibility that, perhaps, there might have been a communication with the Transportation Agency or the 

Minister in charge of Transportation Agency, but there hasn't been anything of a commitment from the 

federal minister with regard to this. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the member for Regina South 

(Mr.Cameron), that the following motion be presented to the committee: 

 

That this committee expresses its desire: (a) to preserve the present location of the Regina 

Airport; (b) to expand the capacity of the Regina Airport by constructing a new runway 

approximately one mile south of the current second runway. 

 

Of course, when I talk about this, it gives the opportunity for the large 747s to come in. When I say the mile 

or two miles, or three miles, or whatever it might be, I am referring to the need for a new and larger runway. 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1651 

 

(c) to expand the capacity of the terminal, and (d) to provide customs and clearance facilities; (e) to 

proceed immediately with all necessary zoning changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move and I would like to speak, very briefly, to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in making this particular motion I tried to make it so expansive, or at least to cover the majority 

of the problems relating to the city of Regina and its airport facilities. I would hope that, in discussing it, 

members of the committee might consider the purpose behind the motion and the intent. 

 

(a) to preserve the present location of the Regina Airport, I think makes a great deal of sense. First of all, 

when we talk about the present location, we are talking about not expending the kinds of hundreds of 

millions and millions of dollars that were required, for example, to change the airport location in the city of 

Calgary, we hear about the tremendous expenditures at Mirabel and so forth. 

 

(b) to expand the capacity of the Regina airport by constructing a new runway, approximately a mile, or 

wherever it is, South. Of course, what we are really saying is that one of the unfortunate things about the city 

of Regina and the airport in the city of Regina, the capital of this province of Saskatchewan, is that you can't 

land a jumbo jet here. You can't even take off, for example, with a Stretch Eight, a DC Eight, that is fully 

loaded with gas and fully loaded with a passenger capacity. That is very, very unfortunate for the capital city 

and the province of Saskatchewan and that happens to be a fact. You can't even take off with a Stretch Eight 

loaded to capacity. Therefore, there is a need for the reconstruction of a runway. 

 

(c) to expand the capacity of the terminal. Of course, I don't think I have to tell anybody the projections for 

air travel in the future, or 1985; the projections in Regina, Winnipeg and across Canada are fantastic, the 

growth in air traffic. 

 

(d) to provide customs and clearance facilities is self-explanatory. One of the reasons we are not a gateway 

city, in the city of Regina, is, of course, because we don't have the customs and clearance facilities. 

 

(e) to proceed immediately with all necessary zoning changes. That, of course, now requires leadership from 

the government of Saskatchewan as well as the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all members of the House would look at this particular recommendation or 

this particular motion, in a positive and a progressive way so that it is what is best for the city of Regina and 

the province of Saskatchewan. It would be very helpful, as a matter of fact, for the minister and other 

members of the government to stand up and support this particular motion, so that we could send it down to 

Ottawa, unanimously, from both the government and the members of the opposition, because it certainly 

expresses the needs and the desires of the citizens of Regina and the citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Chairman, I think we can appreciate the 

hon. member's motion with respect to the airport. Perhaps all hon. members will be interested to know the 

background to the particular motion. I think it is 



 

April 18, 1978 

1652 
 

a very positive motion, it is lacking in the necessary specifics in order to deal with the Regina airport 

situation. A report to all hon. members that, at the initiative of this government and the city of Regina, a 

study into the Regina airport was established involving the federal government, the provincial government 

and the city. That study was completed I think shortly after the new year and the recommendations of that 

study were released to the public for public comment. This then could be followed by meetings involving the 

federal Minister of Transport, myself and the city officials. The recommendations, in the broad sense, are in 

keeping with the motion put forward by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, and I think that everybody 

supports those. I think the study people made those recommendations, I think the city supports them, I think 

they are prepared to deal with the controls and the zoning and we are prepared to work with them in that 

area, and I think that the federal government agrees with the recommendations. 

 

The recommendations of the study puts some time frames on implementation, and I think that those are 

fairly important. I know that, in the hon. member's motion, those time frames were not included and in the 

recent weeks we have been seeking an opportunity to sit down with the federal Minister of Transport and the 

city to not only just discuss the recommendations of the study in the broad sense as put forth by the hon. 

member, but to discuss with them the kind of time frames for implementation. In terms of the time frames 

proposed in the study certainly our feeling by the government was that it could have been brought in in a 

shorter period. However, we were willing to accept the recommendations of the study team and that is 

basically our position. However, there has been no opportunity to meet and therefore we have not been able 

to provide a positive response to the study. Since we have been seeking that opportunity, (I know the federal 

Minister of Transport is busy and obviously will likely be getting busier), we are still seeking the opportunity 

and still seeking an opportunity to get more specific commitments than the motion proposed. 

 

In light of this then, Mr. Chairman, I would like to move a further amendment to the motion amend the 

motion, by adding the following words at the end of the motion as presented. 

 

And express its extreme regret the failure of the Minister of Transport, Canada, to meet with 

civic and provincial officials, to resolve the said concerns thereby downgrading the status of 

the City of Regina. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Mr. Speaker, before we vote on the amendment there are a couple of questions that 

I would like to ask the Minister of Tourism and the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

I would like the Minister of Tourism to stand on his feet and tell us when he contacted the Department of 

Transport, since the latest progression in the airport situation, which will be discussed in a moment, Mr. 

Attorney General. Would the Minister of Tourism please stand on his feet, and the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, and tell us the exact date, because I will be interested in finding out, because I am very concerned 

about this, this exact date when the last occasion he requested a meeting with the Minister of Transport, Mr. 

Lang, and what particular date did he suggest - and because this is rather important - from some of the 

additional information that we are going to provide. Would the Minister of Tourism please indicate that 

before we vote on the motion, Mr. Chairman? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I am unable to give the hon. member the exact date 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1653 

 

of my correspondence with the Minister of Transport. I did correspond with him, I think it was sometime last 

summer, with regard to this. I expected to see him at the conference, which he didn't attend. Now how do 

you get to a minister when he doesn't make himself available? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I just want everybody to listen to what has happened here. Just let's everybody 

listen to what has happened! The Minister of Tourism said he contacted a letter last summer, but the report 

just came out a short time ago. Well, that is par for the course. When is the city . . . inaudible . . . tell us that. 

Let's ask the minister. That is par for the course. Then the minister expects us to support a thing like that, 

when the last letter, the last correspondence he had with the Minister of Transport  . . . please tell us Mr. 

Minister, and I ask the Minister of Municipal Affairs, to tell us what has occurred since last summer in 

relation to the airport issue in the city of Regina and the province of Saskatchewan. . . and then have the 

audacity to say that the Minister of Tourism could support the amendment, or the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, my correspondence with the Minister of Transport was in connection 

with custom clearance facilities at the Regina Airport. At that time there was nothing about the Night Hawk. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Then how can you support that motion? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I certainly will be supporting and I am just wondering how your colleague over there 

is going to support the motion and that is the hon. member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron). 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I will be happy, Mr. Chairman, to tell the minister how I intend to support the motion 

and vote against the amendment. 

 

The minister has indicated that there was, in fact, a study which was undertaken in co-operation with the 

three levels of government and it was a very good effort on behalf of his government and I want to give him 

credit for it. I am happy to do that. 

 

The study looked at a variety of alternatives, but on this base, it found clearly, that the past number of 

passengers in Regina is likely to double over the course of the next 15 to 20 years, that is first. Secondly, the 

number of incoming and outgoing flights is expected to increase dramatically in that same time period. The 

question is, what are we going to do to meet that problem, because these are already the facts? 

 

The noise levels in the southern portion of the city, and some of you will be familiar with that, are already 

too high and they are a major irritant. Secondly, is that the safety levels with respect to the use of the main 

runway are now causing a problem. Those aircraft are coming in very low and the danger of the situation is 

building with the increase in the traffic. That is the second problem. What is the solution to it? The minister's 

study, in co-operation with the federal and provincial governments, has suggested that there ought to be a 

major runway expansion by building a second runway a mile south and west of the existing runway, running 

in an east-west direction. That could mean that the incoming flights would come over west of the by-pass, 

west of Kiddie Land, that area. They would come over non settled areas of the city, which is a very good 

solution. 

 

Secondly, of course it would solve the noise level problem by and large with the 



 

April 18, 1978 

1654 
 

exception of the small use of the eastwest runway. That, in my view, was a good solution. The study 

recommended that there had to be zoning provisions made in order to accommodate that and there had to be 

some action taken, in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Housing Authority as the minister will know, to 

be certain that settlement was not taking place to preclude those options. Again I give the minister credit — 

he made some tough decisions and it was his decision in the main that saw to it that those options were not 

foreclosed in the decisions that you made last summer. I give you credit for that, much credit as a matter of 

fact. What has transpired recently now is that the city of Regina has approved the zoning, that land that was 

required of it, I believe, about a week ago, and I would give the city of Regina credit for having done that as 

well. I think there are now additional zoning requirements which is now resting with you. That is, the 

provincial government has to take some action in this area as well. As the minister will know, Saskatchewan 

Housing Authority owns some land as well that may be required if the expansion is to take place. 

 

Now, the current situation we are in is that there is, in my understanding, some additional zoning and other 

requirements of the provincial government which I hope that the minister will move on fairly quickly. Then 

it would be a matter of persuading the federal government, in a period of restraint, to come forward with the 

$30 million or $40 million that will be required for the project. 

 

First I want to address you in a serious sense of respect to this. This is a major problem of this city and it has 

been a problem which is growing in intensity and will continue to grow in intensity. There has been good 

co-operation by the three levels of government to this point to solve the problem. We are now coming to the 

point where action has to be taken. One is, we want to preserve the location of the airport. There are some 

voices that don't agree with that, as the minister will know — not governmental voices but other voices — 

who want a new airport constructed elsewhere and we would lose the convenience of the present location. 

What now is required, in this last step, is the continued high co-operation between the provincial government 

and the federal government. The record of co-operation at this point in time has been excellent and I give 

your government credit for it — sincerely I do. Now we have one last step to go and that is, the ministers 

now have to meet with their federal government counterparts to finally make some decisions with the base of 

the information that has been gathered, the zoning has been done and the minister's housing decision that he 

took last summer. 

 

Now is the time when we have to make the decision. Now is the time when we need the $30 million or $40 

million in times of restraint. I think the minister would find it helpful in his meeting with his counterparts in 

Ottawa, to have this resolution with him at the time he goes. And if he thinks it is of any value to have my 

address in respect to it, along with him, I would be happy if he would take that too because I can tell you, 

two months from now or three months from now, when I am dealing with this problem at another level 

(Laughter), I will find this very helpful to have this resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — So I want all ministers, all members too — we will not only arm those ministers with 

the value of this resolution in their negotiations, but I ask you to do me a favor too and arm me with the 

resolution because it will help me in my persuasions three months down the road! (Applause and inaudible 

comments) What I say is  . .well members will know it is cost of association that I am associated with some 

money to advance these propositions by way of popular support and so on. I want to say, in respect to the 

amendment, the problem with it is, that it plays easy politics you see — 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1655 

 

that is what it does. Well, for the Attorney General — the Attorney General — he would like to express 

some regret for the fact that they have not been able to meet with the Minister of Transport — ever. The fact 

is, they are now in the process of trying to arrange that meeting. Atmosphere at the moment is good, there 

has been good co-operation, there can only be good co-operation in the future if we make an effort to 

co-operate. 

 

Is it helpful, to send your minister, who is now trying to arrange the meeting with the federal government, is 

it helpful to send him with a resolution that this House condemns the fact that they haven't yet met? Of 

course it isn't! What difficulties there are would only exacerbate the difficulties . (inaudible interjection) You 

see, good politics from your point of view  ..(inaudible interjection) ..makes lousy administration — and 

when you have to balance good administration against bad politics, I much prefer the good administration. 

 

The resolution, the amendment of the Attorney General is good politics, lousy administration. I say to him, 

for a change and to the minister, for goodness sakes — the atmosphere of co-operation you now have got 

going — don't go off on some political tangent and ruin it all, but take a good positive sound message to 

Ottawa, that is the way we will get things done. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my only comment will be that, that sort of 'politics' started 

from the utterances from the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. I think it is true that the co-operation 

between the federal government, the province and the city on this issue has been excellent. There is no 

question, Mr. Speaker, that when the report was released it was an agreement between the federal Minister of 

Transport and myself, that we should meet before any final decisions were made with respect to 

implementation of the report and that was very, very clear and that no one would move, that involves the 

city, the province and the federal government, until such a meeting took place. I think that is obviously 

important. It has been quite sometime, Mr. Chairman, since that report was released and through the officials 

of the Transportation Agency who are in contact with the ministry of transport people the efforts to have 

such a meeting have been tried without success so far. I don't think there is any question about that. Officials 

from Transport Canada forwarded to the officials in the Transportation Agency a general press release which 

covered, to a degree, similar in terms to the motion put forward by the hon. member which I just did not find 

acceptable. I instructed my officials to seek once again an opportunity to meet and get on with the serious 

business of the implementation of the study committee's recommendations. Those are, in fact, the facts. Now 

I think that the best thing this Assembly can do and all members can do and I suggest this to the hon. 

member for Indian Head-Wolseley, that he withdraw his motion and I'll be glad to withdraw my amendment 

and we will really get on with the serious job of doing something about the Regina Airport. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — You know, it's rather interesting that this is the first public discussion that has ever 

been held in this Legislative Assembly about the customs facilities problems in Regina, about the airport 

problem in Regina, about the sound levels in Regina, about the runway facilities in Regina and then the 

member for Last Mountain stands up and says, withdraw the motion. I suggest to the member for Last 

Mountain that he read that motion very carefully. That motion is a very positive motion. It is neither negative 

to the province of Saskatchewan or the government of 



 

April 18, 1978 

1656 
 

Saskatchewan nor is it negative to the government of Canada. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Read the words that supported the motion. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, absolutely. It is about time that the federal government knew that there was an 

expression of unanimous support from this Assembly to carry out the implementation of that survey. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Then the minister says in order to save his political hide, he stands on his feet and 

he says, well, let's go down and start that meeting with an insult. Let's go and start it with an insult, when the 

zoning regulations were just completed a week ago. All I'm saying to the minister, I'm saying that the 

amendment is a bad amendment and I say that he should withdraw it and I say that the original motion is a 

very simple one. It merely expresses on behalf of the Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan 

a desire that the federal government get on with the job of co-operating with Saskatchewan and the city of 

Regina and get the job done and I say that we should all support it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Now that we have had the political debate 

between the Minister of Municipal Affairs and the people on this side, I want to get back to the minister 

what have you done about establishing customs facilities at the Regina Airport? You told us you had some 

communication last summer with the minister, now what has transpired since that time? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier that I had corresponded with the Minister of 

Transport some times last summer with regard to improving the customs clearance facilities in Regina. 

Following that of course there was the study on the Regina Airport and earlier this winter we had the 

Tourism Travel conference and I have made representations there with regard to the provision of custom 

clearance facilities in the capital cities of the provinces as well as designating or improving the facilities in 

the airport of the capital cities, and giving them the designation of international status. This was only a few 

months ago. 

 

MR. MALONE: — A few months ago — May I suggest to the minister that much more can be done. You 

are well aware of the inconvenience put to passengers who want to get to Regina; they have to stop 

somewhere else — Calgary, Vancouver, Winnipeg, Saskatoon, as the case may be. Have you had any 

communication with the Chamber of Commerce in Regina to take your case with you to Ottawa? Have you 

talked to the travel agents in Regina about making arrangements for these customs facilities? Have you 

talked to customs brokers within Regina? It must cause them a great deal of difficulty to carry on business in 

this city. 

 

I suggest to you that there are many, many things that could be done that you haven't done and I say to you, 

that it is your duty as the minister in charge of this particular portfolio to start doing something to get the 

situation rectified. Now we put a motion 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1657 

 

before this committee to assist you in this regard and the Minister of Municipal Affairs and the Attorney 

General have chosen to play politics with it. I'm suggesting to you as well that if you need another motion in 

this regard that we can all support we would be prepared to do so. But can you give us your assurance that at 

the very least, you are not going to let the matter just slide away and that you will instruct your officials 

tomorrow to start making communications with Ottawa, start talking to the people in Regina who are most 

directly affected and get going with the job? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, we have ongoing discussions at the official level between the various 

travel agencies, the Chamber of Commerce and all of the other various agencies interested in travel and 

tourism — these are ongoing and certainly it is my intention to continue to press on the federal authorities to 

improve the facilities here in Regina. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — In the minister's budget are there any (I notice on the Heritage Fund 

area we have a $200,000 for Moose Jaw wildlife park development) other funds in any other area of the 

estimates for that project or a project for any other city in that line? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The $200,000 represents the funds for the development of the Moose Jaw recreation 

complex. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — My understanding of the Moose Jaw complex is before it is going to be done, it is 

going to cost $2,054,440. Now you only show the one figure. Where is the rest of the money being budgeted 

for and are you having to put in a subsequent amount later on? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The $200,000 that is set aside there is for the development of the phase one part of 

the project. Additional funds will be provided as time goes on but in this year's budget we have $200,000 

that has been set aside. It depends on how the development proceeds. It is our intention to be requesting for 

an additional $265,000. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — That's in the first year's estimate — you have $200,000 now; you are going to request 

a special warrant for $265,680 roughly. Is that correct? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — That's right. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So what you are suggesting is that that is phase one which is 1978-79 and phase two 

and so forth — What is the city of Moose Jaw and district's contribution to the same project? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — This is totally a provincial project for the city of Moose Jaw and therefore the city of 

Moose Jaw is not a contributor towards the project. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well basically, the government of Saskatchewan is making a commitment of roughly 

$2 million plus for this over the next five years. That is my understanding. Is that correct? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, it is projected over the five year period and totals $2.7 million or $2,054.440. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is there any other provincial park of the zoo type which this is, that has received 

money in the past years? 



 

April 18, 1978 

1658 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — No, there weren't any other projects of the zoo type that have received any 

assistance. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So, for example, Saskatoon has a zoo type with, basically, all the animals, I am 

informed, going into this atmosphere and there is no funding from you at all? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — No, there was no funding to the Saskatoon animal park. There have been 

representations made in form of a request for a funding. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Could you tell me why no funding has been available and what makes this a special 

case to receive this kind of guarantee? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — There was no formal request made for a contribution from the provincial 

government, nevertheless discussions have taken place. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Let's try that one, one more time. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — There was no formal request made from Saskatoon for assistance, nevertheless 

discussions have taken place. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — How about any other of the zoos, for example, on the way to Prince Albert. We see 

the Buffalo Station and so forth. Are you involved in any of those? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — No. The provincial government is not funding any other zoo. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — I would like to pursue a different subject with the minister and 

that is the question of the revenues generated for the province as a result of stumpage fees, etc. in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I note, here, that the fees that were paid in this annual report by Sask Forest 

Products Corporation were in the neighborhood of $303,000. I would like the minister to point out to me if I 

am mistaken there, if that in fact is fairly accurate. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — May I ask the hon. member to repeat his question, please. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well, I am trying to establish the revenues generated for DTRR and consequently the 

province, as a result of the forestry usage fees. I see that in 1976-77 this annual report, Sask Forest Products 

paid, roughly, $303,000 in stumpage fees for saw timbering non-licenced areas, pulpwood non-licenced 

areas and other products in non-licenced areas, for a total of roughly $303,000. I wonder if that was, within a 

few dollars, roughly what Sask Forest Products paid the DTRR this year? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, that is correct. I think the hon. member is using three figures, non-licence area 

figure of $30,000 some and then the saw timber non-licence area — $18,000 plus, and then the other 

products — $254,000. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — That is right. Now, I am also under the impression that the amount of timber that 

Sask Forest Products Corporation used this year roughly doubled from that of last year. I would like to know 

if it is possible that the relationship may not have been a complete doubling. There may have been 

considerable inventory held over one year or the other. But I would like to know if, in fact, this year the 

amount of timber that they used in Saskatchewan, or took out of the bush, was increased very greatly over 

last 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1659 

 

year? If so, can you tell me how much of an increase there was, percentage wise? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — This year's cordage that has been used is roughly 160,000 cords. The increase over 

the previous year would be in the neighborhood of 30 per cent. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — O.K., if that's the case then, I assume that last year - the point I want to make is that 

there has been a serious change to the best of my knowledge in the approach that DTRR and the provincial 

government have used with respect to Sask Forest Products Corporation. Last year that corporation paid to 

the province of Saskatchewan for the utilization of our timber $1,031,900 roughly and I'm under the 

impression they received a $200,000 rebate and Mr. Bailey might be able to confirm that with you but in any 

event roughly $1,031,900. This year they used 30 per cent more product in the bush which one would 

assume, if they paid at the same rate they did last year, their stumpage fees, their total fees would have been 

roughly $1.3 million or $1.4 million. This year the corporation paid $303,000, not $1,300,000. If the same 

set of fees were being applied to Sask Forest Products this year that were applied last year and I would 

appreciate it if the member could point out to me or the minister where we might be wrong here, if the same 

fees were applied this year as were applied last year, Sask Forest Products Corporation would have paid an 

additional $1 million in stumpage fees to the province of Saskatchewan. Their loss would not have been $4.9 

million but $5.9 million. My question to you is, what justified a complete reduction in the fees to Sask Forest 

Products Corporation while the amount of timber that they used from provincial forests went up 30 per cent? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in accordance with the annual report the dues paid were in the 

neighborhood of $300,000. This year the dues to March 31, 1978 amount to just a little over $1 million. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — I'm interested only in the annual report for 1976-77. Now I don't know what you are 

going to pay this year; we will have to assess that at the end of the year. My point to you is, if you charged 

Sask Forest Products Corporation the same rate for timber in 1976-77 as you had charged them in 1975-76, 

it would have amounted to an additional $1 million in levies to Sask Forest Products Corporation which 

would have resulted in an additional $1 million of loss bringing the total in SFPC to $5.9 million, instead of 

the already horrendous $4.9 million. I want to know why there was a change in 1976-77? The volume of 

product that they used went up 30 per cent and if anything there should have been an increase in the 

stumpage fees paid to the province. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in the year 1975-76 there has been a change in the plywood dues. The 

plywood dues were based on the selling price of softwood sheeting in Regina and it was at a rate of $14. I 

don't know whether there is any sense in that or not and in round figures $14. Then in 1976-77 there has 

been a change or an adjustment made in the dues and the stumpage dues were based on the net mill selling 

price and this is more in line with other operations, which are up $9. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Let me warn the minister, if you expect to get a return for the people of 

Saskatchewan from the use of their product in this province, you had better not base it on the net return to 

Sask Forest Products Corporation because we will never see a dime in this province. 

 

Now all I want to know is how you can justify, as the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources, cutting 

the cost or the expense or the revenue to the people of Saskatchewan by about 400 per cent from the use of 

the product that Sask Forest 



 

April 18, 1978 

1660 
 

Products Corporation uses. They have taken the volume out of the bush; you say this year an increase of 30 

per cent over last year. They took 30 per cent more of our resource and paid us 400 per cent less for it. My 

question is, how do you justify that? I'm telling you what the result of it is, regardless of how you manage to 

do it or what bookkeeping method you use, the result of it is to spare Sask Forest Products Corporation some 

serious embarrassment on top of that which they have already gotten this year. You cut their expenses by $1 

million. You made it up in other areas. I see your net revenue from your timber resources in the province for 

this year is roughly the same, but I will tell you who paid the difference, who made up the $1 million, 

Simpson Timber saw timber licence area fees this year at $921,000, last year $563,000. You picked up 

$400,00 right there from one or our fine corporate citizens - Simpson - to pay for Bowerman's and Messer's 

folly, Sask Forest Products Corporation. 

 

Now I want to know how you justify to the people of Saskatchewan selling our Crown corporation 30 per 

cent more timber this year than last and charging them 400 per cent less? They used the timber, but they 

didn't pay for it. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I am quite sure that the hon. member will agree that it is only fair that 

the charge, that the stumpage dues charges against Sask Forest Products, shouldn't be that much out of line 

with other operators in any other province in Canada. The adjustment that has been made on the stumpage 

dues to Sask Forest Products, even at that, the in-rate is higher than many of the other operations in Canada 

and, therefore, I don't think it is fair to say that this has been done specifically to try to assist Sask Forest 

Products in its difficulty. If we had reduced the dues to an unreasonably low level in comparison to other 

operations in other provinces that would be different. But the dues presently at $9 are higher than the dues 

with many of the other operations in the province. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well, what you said to me then is last year we were charging 400 per cent too much 

money against our Crown corporation then, is that what you have said? Because you have reduced their fee 

by close to 400 per cent according to the figures that we have been given in your annual report and the 

increase in volume that you have just given to us. Now what was the problem there? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I am just wondering, Mr. Chairman, whether we are talking about the same years. 

We were discussing '75-'76, the dues that were being charged in '75-'76 as compared to the dues that have 

been charged in '76-'77. I have indicated that there has been an adjustment from $14 to $9. I don't know 

where the hon. member got the other figure on which he established is 400 per cent increase. For what year 

is that? 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Minister, I will tell you where I got my set of figures (and they are both your sets 

of figures), one from the annual report '75-'76 tabled in this Legislature last year and we went through it, the 

other from this report. Last year Sask Forest Products paid, for pulpwood non-licence areas, fees of $26.6 

thousand. This year those fees increased marginally to $30.7 thousand. Saw timber, non-licence area  . . . last 

year Sask Forest Products paid $123,500; this year they paid $18,404. Now, figure out the percentage 

reduction there. That isn't the only area, other products non-licenced areas. Last year Sask Forest Products 

paid $881,800; this year they paid $254,000. Figure out the percentage decrease there. Now, that is bad 

enough, but if they had harvested the same amount of timber last year, their reduction would still be in the 

neighborhood of 300 per cent in their rates according to these figures. But they 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1661 

 

didn't; they harvested an additional 30 per cent of the timber that they had taken the year before and their 

rate, therefore, became an approximately 400 per cent reduction, according to the figures you have outlined 

in your reports. 

 

I want to know why that is? You say that the stumpage fees were $14 in 1975-76 and are $9 now. That isn't 

going to account for a 400 per cent reduction in the rates they pay this year. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize to the hon. member for taking that much time. I am 

informed by my officials that the payment of dues is on a cash basis and unless the dues are paid within the 

period, the fiscal period, they wouldn't be included here and, therefore, that may be the problem with the 

figures that we have here. But, again, I want to repeat what I said earlier, that the adjustment in the fees were 

with respect to the plywood that was $14 to $9. I would like, at this time to inform the House with respect to 

the rate of dues in other provinces as compared to Saskatchewan. 

 

In Saskatchewan, I have indicated $9 and they are $9.30; in Ontario it is $2.40 a cord; in Manitoba $2.50 and 

in Alberta $1.50. Saskatchewan is $9.30. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want members of the House to note what the minister just said 

to me. He said, the discrepancy may lay in the fact that SFPC didn't pay all of their stumpage fees in the year 

under review. That is exactly what the minister said and if the Attorney General would like to quarrel with 

me on this point, on what the minister, he will have every opportunity to get on his feet. 

 

You said to me that the only reason that you can see why your reports indicate that SFPC paid over $1 

million in 1975-76 and only $300,000 now is that they didn't pay their stumpage fees in the year under 

review. I assume, then, that at the end of your fiscal year you wrote that $1 million in stumpage fees owing 

off, as an uncollectible debt, because you have a responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to collect the 

stumpage fees incurred in the year, your fiscal year, within the year between March 31 and April 1. Now I 

assume that you made arrangements to collect those outside the fiscal year in which they were incurred. Why 

didn't you put in your annual report that Sask Forest Products owed the people of Saskatchewan — I don't 

even know how much it would be under the reduced rate — still an additional $300,000 or $400,000? 

 

I am saying in the year 1976-77 according to the same fees that they would have paid in 1975-76, they 

incurred about $1.4 million in fees owable to DTRR. You say, no, they didn't, they incurred somewhat less 

than that. I say they incurred $1.4 million and they paid $.3 million. You said there was a reduction in fees 

from $14 down to $9. I don't know what percentage reduction that is. It isn't 400 per cent less than they paid 

the year before so all I can assume from that is that there is an outstanding amount of stumpage fees owing 

by Sask Forest Products to DTRR which wasn't collect in the year under review. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the hon. member a question. Where does the hon. 

member get the figure of $1.4 million in dues? 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well in 1975-76 the corporation paid $1,031,900 in fees to your department. I have 

added up all of the figures found in table number 16 in your report from 1975-76. In 1976-77 the corporation 

paid $303,000 in fees, not on the same amount of lumber as they had the year before but on 30 per cent more 

volume. So I am saying that if in 1975-76 they had harvested or paid on the same volume as in 1976-77 



 

April 18, 1978 

1662 
 

they would have in fact, paid $1.4 million. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — I don't know if that is a good sign or not. I'll be you John Burton knows where 

that money . . .  

 

MR. MATSALLA: — In 1975-76 the hon. member indicates that we have (the department has collected) 

just a little over $1 million. For that year there has been an adjustment made in the dues and these amounted 

to approximately $350,000 and this was held as a credit to Sask Forest Products. Therefore in the subsequent 

year, 1976-77, the dues in fact, amounted to about $650,000 and then adjusting it by the $350,000 credit, 

leaves a net amount of $303,000. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Well I'm not sure that I follow the exact bookkeeping that would be necessary to 

arrive at that calculation. What you are saying is that in 1975-76, Sask Forest Products had in fact, prepaid 

dues for 1976-77 and that applying those dues that they had prepaid in 1975-76 to this year they would have 

paid $650,000 in dues instead of $700,00 that was owing last year after they took the rebate into 

consideration. So that would work out that they paid roughly the same this year as they did last year for a 30 

per cent increase in timber, so their reduction was then 30 per cent roughly. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The increase in the production that was indicated earlier (I think I have indicated 

earlier that there has been a 30 per cent increase in the amount of timber used). That 30 per cent was for the 

year, 1977-78 rather than 1976-77. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — In 1976-77 Sask Forest Products said their production doubled over 1975-76 and in 

fact their sales doubled as well. My question to you was on the basis of those figures, did that reflect a 

corresponding doubling in the amounts of timber they took out of the bush, or did they only take out half that 

much and had to use what was in inventory before it got worm-eaten or whatever? They say they doubled 

their production. I want to know if there was a corresponding doubling in their bush harvest. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I think, Mr. Chairman, here we have a problem. I believe the hon. member is using 

the Sask Forest Products Annual Report and using it alongside the departmental annual report. The fiscal 

years of these reports are different and this may, perhaps, account for the difference that the hon. member is 

referring to. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Does the minister not admit then that in 1976-66 the fee structure for Sask Forest 

Products Corporation, the amount charged, was reduced approximately 30 per cent per unit? Is that a fair 

assessment? We could have arrived at that initially if you guys had not gone about your pre-payment and 

rebate. If you simply decided that you went from $14 down to $9, or roughly 30 per cent reduction. Is that 

fair enough then that there was about a 30 per cent reduction in fees from 1975-76? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, I believe that is correct, but that would be for only one product, the plywood, 

that we would be referring to. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — All right, what was the change in fee structure for dimensional saw timber - spruce, 

jack pine and I imagine they are different for white spruce, black spruce and for jack pine and I doubt if they 

sawed any aspen. I doubt if anyone took out aspen permits but if they did, I would like to know what the 

structure, the change was in 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1663 

 

stumpage fees there. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — There has been no adjustment made in the fees for saw timber. It has been the same. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — I can't say that I am happy to hear that because one would assume then if there was 

no change in the rate for saw timber and Sask Forest Products Corporation doubled their production in 

1976-77, then in fact the fees from stumpage fees for saw timber that they used would have increased 

greatly. In fact, we wouldn't have been faced with them paying approximately the same rate as the year 

before. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, the explanation to the question put forward by the hon. member is 

that the agency, Sask Forest Products just hasn't remitted the dues in time to be entered into the annual 

report. As I indicated earlier there has been no change in the dues structure, nor has there been any 

forgiveness on that portion of the dues. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Is it safe to say they are late in paying their account? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — This could happen. 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — Pardon me? 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — This could happen. 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — I didn't ask you if it was possible for it to happen, I asked you if they were late with 

their account. What would be the typical length of credit you would extend to Simpsons Timber or PA Pulp 

in the payment of their dues, would you give them 30 days, 60 days? Are they due at year end? If they are not 

paid at year end do you extend them 30 days and then charge them interest or 60 days and charge them 

interest? What's the level of interest and do you apply the same procedures to Sask Forest Products 

Corporation? 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — The terms are 30 days with 7 per cent interest and this applies to Sask Forest 

Products as well. 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — Do you want to tell me how late they are paying their dues to DTRR for stumpage 

incurred in '76-77, or whatever? 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — Well, they may be late for two years, it's hard to say. 
 

MR. McMILLAN: — I don't recall seeing that in the annual report either. 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, was the hon. member's question, how late was Sask Forest Products 

. . .  
 

MR. McMILLAN: — How late are they and what's the amount outstanding? 
 

MR. MATSALLA: — The dues are paid up to date at the moment but there were occasions that there has 

been a three month period within which the dues were not paid. 
 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, what would the reason be for Sask Forest Products prepaying their dues? You 

mentioned that Sask Forest Products had prepaid their dues 



 

April 18, 1978 

1664 
 

of $300,000 for the year coming up. What would be the reason for them prepaying those dues? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Well, I go back to the time that the 1975-76, the Sask Forest Products had been 

paying a due of about $14 and then there was an adjustment made in 1976-77 down to $9. Therefore, 

because of this adjustment in rate there has been a credit or a rebate you might call of it of $350,000 to Sask 

Forest Products and this has been kept as a credit to Sask Forest Products and was applied on the 1976-77 

dues. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — That is where the 30 per cent reduction came in in the plywood area, is that it? And 

was this 30 per cent reduction also given to the other companies like Simpson Timber? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — They don't manufacture plywood. This only applied to plywood. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Minister, I would like to know who applied the pressure to you to have the rates, 

stumpage fees for Sask Forest Products Corporation reduced firstly. Secondly, I would like to know if the 

reductions applied to that sawed timber that Prince Albert Pulp cut in their lease or cut on behalf of SFPC, or 

exactly how you work it. Do you trade if Prince Albert Pulp cuts light spruce, standard white spruce while 

they are pulping, do they pay the stumpage fees on that? 

 

Firstly, I would like to know whose decision it was or who ultimately made the decision, but I would like to 

know where the pressure came from to have the stumpage fees reduced. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, representations were made by Sask Forest Products to me as the 

minister of the department and we made a review of the plywood rate, and the decision was made to adjust 

them downwards to the level that they are now. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — If Simpson Timber, for example, is cutting dimensional saw timber that ends up 

going to the mill at Carrot River, who pays the stumpage on that? Does Simpson Timber pay the stumpage 

initially and then get a rebate from SFPC, or do they just bill the stumpage fees directly to SFPC? How do 

you make those arrangements? Same with Prince Albert Pulp. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — There is no transfer of timber from Simpson to Sask Forest Products, and our policy 

is — Oh Carrot River, I am sorry. Our policy is that the user shall pay the stumpage fee. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — I would like to ask you some other questions with respect to forestry while we are on 

it. I would like to know what your annual allowable cut of white spruce was in 1976-77? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, the annual allowable cuts for various areas I will have to give it to 

you in areas, that is the way we have it. Meadow Lake area, this is for white spruce, 125,000 cords; Prince 

Albert area, white spruce, 125,000 cords, the Hudson Bay area, white spruce, 220,000 cords. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Would the minister be good enough to help me with my conversion to board feet, 

how many million board feet? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — We require two cords to 1,000 board feet, so therefore in the 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1665 

 

Meadow Lake area it would be roughly 63 million and the same in Prince Albert and about 110 million in 

the Hudson Bay area. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, the White Spruce Lumberman's Association has asked for a green white 

spruce cut and it seems that the only thing they can pick up right now is the fire kill cut. Have you got policy 

or any change in plans to allow these people to go into the white spruce cuts, or is this going to be held 

strictly for Sask Forest Products? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Our policy hasn't changed and we don't intend to change our policy with regards to 

the use of white spruce. We have allocated quite a large area of timber to the White Spruce Lumberman's 

Association. During the past year they operated in the fire kill area and they have done a very good job, a 

commendable job in helping us salvaging that timber. 

 

The operators under the White Spruce Lumberman's Association are entitled to cut the black spruce and the 

jack pine, as well as aspen, but with regards to white spruce, there is no allocation for their operators unless 

it is a salvage situation, a fire kill area, or perhaps a flooded area. 

 

MR. WIPF: — In other words then you have the White Spruce Lumberman's Association set up as a gopher 

operation to go for the stands that you yourself won't go for, that Sask Forest Products won't go for. You say 

that there is a large allocation of white spruce for the White Spruce Lumberman's Association. Where is it 

and how many board feet have you allocated to them for this year? Is this all located within the fire kill area? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The allocation of the white spruce to the White Spruce Lumberman's Association 

was in the Fishing Lake fire kill area and we will get you the  . .(apparently there were other areas as well) 

we will get you a figure. 

 

There were 56 permits issued to individuals to cut 5.5 million board measure of white spruce saw timber in 

the fire kill area. There were five permitees of the White Spruce Lumberman's Association that received 

permits, that I am aware of. In total they have cut 2,100,000 feet board measure. 

 

MR. WIPF: — What you are saying then? The only place that this association can go into cut is only after 

an act of God, a fire, or something like that, that you do not give them a new stand of timber to go into. It is a 

clean-up job or a gopher job, as I said, to go and clean up an area that our own Crown corporation wouldn't 

go into. 

 

You mentioned five permitees, or whatever you call it there. Where are they located? . . . think you said, and 

where are these located? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — . . . Lake area, the Pasquaca area, the Mission fire area, those three. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Have you any plan at all to allow these men and this association to go into a new area other 

than a place that has just been fire killed or are you going to rely on fires, or do they have to rely on fires in 

order to keep themselves working? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — No, our policy, as I mentioned earlier, hasn't changed, not our intention to change the 

policy. Nevertheless, the operators of the White Spruce Lumbermens' Association could make application to 

cut other species — jack pine, black spruce and aspen. 



 

April 18, 1978 

1666 
 

MR. WIPF: — Then your policy is definitely to squeeze out the little operator in Saskatchewan, the little 

bush operator up there. In order to get a permit he has to go to some other timber. You have reserved all the 

rights of the white spruce in Saskatchewan, then, for Sask Forest Products. Is that right? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Well, it is not necessarily Sask Forest Products. You are aware that we have other 

operators as well. Our policy is, as you are aware, to try and obtain the greatest utilization of our forest 

resource and this is what we are attempting to do. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Last spring, in Budget, you talked about we have squeezed out some 41 or 42 small 

operators that are working now only only by the grace of God, because of the fire, and I think you had said 

you had left four or five operators, at that time, up in the Meadow Lake area or the northwest part of the 

province and they would probably be working for another two or three years until they were squeezed out, 

also, by the government, the regulations, because they only had a small stand of timber to work in. Are these 

people still working up there and how many organizations, or how many permits or companies I suppose you 

would have, how many groups are working in that area and for how much longer will they be working in that 

area? The member for Meadow Lake is yelling over there, you should be standing up and fighting for your 

own people instead of sitting back there and letting your government knock down the little businessmen in 

this province. 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The only contractors that we have in the northwest part of the province, the Meadow 

Lake area if you wish to call it that, are those who are in contract with the Saskatchewan Forest Products 

Corporation and they have agreed to the phasing out process. 

 

MR. WIPF: — Well, it's been agreed to this phasing out process but, Mr. Minister, did they have any 

alternative other than to agree to your policies of phasing out the small businessmen, small contractor and 

bush operator in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I think it's wrong to say that we are squeezing them out because they have an 

opportunity to continue as logging contractors for Saskatchewan Forest Products. 

 

MR. WIPF: — All the members from the White Spruce Lumbermen's Association, all the members you say 

then have an opportunity to work for Saskatchewan Forest Products but they don't have the opportunity to go 

out on their own and work as free individuals on their own and get contracts. They must work for 

Saskatchewan Forest Products, is that what you're saying, and that is one of the reasons for the squeeze-out 

of the small businessman in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to repeat what I said earlier that the hon. member indicates 

that the operators are being squeezed out. They are not being squeezed out because they are given an 

opportunity to continue bush operations as logging contractors for Saskatchewan Forest Products. 

 

MR. WIPF: — You mean that opportunity that you are giving these small businessmen can be . . .  

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I beg your pardon? 



 

April 18, 1978 
 

1667 

 

MR. WIPF: — Would you explain this opportunity that you are giving these small businessmen in the 

White Spruce Lumbermen's Association? What opportunity is it that you are giving them? It's an opportunity 

only to work for Sask Forest Products, is that right? They can't cut timber for some other company, they 

must work for the monopoly of the Saskatchewan Forest Products? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — They may work for the Saskatchewan Forest Products or work for the Prince Albert 

Pulp Company. Or they may cut other species, as I mentioned earlier. There is the black spruce, jack pine, 

aspen. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to add to what the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

has said. There is no doubt you people are well aware that you undertook an intentional policy to eliminate 

any competition from the forest industry with respect to the sawing of white spruce in Saskatchewan. Now 

you may have made a few exceptions to either personal friends of the New Democratic Party or in stands 

where you feel that someone might be able to help you clean up (scavengers in Northern Saskatchewan). 

You just finished telling me that the allowable annual cut for white spruce in Saskatchewan last year was 

225 million board feet. Sask Forest Corporation sawed about 50.4 million board feet at the most — that was 

their total cut and that doesn't include eliminates whatever black spruce and jack pine they cut in there. Yet 

you say to these people who are white spruce cutters, the only place you've got for them to go is into a fire 

kill or a burn area, scavengers, you won't even put them in scattered stands that Sask Forest Products 

Corporation's equipment is too big to go into. It's not even a matter of economics that you won't let them go 

in, it's strictly your political philosophy. You haven't been able to give these people one good reason why 

they shouldn't be cutting white spruce and sawing it in Saskatchewan. You say, if you want work go out and 

cut jack pine and saw it and aspen and black spruce. Sask Forest Products Corporation can't make money 

sawing white spruce. How in the devil's name are these people supposed to make a living sawing jack pine 

and aspen in Saskatchewan? Mr. Chairman, 225 million board feet and you told these 43 different operators 

roughly that you didn't have any timber for them, unless it was timber that was going to get worm-eaten next 

year because it was burned. I say your decision to do that (and this has been a question before this 

Legislature for three years) was a political decision, nothing more. Maybe your mills are overbuilt in 

Saskatchewan. It wouldn't be an indication by that strictly the figure that you have given us for the annual 

allowable cut for white spruce. You heard, your gentleman sitting to your right and Mr. Burton your forestry 

man heard the white spruce cutters give him several examples of where good saw timber was rotting in 

Saskatchewan. You can't tell these people you don't have it there because your allowable cut this year was 

225 million board feet and SFPC only cut 50 million. That means that there was probably 175 million board 

feet of mature timber that could have been harvested and sawed that wasn't. That is not only not making 

good use of our timber resource in Saskatchewan but it's making darn poor use of our human potential in 

Saskatchewan. You put these families out of business three or four years ago and you have continued to 

stomp on them. Your first excuse was that they weren't efficient. Now talk about efficiency — Sask Forest 

Products Corporation, clear cutting merrily along in complete contravention of the spirit of the NDP Party in 

1971 — clear cutting. Sask Forest Products Corporation says they can't go into small scattered stands 

because their equipment is too big, the roads they have to build into them are too costly for the timber that 

they can get out. The private operators have small portable sawmills that have been prepared to go in and 

build their own roads at their own expense in the past to get into scattered stands, and you won't give them 

the opportunity, for philosophical reasons. 



 

April 18, 1978 

1668 
 

It would be, in a perverse way, understandable if they were a serious threat to Sask Forest Products 

Corporation's ability to make money. We know how politically bad you people are scared of looking with 

them; you look bad, I will guarantee that. You've got one argument to make or the other. Either you can't 

afford to give them the resource when it is ready to be harvested because it has to go to Sask Forest Products 

Corporation in order to maintain that corporation's economic viability . . 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 o'clock p.m. 


