



















































Hansard: March 21, 1978


521 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

March 21, 1978. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

MOTIONS 

 

SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES AND PROCEDURES 

 

MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North):— I would like to move, seconded by Mr. Wiebe, the hon. 

member for Morse: 

 

That the first report of the Select Standing Committee on Rules and Procedures be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery we have today, and I 

introduce them to you and to other members, a number of students from Douglas Park School with Don 

Taylor, one of their teachers. We have in addition, a number of students from California, about 40 students, 

Mr. Speaker, on an exchange with Saskatchewan. Some of our students, from the constituency that I am 

fortunate enough to represent, will be visiting California. I think as all members, particularly members 

opposite should know, the United States is our largest supplier and our best customer and in my view one of 

our best international friends. I am sure that you and all members will join with me in welcoming Douglas 

Park School and our American guests to the Assembly today. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the member for Wascana in 

welcoming these students from Bakersfield, California to the Legislature today. Since Saturday they have no 

doubt been touring Regina and participating in cultural and educational activities which the people of 

Saskatchewan enjoy. I am sure they will have interesting stories to tell their friends and families when they 

return to Bakersfield, perhaps particularly about their prowess in ball hockey, which, I understand is a game 

which is played there and here as well. I know that their friends from the Douglas Park School are looking 

forward to visiting Bakersfield next week and I wish the students from Douglas Park an enjoyable and 

memorable visit. 

 

I share with the member for Wascana (Mr. Merchant) the fond feelings for our neighbor the United States. 

Since the founding of both of our nations, the United States and Canada, have been with a few notable but 

short exceptions, friends. And throughout the many decades of our friendship we have exchanged our wealth 

and our ideas and our support. We have the much publicized, longest undefended border in the world. On 

behalf of the government of Saskatchewan and all the members of the Assembly I will take an opportunity to 

present to the students from Bakersfield, a copy of a book, "Between Friends" — "Entre Amis", in this case. 

This book celebrates the peace and friendship which our countries enjoy and I hope that through its many 

beautiful 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

522 

 

photographs and quotations the students will come to recall their visit to Saskatchewan. I have inscribed it, 

"With best wishes from your many friends in Saskatchewan, Allan E. Blakeney, Premier". 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.H. LANGE (Bengough-Milestone):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of students 

from Radville, Saskatchewan. They are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery, 22 in number and in Grade Eight. 

For those members of the Legislative Assembly and for those students from California, for the information 

of those people, Radville is situated about 40 miles from the American border and straight south of Regina 

and is the heart of the Bengough-Milestone constituency. It is well-known as an agricultural centre and a 

social and cultural centre in the south with a great deal of bilingual background. There are a lot of French 

Canadian people in Radville. This group of students is accompanied by Mr. Ed Borsa, who is their teacher 

and also a very good friend, I might add of Mr. John Kowalchuk, the member for Melfort. As well as being 

the geographic centre of Bengough-Milestone, I think Radville has some significance in terms of the last 

three years of debate in this House since it was where potash was first discovered in Saskatchewan in 1942. I 

wish to welcome the students to the Legislative Assembly and I look forward to meeting with them later on. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to join with the Premier and the 

member for Regina Wascana welcoming on behalf of the Conservative caucus the guests from California. I 

note the very kind words some of the students made on the news last night when they were interviewed. The 

response they gave to the fine hospitality they have received from the Regina students and their desire to give 

the same type of hospitality when the Regina students go to California next week. We thank you for your 

kind words and I know that you will give the same type of hospitality you have received. Our thanks to the 

students from Regina for making them feel welcome when they arrived in Regina. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

SGEA STRIKE 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of the 

Public Service Commission. I note, Mr. Speaker, and hon. members as well that the SGEA strike continues 

apparently without the concern of the government and I ask the minister what you are doing to resolve this 

matter and end the problems, particularly the problems in the administration of justice, Land Titles, the 

courts? What positive steps is the government taking to resolve what is developing into a very serious 

problem? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance):— Mr. Speaker, addressing myself to the first question 

about what the government is doing to try to resolve the dispute, as the hon. member will have no doubt 

heard in the news media, a mediator has been appointed who is mutually acceptable to both parties. He is 

currently involved in mediation and my hope is that we will be able to resolve the differences with the aid of 

the mediator within a short period of time. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

523 

 

In the case of the problems that do arise because of picket lines, this is part of the price that you pay for the 

free collective bargaining in which this government believes. There are naturally some inconveniences but I 

think, by and large the inconveniences to the public have been minimal and the union members have been 

quite co-operative, but as I say there has been the odd inconvenience. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I did note the appointment of an active New 

Democrat and former deputy minister and I ask the minister whether that mediator has specific instructions 

regarding your insistence on a two-year contract. I ask whether the insistence on a two-year contract is the 

principle stumbling block to settlement and I ask whether it is not true that a big part of the motivation in 

stonewalling for a two-year contract is that the government wants to avoid the political problems you fear in 

having labor negotiations next year, during a provincial election? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, we have indicated a desire for a two-year elective bargaining agreement. 

The hon. member may have noted that quite a number of unions in the public sector area have been settling 

for two-year collective bargaining agreements. The mediator is free to mediate. I hope that he will be able to 

resolve the dispute, or assist the parties to resolve the dispute. He has not been given any specific 

instructions. He is a free mediator. 

 

FARM COST PRODUCTION 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— I would like to direct a question through you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, as you are aware, through the question period yesterday, the Alberta 

government has allowed a discount of eight cents a gallon and effective April 1st, that will be increased to 12 

cents a gallon. I want to know, Mr. Minister, will you now consider a re-introduction of the farm cost 

reduction program and, with some modification designed along the lines of Alberta’s program where there is 

far less administrative red tape and is going to result in a far more efficient type of system where there is no 

limit on the amount of fuel purchased. Mr. Minister, I just want to know, will now you reconsider the re-

introduction of the farm cost reduction program. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture):— No, Mr. Speaker, we are not anticipating such a move. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Very simply, Mr. Minister. Are you telling this 

Assembly, and in fact through this Assembly the farmers of this province, that in these times of low net 

returns, you are not about to do anything, Mr. Minister? By your own admission, you have said that you 

cannot do anything about the prices that farmers are paid for their products except through your notorious 

marketing board concept and, by your own admission again, you admit that the farmers are not prepared to 

accept that proposal. This is one area in which you can do something — you can reduce those costs to the 

farmers. 

 

SMDC PROPOSAL 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— A question to the minister in charge of 

SMDC. Yesterday’s Leader Post carried a story on its financial page that Inexco Canada, one of the 

government’s or the SMDC’s partner in the Key Lake development, has decided to sell its assets, subject to 

some conditions, to Denison 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

524 

 

Mines Limited of Canada, the purchase price being some 158.5 million dollars. Presumably, the purchase 

price also refers to Alberta property this government would not have an interest in. My question to the 

minister, and I think this is a matter of some public concern, does SMDC have, at this time, an option to 

match the offer of Denison or right of first refusal to purchase the assets of Inexco Canada Limited, both 

within the province and without the province. If there is such a right of first refusal can the minister indicate 

to me whether the government has determined whether or not it will exercise that right? 

 

MR. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, as I understand the proposal that 

Denison has made to Inexco, it is for the purchase of properties solely within the province of Saskatchewan. 

In answer to the member’s second question pertaining to whether or not SMDC has a right of first refusal, 

the answer to that is, yes. We have 60 days to exercise that right of first refusal. I believe that one of the most 

important options in the Denison proposal relates to the outcome of the Bayda Inquiry, and ultimately, the 

decision of the government in regard to uranium mining in Northern Saskatchewan. I don’t believe that we 

will be undertaking to give consideration to our right of first refusal until Bayda has had the opportunity to 

report, and the government has had an opportunity to consider what its position will be pertaining to uranium 

mining at that time. 

 

MR. MALONE:— Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The story does indicate Alberta properties, I 

thank the minister for the information that it is strictly Saskatchewan we are concerned with at this time. A 

twofold question, Mr. Speaker. It is apparent that if Bayda does not come down within 60 days with his 

report that the government is going to be put in an awkward position, to say the least, with the 60 day first 

right of refusal period. 

 

A secondary question as well — the story also refers to government permission for this transaction to take 

place and it is plural, presumably federal and provincial. Should the government decide not to exercise the 

right of first refusal that it has, can the minister tell me what the government’s position will be as to whether 

or not you will give them permission to allow Inexco to sell its assets to Denison? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, I can recognize the observations made by the Leader of the Liberal Party 

that perhaps the 60 day option and its relation to the Bayda Report coming down may present some 

problems. I don’t believe that it would be credible for this government to undertake to endorse, in any way, 

either for or against the proposal that Denison has made to Inexco until we have the opportunity to look at 

the report that we expect shortly from Bayda and as a government to come to a decision in relation to 

whether or not there is going to be uranium mining in northern Saskatchewan. To do anything else, I think, is 

not really conclusive with regard to the proposal that Denison has made to Inexco. We first have to have the 

benefit of the Bayda Report. We, secondly, have to be able to have the opportunity to decide, as government, 

whether or not there is going to be mining activity in northern Saskatchewan, particularly on these 

properties. 

 

MR. MALONE:— Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the minister would tell the Assembly 

whether the first right of refusal, which you hold, would amount to paying the same amount as offered by 

Denison to Inexco or whether it would be a lesser amount or some amount determined by evaluation by 

independent authorities? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier we have not, at this particular point 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

525 

 

in time as far as Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation is concerned, considered the position that 

we may take in regard to the 60 day option. We are fully aware of the $158.5 million US that has been 

offered. I would expect that if we were going to exercise our 60 day option and expect to give some sort of 

consideration by Inexco, the offer would have to equal that or be better than that. We are not, at this 

particular point in time, disclosing whether we are interested in making that kind of offer. We first have to 

wait, as I said earlier, on the Bayda Report and the ultimate decision of the government. 

 

GASOLINE PRICE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ALBERTA AND SASKATCHEWAN 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Attorney 

General. Yesterday, I understand that in the House a number of questions were asked related to the gasoline 

price difference between Alberta and Saskatchewan. The question I want to direct to you, Mr. Attorney 

General, is this, is there anything within the provincial regulations that will prevent anyone in 

Saskatchewan — and I am thinking of those from a 50 to 100 mile radius — of trucking their fuel from out 

of Saskatchewan, from Alberta into Saskatchewan? Is there any regulation to prevent this because my own 

area was informed yesterday that a number of people intend on doing just this thing — like the old rum 

running, it now becomes gas running and diesel fuel running. Is there any stipulation within provincial 

government to prevent this? 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— I will take notice. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. If there are no provincial regulations in order, 

Mr. Attorney General, would it not seem advisable for the government then, in order to give protection to 

those who are dealing in this petroleum industry within the radius of 100 miles of the border, to give some 

protection to them and, secondly, Mr. Attorney General, if there were some regulations in place, to have 

some idea as to the enforcement of the regulations of the transporting of fuel for individual purposes? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Just on that particular point the member raises, the member is getting very close to 

being out of order on the type of question because he is asking a solution or an interpretation of a document 

which is equally available to him as it is to other members of the House and, "He shall not seek 

interpretation of a statute or a minister’s powers," and I think it is falling very close to that area. 

 

HEAVY OIL DEVELOPMENT 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley):— Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of Mineral 

Resources with respect to heavy oil development. In view of the fact that until an announcement can be 

made about whether or not that heavy oil plant at Lloydminster will proceed, heavy oil production and 

expansion of production in Saskatchewan is going to remain in limbo. I would like to ask the minister what 

positive steps he is taking and what success he is having with respect to a guarantee of supply to the potential 

plant in Lloydminster? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, I believe the member is somewhat misinformed if he thinks that heavy oil 

extraction activity is in limbo. There is, I think, a record pace in regard to primary, secondary and tertiary 

recovery ventures in Saskatchewan pertaining to heavy oil recovery. I convey to him as I have conveyed to 

other members of 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

526 

 

this Legislature on occasions in the past that we have a joint program $16.2 million between the federal and 

provincial governments to encourage tertiary recovery of heavy oil in Saskatchewan that has been received 

very well by the industry and there is considerable activity because of that program. I might also remind the 

member that the last two land sales in the province of Saskatchewan have been, Mr. Speaker, record land 

sales in regard to obtaining properties which have potential heavy oil development. All in all I am sure that 

the member for Kindersley, if he was to talk to the oil industry and I suggest that he would on occasion, they 

would convey to him that there is an accelerating interest in regard to heavy oil extraction in Saskatchewan 

and it is by no means in limbo at this particular point in time. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that virtually all of the heavy oil 

production and prospective production of heavy oil in Saskatchewan is in the hands of private companies 

and that they are not at this time prepared to proceed with extensive drilling programs until they find out 

what happens with respect to heavy oil plants, can you tell me what steps you have taken either through 

Saskoil or the Department of Mineral Resources to see that the allocation of that heavy oil production can be 

directed towards a heavy oil plant? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, we have had ongoing discussions with the oil industry in total. Just last 

week we introduced to them the regulations that we are considering in regard to Bill 47, The Oil Well 

Income Tax Act. The industry is now considering those regulations. Certainly some of the industry will be 

relating those regulations to heavy oil and what incentives there may be there for them to accelerate beyond 

the present level their activities in relation to the extraction of heavy oil in the Lloydminster area, oil that 

will be designated to the upgrading facility. Mr. Speaker, I again say that there is no evidence and certainly 

there has been no communiqué from the oil industry to my department or to myself indicating that they are 

somewhat concerned about the present situation in relation to the upgrading facility or the lack of activity or 

the lack of enthusiasm of the government of Saskatchewan pertaining to primary, secondary or tertiary 

recovery of heavy oil in this province. 

 

MR. McMILLAN:— Mr. Speaker, is it not a fact that as a result of the fact that you are not even proceeding 

with negotiations for the direct receipt of heavy oil production in Saskatchewan from the private companies, 

that you, yourself, hold little or no hope for the development of a heavy oil refinery or upgrading plant at 

Lloydminster? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, there is not one scrap of truth to the statement that the member for 

Kindersley made. We have for some months been negotiating and discussing with the oil industry means of 

encouraging increased and enhanced recovery of heavy oil in the province of Saskatchewan. We have in 

effect, Mr. Speaker, given evidence through those negotiations to the oil industry and created an environment 

of optimism and enthusiasm for increased recovery of heavy oil in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious 

that we are not able, with precision, to give to them the terms in a final sense, until we’re able to finally 

introduce the regulations pertaining to Bill 47. They have said to us that that is not deterring them at this 

particular point in time and they are carrying on as they would have carried on had Bill 42 been in effect, and 

we would’ve been able to give to them the royalty concessions we proposed to them in December of 1977. 

 

RAP 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

527 

 

the DNS — I asked earlier about some payments by the DNS to contractors under the RAP (Regional 

Assistance Program), payments which were made before the work was completed, and some more 

information has come to light from the Prince Albert Daily Herald last Friday. It says, "Some of the residents 

in Cumberland House were short-changed because the Department of Northern Saskatchewan had 

authorized payments for work on their homes before the work was completed." A councillor for Cumberland 

House said, "Because of this problem, local residents are now being requested to pay for the balance of the 

work that had to be done." This problem is well over a year old, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us today what the 

DNS is doing for these eight residents in the Cumberland House area to try to help them get their homes 

finished and also what steps the DNS has taken to get the contractor back to finish the work he has been paid 

for in total, a year ago? 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan):— Mr. Speaker, I attempted to answer 

this question many times for the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake but in order that I can get a more 

detailed answer for him with respect to the specific questions he raises today, I’ll take the matter as notice 

and will attempt to get the information for which he asks. I indicate to you again that the investigation, which 

is being conducted as a result of the information raised regarding the RAP in Cumberland House, is taking 

place. Until our investigation is concluded I cannot give the member a specific answer with respect to it but 

I’ll take the questions under notice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. WIPF:— Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Mr. Minister, this investigation has been going on for over a 

year now and these homes have not been finished for over a year. I’m wondering how much time you feel 

you have to have yet, another year or are you hiding behind the RCMP and blaming them for holding you up 

and holding up the investigation? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN:— I take it, Mr. Speaker, that the only member who is really blaming the RCMP is the 

member across the floor. He’s found it appropriate to continue to raise in the House this question when I 

have continued to give him the answer with respect to the investigation. The only conclusion that I can draw 

from the member’s questions is that he wants to implicate the RCMP in not doing their job. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I’ll take the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

CRISIS OF CONFIDENCE — UTILITY INDUSTRY 

 

MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg):— A question to the Minister in charge of SPC. Mr. 

Minister, the deputy general manager of SPC is quoted in the Regina Leader Post today as saying that 

consumer groups, environmentalists, land owners, politicians, individual customers and other groups are 

detractors and have created a crisis of confidence in the utility industry. Mr. Minister, do we take it that this 

is a policy of the minister and SPC and that he does intend to continue to ignore these groups? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— No, Mr. Speaker. It was the intention, as it 

always has been of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and/or other Crown corporations to have the 

minister announce the policy of that corporation, not some other official. I am not aware of the news article 

that the member relates to, so I can’t comment further on it. 

 

MR. NELSON (As-Gr):— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest the minister reads those remarks. I 

was wondering if the minister feels that we should have cheap 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

528 

 

power at the expense of the local people, the local governments, the local landowners and that I should not 

have the right to speak on behalf of my constituents as his deputy minister says. 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, I think the member knows full well, as do the people of Saskatchewan, that 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s record will speak for itself as to its charges for power and gas in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

REDUCTION IN AUTO INSURANCE PREMIUMS 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— A question to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office (SGIO). Mr. Speaker, in light of the Minister of Finance’s statement in the 

Budget Address of March 7, that because of reduced injuries resulting from compulsory seat belt use, auto 

premiums would be reduced by an average of 5 per cent, effective May 1, 1978. Mr. Minister, given the fact 

the tobacco tax increase was effective at midnight March 7, adding $3.2 million to government coffers, do 

you not agree that the people who by no fault of their own, must make application for their auto insurance 

prior to May 1, should be allowed this 5 per cent reduction effective on the day it was announced similar to 

the tobacco tax? 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs):— Well, it depends on your options, I suppose, 

but one must look carefully at the procedure that has to be taken in order to get the materials printed in order 

to put the material in the computer and it does take that much lead time, I assure you. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you have just admitted that you are in fact 

penalizing those people who chose the month of April to renew their license and are not getting the rebate. 

Would you not make it effective the same date as the tobacco tax, the penalty tax that you have placed, and 

give the rebate to these people on the same basis? 

 

MR. WHELAN:— The only observation I want to make is that whatever decrease there is will be stretched 

over a period of 12 months and if you don’t get it this April, you’ll get next April. I think that’s fair. I don’t 

see anything wrong with that. 

 

REDUCTION IN SGIO RATES 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— A question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister in charge of SGIO. In 

view of the indication yesterday in the Annual Report of SGIO that the number of automobile claims in 1977 

increased about 3,200, and that the dollar value of the increase of those claims was $7.4 million over ‘76, 

I’m curious to know how you support the statement in the Minister of Finance’s Budget Speech that you are 

reducing the rate 5 per cent as a result of the Safety ‘77 Program? 

 

MR. WHELAN:— I think it is clearly enunciated in the annual report. You’re just not reading it right. I 

suggest you take a good look at it. I have already gone over this a couple of times with you. I thought that 

you could wait until you got into Crown Corporations Committee and ask the question the proper place and 

the proper time. Just for your own reference, I think the hon. member should look at the increase in the 

number of accidents from 120,000 to 123,000 and the year before it jumped from 112,000 to 120,000. I said 

that the percentage increase in accidents had dropped and that is correct. I think if you look at page 11 you 

will find the explanation for it. I suggest that we will be prepared to explain in detail that explanation when 

we are in Crown 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

529 

 

Corporations Committee. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— In view of two things, in view firstly of the direction that you had from the Crown 

Corporations Committee unanimously a year ago to bring in amendments to avoid the discrimination of 

housewives under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act and in view secondly, of the fact that you report 

120 per cent increase in net profit, I am asking you when can we expect some amendments to the act to 

increase the benefits which are so badly eroded by inflation? 

 

MR. WHELAN:— Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, we should look at all of the circumstances. I am prepared to 

read into the record, if you like, the recommendations of the Reformations Committee, the recommendations 

of the Sickness and Accident Committee. I also want to make reference to the hon. member since he is a 

candidate for that certain group, there are 37 recommendations that are far more important than any one you 

have raised in the Status of Women in Canada and you people are sitting there doing nothing about it. You 

are talking in terms of their income and their wages within the civil service. Why don’t you do something 

about this? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! I will take the next question. 

 

SASK TEL HEAD OFFICE 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of Sask Tel or the 

Minister in charge of Government Services. It is my information that the new Sask Tel head office that is 

being built downtown is a building that is not required, that the people of Sask Tel felt they had enough 

room, said they had enough room and that this new $27 million "Byer’s Palace" downtown is nothing but a 

political decision and had nothing to do with the people that operate Sask Tel at all. Could you answer that? 

 

MR. BYERS:— I think it is more like the "Byer’s Bungalow" than the "Byer’s Palace". Mr. Speaker, I think 

there is an obvious need for the new head office. At present the administrative staff cannot be accommodated 

in the present head office at College and Albert. The total staff complement of Sask Tel is growing and will 

continue to grow. It is now in the order of 3,840 people whereas six years ago when there was very little 

activity, if any, in putting in coaxial cable there were 2,400, the staff has grown. It is therefore required to 

house the head office staff for that corporation. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 

 

RETURN NO. 3 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 3 showing: 

 

The payments made, if any, outside Saskatchewan for repairs, gas or maintenance, etc. for government 

vehicles from January 1, 1977 to November 1, 1977. (a) The number and charges made out of 

Saskatchewan for repairs, gas, oil and maintenance. (b) The employees who were assigned to each of the 

vehicles at the time of such maintenance or repairs or gas or oil purchase. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, these are a series of questions that were asked prior to the 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

530 

 

previous prorogation. At that time the minister responsible indicated, I believe in each case that they were 

endeavoring to obtain the information for me. I therefore move, seconded by Mr. Bailey, the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose return no. 3. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in my judgment this is a 

resolution which, by its very width, is incapable of a correct answer, a full answer. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— That’s not what you said last time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— That’s exactly what I said last time. Just take a look at it, "The payments for repairs, 

gas, maintenance, etc. (I don’t know what etc. means, what kind of a legal interpretation could be put on etc.) 

that there is for government vehicles outside the province of Saskatchewan." 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is quite clear to everybody that the government is involved in all kinds of border work, at 

Flin Flon, the Creighton area, Lloydminster, Saskatchewan area. I just don’t know how one could reasonably 

answer this. But perhaps I am in error so we’ll let the Minister of Revenue make a comment on it. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue):— Mr. Speaker, I would simply make a few comments in 

line with what the Attorney General has said. There are 1,982 vehicles in the CVA fleet and there are 

employees going back and forth in the Flin Flon area, the Lloydminster area and the border points down 

around Estevan and Portal and places of that nature and to ask us to get the information that you are 

specifically asking for we would have to go through every credit slip. These are issued credit cards and they 

charge those items on those credit cards. We would have to thumb through every single credit slip. It would 

take two employees at least two months to find out whether or not the information the member is asking for 

is available. I think on that basis we should simply defeat that motion. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to just make 

a few comments on this particular item that has been requested by the member for Qu’Appelle. Now as an 

administrator I think that I can say that the amount of administration that the Minister of Revenue has 

suggested is going to take place with reference to this particular item is incorrect. The kind of procedures 

necessary to find this information would not necessitate going through every single bill and every single item 

of expense that had occurred outside the province of Saskatchewan because I am certain that the 

expenditures of the province of Saskatchewan are gauged such that the expenditures like that that are made 

outside the province of Saskatchewan, where they are involved in other kinds of jurisdictions, are kept 

separately in a separate account for purposes of accounting for the necessary records. I am sure that the 

Minister of Finance would concur with this that if it is necessary for the government employees to go outside 

of the province of Saskatchewan that they record their expenditures as being expenditures outside of the 

province of Saskatchewan rather than the ones that were inside and those are recorded and coded to a 

specific account. Said account could be pulled relatively easily and the expenditures for that particular item 

of expense could in fact be summarized relatively quickly and, therefore, the answers to the question could 

be relatively easily to obtain. 

 

Now why ask such a question? Well, there are two reasons primarily. One, I think that it would be of 

importance for the people of Saskatchewan to know what kind of expenditures are being made by employees 

of the government of Saskatchewan 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

531 

 

outside the jurisdiction of the province of Saskatchewan. For example, they might like to know what is the 

extent of the government of Saskatchewan employees’ involvement outside the province of Saskatchewan? 

Are they involved in activities in Alberta and to what extent are they involved in activities in Alberta? Are 

they involved in activities in Manitoba and to what extent are they involved in activities in Manitoba? How 

much, for example, is that costing the people of Saskatchewan to involve the employees for travel expenses 

outside the province of Saskatchewan. By obtaining such information it may be possible for the people of 

Saskatchewan to discern to what extent — in other words if this is a significant number in terms of payments 

for this kind of expense then naturally the amount of time spent by the employees outside the province of 

Saskatchewan would be a significant number and should be reported to the people of Saskatchewan. I think 

that for two reasons: (1) it would be relatively easy to obtain this information, and (2) I think it’s important 

that the people recognize the extent of the involvement of their civil service outside the province. I think it 

should be relatively easy for the government to answer this question and relatively quickly as well. 

 

MR. BOWERMAN:— Mr. Speaker, just a comment with respect to the area in the northern administration 

district that would be affected by this resolution. Perhaps the member doesn’t realize or doesn’t understand 

that in order to get facilities — cars, trucks, services and goods to Uranium City during the summer you go 

up to Waterways and into Lake Athabasca. And then you suggest that the purchasing of gas when you leave 

Saskatchewan and go into Alberta, that the unit — take whatever unit number you want to, unit number 270 

or whatever it is — that somehow that is recorded differently. It is not recorded differently. The gas 

purchases in Alberta as opposed to the purchase of gas in Saskatchewan and the tickets that would be kept in 

that way are not kept differently. I say that with respect to Flin Flon, Saskatchewan as opposed to Flin Flon, 

Manitoba. On what side of the boundary do you happen to buy a tank full of gas? Anytime that I go into Flin 

Flon by air I go out to Baker’s Narrows and the employees if they are going to meet me, come to Baker’s 

Narrows. Now that is 20 miles inside of the Manitoba border. 

 

It is not anything that is going on in terms of a project or a program but in fact it does happen. Those people 

who travel from Creighton for example when number 106 is out and who come down via The Pas, Manitoba 

and come around by that route and then go back up into Cumberland House by car, again don’t keep gas 

purchases separate or may not keep maintenance separate, that would be incurred on a trip of such kind. I 

don’t see the significance of that but to go through every gas purchase ticket that is purchased in the public 

service in order to be able to accommodate that particular question seems to me to be far more extensive 

than what the information would serve the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— I would just like to make a few comments on this. 

There must have been a change in government policy because under the old government at least, government 

credit cards were not applicable outside the province of Saskatchewan. If they are at this time that is 

something new. No, it’s a fact; they weren’t. If you made a purchase of gas or repairs outside the province of 

Saskatchewan you would have to obtain the bill and get reimbursement and that was a very logical reason. Is 

this not still the same policy? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN:— How can you limit a credit card? 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— No, no. I’m talking about the government white credit card — I mean the way we 

used to establish a white government credit card (I’m not sure if it’s 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

532 

 

still available). It wasn’t applicable outside the province of Saskatchewan so therefore anybody who has a 

bill or a credit card other than the government white card they should be very easy to trace and it should not 

be a very difficult job to do. If you don’t use the government credit card any more and you’re using different 

ones, I can see the point. 

 

Please have the minister, when he winds up debate, indicate: (1) are you still not using that white 

government credit card? 

 

MR. ROBBINS:— Within the province. 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— Within the province. Outside the province you are using credit cards and paying for 

the gas so there should be no problem with identification whatsoever. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Well, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that we caught the government with its 

pants down on this one. I wish the reporter from the CBC was in to observe this because if he wanted 

something about election expenses he would find that we were attempting to find how much the government 

opposite had spent around the time of the Manitoba election. It is very interesting that the government last 

session was prepared to give us the information. They wanted to consider it and now when they see the 

ramifications of it, oh, we have a big cover up. Now we can’t figure it out. It is not that they can’t figure it 

out, Mr. Speaker, it is that they won’t give it to us and they won’t give it to the people of this province. The 

reason for the refusal to give this information is because the government opposite is trying to hide the 

expenses that it paid for in the last Manitoba election, not really that it paid for, that the public of 

Saskatchewan, in fact, paid for. 

 

The Attorney General was very alert when he picked that up and decided that the government was going to 

vote against this because that is the type of operation that he knows full well goes on and, in fact, he doesn’t 

want the opposition to get that information. 

 

The answers given by the treasury benches were, of course, specious, no validity. You know to have the 

Minister responsible for Revenue in this province decide that it is a little too much work to try and get the 

information is typical of what we are going to be running into in the future, when it is no longer the 

prerogative of this Assembly to demand public accountability and to demand information on government 

and public expenditures. You are going to fall behind the guise of, oh, it is a little too much work to look up, 

if it is politically embarrassing. Or it is Crown Corporations — we don’t have to answer here or we can put it 

off a year later by changing the year end in the Crown corporations. 

 

This refusal to give us the answer on this question, I think, typifies the attitude of the government opposite 

but I, in a way, commend the Attorney General for astutely picking up the question and very quickly ruling 

that, in fact, the government refused to give the answer to the opposition because it is going to be 

embarrassing. I think that that is just another nail in the coffin of the ability of this Assembly to review 

public expenditures and review expenditures of the public purse. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

533 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 21 

 

Malone Stodalka Lane (Qu’Ap) 

Wiebe McMillan Birkbeck 

Merchant Nelson (As-Gr) Berntson 

MacDonald Clifford Lane (Sa-Su) 

Penner Collver Wipf 

Cameron Larter Thatcher 

Anderson Bailey Katzman 

 

NAYS — 30 

 

Pepper Banda Cowley 

Thibault Whelan Tchorzewski 

Bowerman Kaeding Shillington 

Smishek Kwasnica Vickar 

Romanow Dyck Skoberg 

Snyder McNeill Nelson (Yktn) 

Byers MacAuley Allen 

Lange Feschuk Johnson 

Kowalchuk Faris Thompson 

Robbins Rolfes Lusney 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS — SENIOR CITIZENS 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont):— Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me this afternoon to 

introduce a group of 30 student who have just come in to the Speaker’s Gallery; they are 30 senior citizens 

from the University of Saskatchewan, Extension Division. Would you like to stand up and be recognized? 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ALLEN:— They are accompanied today by Dr. M. Alexander. I understand that we are going to be 

getting together for a few minutes after you leave the gallery and I look forward to that. I would like to 

welcome you this afternoon on behalf of all the members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to join with the 

member for Rosemont in welcoming the university students. I must say that university students are getting 

younger and prettier every day and welcome to the Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

534 

 

RETURN NO. 5 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle) moved that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 5 showing: 

 

The names of companies or individuals or partnerships under contract with the Government of 

Saskatchewan to supply personal services and copies of each contract, and if such contract is verbal, the 

dates of each contract and the amount of payment. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we have seen a proliferation on the federal and provincial level of rather than 

government firing employees as such, they are hiring individuals through contracts of services or they are 

hiring the personal management companies of individuals and apply paying their companies rather than 

paying the individuals. Now in many cases this has pretty great advantages for the individual employee, 

particularly now in light of the new income tax rules on the dividend tax credit. As well, however, it allows a 

great deal of flexibility on the part of the government because the individual is not paid as an employee 

although he does, in many cases, employee’s work. He is allowed the flexibility of having a straight contract 

paid to his management company and then as long as he supplies particular services to the government, 

pursuant to a contract, it doesn’t matter to the government when those are supplied. A prime example I 

suggest is the management contract I understand with one of the members, one of the employees of the 

Executive Council — the press officer, of the government opposite. Now obviously I think it incumbent 

upon the Assembly, if we are trying to review public expenditures, that we now look at a totally new 

direction in determining the expenses by the government for employment or for services rendered. 

 

I have attempted, by the use of the words ‘companies or individuals, or partnerships’ so that there is no 

technical question as to payments being made, but as I say, we have seen both on the federal and the 

provincial level a great proliferation of governments paying individuals to keep them outside of the scope of 

the public service giving them one, the flexibility to determine the terms of employment by contract and 

individual contract between the government and the individual and in many cases, as I say, to give an 

advantage, an economic advantage to the employee who through a limited company will have greater take-

home pay than he would if he were paid direct. 

 

I, therefore, move, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) (and if I could have more than one 

seconder — the member for Regina South) that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 5. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance):— Mr. Speaker, I do not know about the hon. member who 

has just moved the motion whether it was really his intention to word the motion in the way that he did 

because this motion creates some very serious problems, whether by intent or by accident, and I want to draw 

it to his attention. 

 

If we were to answer or provide information based on this question we would have to reveal a great deal of 

information which at the present time is prohibited even by statute. 

 

We enter into contracts with the medical profession. Every doctor, in the case of MCIC, enters into an 

agreement with the Medical Care Insurance Commission to provide medical services. Those are personal 

services. We would have to provide the income of 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

535 

 

every physician. Now I am surprised that the member is seeking that kind of information. We saw, during 

the fall session, the Conservatives asking for information to reveal the names of social assistance recipients, 

how much they were paid. They even went as far as asking this House to provide information of whether 

those social assistance recipients were Indian, or of native ancestry. 

 

Today, they are asking us to provide information, particular contracts, the wages, or the fees that are paid to 

all the doctors, to all the chiropractors, to all the physiotherapists and the dentists, because we do have 

contracts with them and the information that is requested would obligate us to provide that information 

contrary to some of the statues. 

 

Now I really wonder whether that was the hon. member’s intent. I notice he is shaking his head that it was 

not his intent. I refer him to item No. 14 on page four, where his colleague seems to be asking the question 

that he was talking about. If that is the case, I would like the two Conservative members to get together. The 

hon. member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake asks the names of persons presently employed under contract in 

the service of the government agencies, the length of term of contracts, and the amount of remuneration paid 

on a daily, monthly, or annual basis. Now, that is what the hon. member seemed to have talked about, but in 

his resolution, Mr. Speaker, he went much further. The next thing we know, not only will they be asking, 

once they get the information about all the doctors and the amount they were paid, I suppose they will next 

ask what particular service they provide to a particular patient. I think that is carrying things too far. There is 

such a thing as confidential information which is not in the interest, and which is, in fact, prohibited. I again 

raise the question with the hon. member, is he seeking the information that his colleague is seeking in Item 

14? If he is, that should satisfy him because this goes much, much too far — it goes beyond the proper and 

legitimate bounds. 

 

I ask the hon. members to defeat this resolution. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RETURN NO. 6 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 6) 

showing: 

 

The rate per mile charged the Executive Council by the Central Vehicle Agency for use of each of the 

government aircrafts in each of the years 1975, 1976 and January 1, 1977 to November 1, 1977. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I did not request that it be stood. Is there some reason for the alacrity with which you 

moved on that? Again, this is a matter that was raised prior to prorogation and it is requesting the rate for 

mile charged the Executive Council by the CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) for use of each of the government 

aircraft. Again, the minister responsible at that time undertook to supply that information. I assume we can 

expect it shortly and I therefore move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 6) showing. 

Seconded by the member from Saskatoon-Sutherland. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue):— Mr. Speaker, I might just make one brief remark. I think 

we can supply this information very shortly and we will be agreeable to it. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

536 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 7 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 7) 

showing: 

 

The amount budgeted and spent to November 15, 1977 for the government promotion of the Saskatchewan 

Family of Crown Corporations and the advertising agency or agencies who produced or placed the 

advertisements and the amount budgeted for on each ad agency and the amount paid to each agency as of 

November 15, 1977. 

 

He said: I am glad this one is agreed by members opposite, because it indicates a complete change of views 

since prior to prorogation. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI:— Put in a sensible resolution and we will agree to it. 

 

MR. LANE:— I am glad the Minister of Health agrees that this one is sensible, because the motion will read 

that the Order do issue for the amount budgeted and spent to November 15, 1977, for the government 

promotion of the Saskatchewan Family of Crown Corporations and the advertising agency or agencies who 

produced or placed the advertisements and the amount budgeted for on each ad agency and the amount paid 

to each agency as of November 15, 1977. The Minister of Health has already indicated from the Chair, Mr. 

Speaker, which gratifies me immensely that this was a sensible resolution that he agreed with. I know that 

the Minister of Revenue has also agreed. Rather than go through I think it would be in order for all members 

of the Assembly to indicate that the debate we went through prior to prorogation could be taken as read, and 

we do not have to go through it. I think the American system is that you can just table the speeches. I 

suppose that would be in order. That is the information requested, Mr. Speaker, and I therefore move Return 

No. 7. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 8 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 8 showing: 

 

The names of companies or individuals or partnerships contracting with the Government of Saskatchewan 

for the supply of personal services to which were assigned or leased government vehicles or the names of 

shareholders of such vehicles who were assigned or leased government vehicles. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Return No. 8 basically deals with whether or not any of the individuals under contract 

of service or any company under contracts of services, or to supply personal services, where assigned 

government vehicles in which case we want the information as to those individuals affected who received 

government vehicles, if any. Seconded by the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) that an Order of 

the Assembly to do issue for Return No. 8 showing. 

 

MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, I think I should make a few brief remarks with respect to this particular 

one that states the names of companies or individuals or partnerships 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

537 

 

contracting with the Government of Saskatchewan for the supply of personal services to which were 

assigned or leased government vehicles or the names of shareholders of such vehicles who were assigned or 

leased government vehicles. For what period? 

 

How could we be held responsible for knowing what went on in the period 1964 to 1971? Obviously, there 

is no way we could know all the contracts and agreements that were made between companies or individuals 

or partnerships at that time. I think, simply because it doesn’t provide any single date at all in relation to the 

period of time that it requests this information, the Assembly should have no alternative other than to defeat 

the motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RETURN NO. 9 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 9 showing: 

 

The number of non-government employees who used government owned vehicles in each of the years 

1976, and January 1, 1977 to November 1, 1977 and the reason for such usage. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the next motion deals with a question tabled before the Assembly. Obviously, I am 

referring to on businesses opposed to the spouse of an employee who has been assigned a government 

vehicle for purposes other than which they were intended. I, therefore, move that an Order of the Assembly 

do issue for Return No. 9 showing, seconded by the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane). 

 

MR. ROBBINS:— Mr. Speaker, I think I should say a few brief words with respect to this one. I note that 

the member for Qu’Appelle pointed out that non-government employees didn’t include — if I heard him 

correctly — wives and families of personnel to whom vehicles have been assigned and I appreciate that 

information. I think we have to look at what is a non-government employee. Does it include contractural 

employees? Are they deemed to be non-government employees? And because I think we have to have a look 

at this one, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 10 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 10 showing: 

 

Copies of the studies, if any, by the Government of Saskatchewan with regard to instituting minimum 

performance standards for licensed real estate agents. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, there is some concern among the real estate industry in Saskatchewan as to what 

direction the government may take with regard to regulating the industry, if it intends to do so and my 

request is merely for copies of the studies, if any, by the government of Saskatchewan with regard to 

instituting minimum performance standards for licensed real estate agents. I so move, seconded by the 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

538 

 

member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane). 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary):— Mr. Speaker, just a couple of brief comments here. With 

respect to this question, the answer is since 1971 there have been no studies. I don’t know whether there 

were some in 1911 or not, which is the problem with the question. On the assumption that the member is 

asking sort of in the recent period, then I am prepared to accept the motion and we will provide him with the 

answer, nil, in due course. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 11 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 11 showing: 

 

The agreements entered into between the Government of Saskatchewan or its correctional centres 

employees and prisoners in the correctional centres since 1971; and dates and copies of such agreements 

and the criteria used for selecting the prisoner representative. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, one of the matters that came forward at the Moore Inquiry was an alleged agreement 

or an agreement between the correctional centre and some of the inmates and their representatives or their 

representative. I have requested that the government table before the Assembly any agreements entered into 

between the government of Saskatchewan or its correctional centres, employees and prisoners in the 

correctional centres since 1971 and dates and copies of such agreements and the criteria used for selecting 

the prisoner representative. I will assume that perhaps the criteria could differ from one institution to 

another. I would be interested in seeing the various criteria used. I therefore move, seconded by the member 

for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) Return No. 11. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 12 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 12 showing: 

 

The number of mailing lists supplied by the Government of Saskatchewan to individuals or groups in each 

of the years 1974, 1975, 1976 and January 1, 1977 to November 1, 1977. (a) The names of the individuals 

or groups that such lists were supplied and the source of each list. (b) The amount charged or paid for each 

list. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I, in reviewing my files, note that I have copies of the mailing list in 1974 but not for 

the year ‘75-76 and with leave of the Assembly, I would like to delete the number 1974 from the motion, if 

the members insist I will withdraw it and resubmit it on that basis. As I say I have the list for 1974, the list of 

the mailing list supplied by the government to individuals or groups, the names of the groups or individuals 

that such lists were supplied to and the amount charged or paid for each list. I therefore, move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) Return No. 12. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

539 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, the motion as it is worded creates some problems in us being able to 

answer it. I have an amendment. The hon. member says he has the information for 1974. This was a 

resolution; I am not sure whether it was he who submitted it, but it is putting it in those words that we were 

able to answer it, which would read: 

 

That all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(1) The names of all Government departments which supplied mailing lists to any individuals or groups in 

each of the years 1975, 1976, and January 1, 1977 to November 1, 1977. (2) In cases where the department 

maintains records of such information, the names of those to whom such mailing lists were supplied. 

 

I think that was the question we answered the last time and we are prepared to answer it in its same form. I 

can tell the hon. member that in the case of lists that we do provide there are no charges or collections made 

on those. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— Perhaps would the minister . . , 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Yes, give the hon. member a copy of this. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— I am wondering if the minister, before he tables his amendment would include in 

there, departments, Crown corporations or agencies? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Well, that is not what you asked for in the original question, the government of 

Saskatchewan, and that is what I am directing myself to. I can’t amend my own motion now, and neither can 

you. So, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we can adopt this motion and if he wants the additional information, ask an 

additional question. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— Obviously, as a result of the amendment I will have to submit another series of 

questions. I will be asking the government when the policy changed as to charging for mailing lists because 

the last return that I had, mailing lists were supplied at varying rates of so many cents or quarter cents per 

name. One, for example, I believe was R.L. Poke which dealt with automobile listing. I will be asking for the 

Crown corporations and other government agencies, the phraseology, I believe, government of Saskatchewan 

usually is the umbrella phrase which includes all and the restriction to government departments limits it to 

what are formally referred to as departments. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 13 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 13 showing: 

 

The rate per mile charged by the Central Vehicle Agency (or the Government of Saskatchewan) for each of 

the government aircrafts in the years 1974 to November 1, 1977: (i) the total mileage flown by government 

aircraft in each of the three years; (ii) the total mileage charged to government departments or agencies for 

each of the aircrafts in each of the years; and (iii) the amounts 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

540 

 

charged to each department or agency in each of the years. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I will be requesting the information from the government as to the rate per mile 

charged by the Central Vehicle Agency or the government of Saskatchewan for each of the government 

aircrafts in the years 1974 to November 1, 1977: (i) the total mileage flown by government aircraft in each of 

the three years; (ii) the total mileage charged to government departments or agencies for each of the aircrafts 

in each of the years; and (iii) the amounts charged to each department or agency in each of the years. I know 

that this was one of the motions brought forward at the last session prior to prorogation. I therefore move, 

seconded by the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland (Mr. Lane) Return No. 13. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 14 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 14 showing: 

 

The names of all persons presently employed under contract in the service of the government: (a) the 

agencies; (b) the length of term of contract; and (c) the amount of remuneration paid daily, monthly or 

yearly. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a motion carried forward from the last session. I suppose one has to put it on 

but over the break I’ve heard some rumors out in the communities and in the province that the government 

has some people under contract and it’s rather hard to find out who it is. In order to quell these rumors I 

would like to put forward this motion, seconded by Collin Thatcher the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance):— Mr. Speaker, we’ll be glad to provide the information. 

This is the problem that the Conservatives have. They should operate on fact rather than on rumor. We have 

nothing to hide. There are a few people on contract, we’ll be glad to provide the information to them. We 

always have. Stop operating in rumor, start living in a real world, not one of suspicion and doubt. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would just 

like to commend the Minister of Finance for his co-operation and enthusiastic response to this question. We 

are certain that once we have the facts in this regard we will be able to dispel all the rumors in 

Saskatchewan, not started by Progressive Conservatives, mind you, Mr. Speaker, but possibly started by 

others. Once we have this information I am sure all the rumors in the province will be dispelled. I do thank 

the minister for his response in this question. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 15 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake) to move that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 15 showing: 

 

A list of all projects under the Department of Northern Saskatchewan with cost overruns for the period of 

January 1, 1974 to October 31, 1977 and the amount of cost overruns on each project. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

541 

 

He said: I know I can’t amend my own motion, Mr. Speaker, but if the minister would be kind enough or 

whatever it takes to have this up to the end of December if it’s easier, for a cut-off date. Maybe the October 

31 was a bad cut-off date, maybe the end of December is a better cut-off date — to have the cut-off date 

somewhere in that area. 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan):— Mr. Speaker, the problem with the 

motion as moved by the member for Prince Alert-Duck Lake is not necessarily with the dates, as he 

indicated, but for us to be able to interpret what in fact is meant by ‘all projects’. We would not be able to 

determine under a list of all projects whether or not there were cost overruns because maybe those projects 

which are included under ordinary expenditures appear in the blue book and naturally follow the budgetary 

item with respect to that. I will propose, Mr. Speaker, to amend his motion by clarifying it at least. If it 

doesn’t meet with his full objectives he can re-submit a second question. I would therefore move seconded 

by my seatmate, the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) that the Order for Return No. 15 be amended to read 

as follows: 

 

That all words following ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

A list of all tendered capital projects under the Department of Northern Saskatchewan with cost overruns 

for the period April 1, 1974 to October 31, 1977. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The introduction into the amendment is the only part that I find some difficulty with 

because it should normally read, delete all the words after showing, and substitute therefor rather than, that 

order for Return No. 15 be amended to read as follows. If the House will accept that, delete all the words 

after showing and substitute therefor, we could move ahead. Agreed. 

 

MR. WIPF:— Mr. Speaker, there is just one thing on this motion, I am wondering if I could ask the minister 

a question, if we could get the amount of cost overrun put in this? The projects with cost overruns but also 

the amount of the overrun on each project. This is what was sought in the original question also. 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 — SECRET BALLOT — BRAILLE MARKINGS 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake) moved, seconded by Mr. H.W. Lane (Saskatoon-Sutherland): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to adopt a suitable ballot with braille markings 

to ensure that those with visual handicaps enjoy the right to secret ballot. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a question brought forward again from the last sitting urging this Assembly to 

adopt a suitable ballot for the visually handicapped, as I put in 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

542 

 

here, one with braille markings. In discussion the last time the Attorney General said that they would be 

looking into this and see what they could do. We haven’t heard any reply from him. Realizing of course that 

this could cost some money, I would like the Attorney General’s comments on this to see where they stand 

on this now. In talking with many of the visually handicapped or blind people in the province since then, the 

braille markings as I had written in here weren’t really the big part of it. They would like a ballot with an 

embossed line on it so they could feel the area between the different candidates. Some mark in there that they 

can feel where the different candidates are and then they can be told as they go into the polling booth the 

name of the candidate, in which square he is or which section of the ballot it is. This would ensure that the 

blind in our province do have a secret ballot, totally secret ballot. In discussing this again with a gentleman 

in Prince Albert who travels all over America, apparently this would be a first in America. It is something 

that is talked about amongst the blind people throughout Canada and the United States, to get this 

opportunity to have a totally secret ballot and I would like to see the Assembly urge the government to put 

this through and let’s have another first for Saskatchewan. I think it is in keeping with working and trying to 

help the handicapped. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary):— Mr. Speaker, this is one of those resolutions — no one in 

the House will disagree with the intent of the resolution put forward by the member. 

 

I was interested in his comments with respect to — he wasn’t sure whether what he wanted was braille 

ballots but perhaps ballots with embossed — they were raised so that you could feel the spaces between the 

candidates, etc. I think the Assembly obviously has to deal with the resolution as it stands, which talks about 

braille. I think there are some problems with this. First of all I think we would have difficulty in printing all 

the ballots (obviously everybody’s ballots) in braille. I don’t think that is what the member is suggesting but 

rather that some braille ballots be provided for people who are either blind or seriously visually handicapped. 

 

The problem you would run into there I think is that you would likely in many ridings have less secrecy with 

a braille ballot than more secrecy. In the Saskatoon-Sutherland by-election for example which is one of the 

larger ridings in the province (there are 14,000 voters) there were only three blind people who voted. I think 

they were all in different polls which would mean that you would end up with one braille ballot in the poll 

ballot box which could obviously be easily identified because it would be a braille ballot. You would 

eliminate the person who went into the poll and helped mark the X but you would then have three 

scrutineers, the poll clerk and the district returning officer. In my riding if I recall last time there was only 

one blind person who voted in the whole riding, so even if you sent them all in (all the blind ballots to one 

place) you would again have the person identified. It seems to me that we can’t print all the ballots with 

braille markings because even if it was technically possible, we would have to print them all in one place and 

now we use printers all over the province. I don’t think we want to concentrate the printing of the ballots in 

Regina or Saskatoon and I’m not sure that you could print them all with braille markings as well as the ones 

that I can get along with that I can see. On the other hand if you just have a special braille ballot for the 

person I think it is quite possible that you make it so that more people would be aware of how he votes — 

not the people of his choosing but people of each of our choosing. 

 

That is a problem. I am going to ask the Assembly to defeat the motion. I want to assure the member that the 

embossed argument that he is making . . , I’m not a printer so I don’t know how much problem it is for the 

Nipawin Journal or the Biggar Independent 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

543 

 

to deal with that. Maybe there is no problem at all. 

 

I will certainly assure the member that I will personally take a look into it and I will have the people in the 

electoral office respond personally to him with respect to that comment. I can’t assure you that it will be 

done; I just don’t know what the problems are. 

 

I would like the Assembly to support the good intentions behind this resolution but defeat the wording 

because from my point of view at least, it is impractical to use braille on the ballots. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, I would like to make just a few comments about the comments made by 

the Provincial Secretary. 

 

First of all I think that no one would suggest, nor does the resolution in any way suggest, that only those 

ballots that are for blind people should be either embossed or imprinted in braille. No one is suggesting that 

at all. That, as the minister has quite rightly put forward, because of the few (fortunately, few) people in our 

society who are blind, it would mean that there would be less secrecy in terms of their casting of the ballot 

than otherwise. However, part of the minister’s comments I believe, are (and I can appreciate that he doesn’t 

understand about embossing or he doesn’t understand about braille. But you can understand or appreciate, of 

course, that it is not a monumental task to imprint ballots with the machinery available to all printers today in 

braille. In other words to over print or subprint near a corner or near a space, to subprint in braille the name 

of the person whose name appears on the ballot. In other words it is not a big deal and very, very less than 

costly to imprint a ballot with braille at the same time that they are printing the ballot in printing so that that 

ballot then becomes not only available for sighted people but also is available at the same time for people 

who can go in and feel the area or feel the places where candidates’ names are outlined and can, in fact, 

using their sense of touch and using their sense of direction, cast their X on the ballot that has been imprinted 

in braille and, therefore, enjoy the same privileges at election time as those of us who are sighted enjoy. The 

cost of this is very, very small relative to the position that it would place handicapped people in the province 

of Saskatchewan. It would mean that the government of Saskatchewan for very, very little expenditure is 

saying to the handicapped people, as we are, yes, we are prepared to do for you and to provide for you as 

much as we possibly can. And I want to at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, to say that the government 

members opposite generally speaking, I think, in the last six or seven years have in fact made a real effort to 

assist the handicapped in our province . . , (interjection) . . , No, no, that’s a different kind of handicap. I 

think that the members to my right seem to be laughing at this matter but quite frankly being a handicapped 

person I don’t think is a laughing matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite have made a real attempt but here is another area where with a 

very, very small expense we can in fact print our ballots in braille; the equipment is available I understand. 

The equipment is relatively inexpensive I understand. Then the ballot would be available to all people in 

Saskatchewan whether sighted or otherwise. I think that this may be a way, not only for the actual physically 

handicapped people that we can also tell them that they are full-fledged members of the community, which is 

what the handicapped after all are really shooting for and shooting towards, that they want to be treated by 

the rest of us as full-fledged members of the community with an understanding of their handicap and at the 

same time treated the same. 

 

So I would urge all members of this Assembly to adopt this motion. It is possible to print 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

544 

 

these ballots in braille; it is possible to prove to our handicapped that we can take the necessary measures 

and must take the necessary measures to ensure that they are treated as full-fledged first class citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan at a very, very low expense. 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek):— Mr. Speaker, I recognize the problems that the people without 

sight have and certainly I would be in support of the motion but it reminds me of some of the problems that 

we do have in election campaigns and some of the things that we quite can’t fix, particularly when people 

have a problem with the ability to read. It reminds me of the 1956 campaign in the constituency of Maple 

Creek when two contestants in the provincial election at that time where Mr. Alex Cameron and Mr. Les 

Benjamin. I believe it was the second time that Mr. Cameron defeated Mr. Les Benjamin, the member of 

parliament . . , 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Two out of three . . , 

 

MR. STODALKA:— But anyway he always used to have very active and well organized campaigns in that 

area and this particular election campaign happened in one of the villages. One of the poll workers picked up 

one of the ladies in the village who was unable to read. On the way to the poll she tried to convince the 

person that the proper person to vote for was Mr. Benjamin. After some time, the lady listened and listened 

and then finally before she went into the poll she said, no, she said she still thought she was going to have to 

support Mr. Cameron. Well, the lady said, well that’s fine then she said, if you are going to support Mr. 

Cameron just mark the top name on the ballot. So the lady went into the poll and after she returned she said, 

well, did you remember to mark the top name on the ballot? To which the lady replied, no, she said, when I 

listened to you you convinced me that I should vote for Mr. Benjamin so I marked the second name on the 

ballot. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STODALKA:— But these are some of the things that can happen and I’m sure that they are not 

peculiar to any one political party. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 6 — DELAY LEGISLATION ON LEGALIZING MARIJUANA 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose) moved, seconded by Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to delay any legislation that would legalize the sale 

of marijuana until broader research has been conducted. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, last session I put this resolution on the order paper and I know it may seem strange to 

the Attorney General and perhaps the Minister of Health but I left the wording of the resolution in exactly 

the same way. I might ensure them that I did that intentionally because I do believe that the impact of what I 

had to say when I presented my case for the non-legalization of marijuana still stands. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention, at this time, to go through that same speech and to bring out all the points 

which I thought I had very carefully researched. I think that the Minister of Health, in particular, in trying to 

use the opportunity while speaking on this 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

545 

 

same resolution to talk about all his government’s achievements was somewhat distracting from the 

resolution itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think since last fall when I introduced this resolution, there is even more evidence and more 

research available now than there was then to show that the legalization and the sale of marijuana would be a 

very dangerous thing to society. And despite the fact that a recent political convention voted in favor of it, 

two to one, it still does not change my resolution and still does not change my strong feeling about the 

legalization of marijuana. 

 

I agree with the Attorney General that, perhaps, the resolution should be reworded differently but at the same 

time I think it is clear to everyone that what I am saying is that this Assembly should, in fact, recommend 

very strongly to the federal government because it is a federal matter, that there shall be no legalization of 

marijuana until it is recognized that it is a safe drug in society. I am not going to change the resolution. If the 

Minister of Health wants to use an opportunity to talk about other programs of his government, that is fine. I 

am going to keep it very much to the point. I believe that I have the support of the vast majority of members 

of this Assembly in that we do not want to see the legalization of marijuana. I think it is much too soon 

because, as the researchers tell me in conversation with them, they continue to say that it will be a very 

dangerous thing, indeed. 

 

Up until this point in time I might remind this Assembly that the only people, Mr. Speaker, the only people 

who have advocated the legalization of marijuana are politicians and some theologians. That is all. Not one 

researcher has advocated it. Not one single person who works in pharmacology has advocated it. Only those 

who are attempting to gain some short-term advantage, political or otherwise, are those, in fact, who are 

attempting to promote the idea of the legalization of marijuana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I moved, seconded by the member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) Resolution No. 6. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a brief comment or 

two about this resolution. 

 

First of all I want to tell the member for Rosetown-Elrose I think that I and most members of my party in the 

Legislature and I suppose the majority of members here feel very comfortable in supporting the resolution 

that he has brought forward at this time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I really don’t know — I think the wording was 

very badly constructed or drawn up in the resolution because I know of no individual political party in the 

Dominion of Canada that has advocated the legalization of marijuana. I do know that certain individuals 

have called for legalization. For example, Mr. Clark, the national Leader of the Conservative Party, has 

called for the legalization but I don’t think that represents the feeling of the party that the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose represents, but he was speaking as an individual. Certain other political parties have 

considered the decriminalization of marijuana. I only want to say one or two words and then I would like to 

consider the remarks a little further. 

 

I did have the opportunity at one time a few years ago to have the responsibility of being the minister in 

charge of the correctional centres in Saskatchewan. One of the great, great tragedies of the correctional 

centres was that there were young people who were criminally charged under the Criminal Code because of 

marijuana offences, of 17, 18 or 19 years of age who ended up in jail and who might have on a first or 

second 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

546 

 

occasion been experimenting with marijuana. It eventually ended up to become an education in crime. When 

they left that particular institution they had a far broader interpretation of life and a far broader experience of 

the criminal element in Saskatchewan and in Canada than when they entered. I only point that out to indicate 

the kind of difficulty there is in finding an adequate solution to the problem. However, I want to say to the 

Speaker and to the member for Rosetown-Elrose that I do support the resolution. I find the wording a little 

strange because I don’t know anybody that does except maybe he is looking into the future. I will have a few 

more remarks to make on this at a later date. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 — MIGRATORY BIRD DAMAGE TO CROPS 

 

MR. J.R. KOWALCHUK (Melfort) moved, seconded by Mr. Banda (Redberry): 

 

That this Assembly urges the federal government to fully accept its responsibilities under The Migratory 

Birds Convention Act and demands that the federal government take immediate action to initiate a 

program to compensate for migratory bird damage to Saskatchewan farmers’ crops. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I think the resolution that I am about to speak on and which presents some of the view 

points, is a very important one in view of some of the events that have happened in the past couple of weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that farmers in Saskatchewan incurred great losses through waterfowl crop 

depredation over the years and the 1977 losses being over $10 million, and that with the exception of a very 

minimum input by the federal government, this loss was borne in the main by the farmers and the province 

of Saskatchewan. Also, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact of the federal government’s recent announcement in 

Brandon concerning the funding of crop depredation program, increasing the fund for Saskatchewan by 

possibly less than $1 million when the loss, as I have already stated, amounts to over $10 million. This, then, 

Mr. Speaker, is a matter of urgent importance and the motion I present to this House on the matter, I think is 

urgent. 

 

For too long, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan and the province have borne the brunt of the 

depredation carried on by the waterfowl of the North American continent. More than 60 per cent of all wild 

ducks, geese and other waterfowl use the western fly way and prey upon the farmers’ crops in the southern 

half of Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta, causing millions of dollars of uncollectable crop damage. As 

far back as one can remember this picture has been the same, Mr. Speaker. In 1953, the provincial 

government of Saskatchewan under the Department of Natural Resources initiated a program and made 

funds available to the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office to administer a program designed to 

assist in the wildlife damage. But in no way could a province stand the cost of a total coverage program. 

 

The Migratory Birds Convention Act — and I understand some of the members from the opposition benches 

say that it is not a convention act — I sort of like the name. I know of many other birds that like to meet in 

conventions, I suppose it applies pretty good here, but it is I understand, The Migratory Birds Convention 

Act that places squarely the responsibility of waterfowl depredation on the federal government. And so it 

should be, Mr. Speaker. Waterfowl are creatures that have no domicile residence. Their habitat 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

547 

 

and residence change with the seasons. They are continental without any border restrictions, their hunting is 

licensed under the federal government. In every way it is the federal authorities, Mr. Speaker, that should be 

almost totally responsible for losses under the crop depredation, since it’s all of North America that benefits. 

The damage, however, caused by the waterfowl is borne to the greatest degree by farmers with almost no 

compensation except that provided by the province under crop insurance and subsidized to a very limited 

degree by Ottawa. Only in 1974, Mr. Speaker, after a prolonged and protracted negotiation, did the federal 

government finally recognize its obligations and responsibilities. We considered it then a breakthrough for 

the province. An agreement was signed in 1974, retroactive to 1973, a four-year agreement which last year 

was extended for another year, in the form of a letter. The agreement called for a million dollars, yearly, 

divided between the costs of projects such as lure crops, which is a preventative measure and in 

compensation only contributed to premium costs of all crop insurance and also half of administration costs, 

Mr. Speaker. Where the loss is the greatest and not recoverable to the greatest extent under all-risk crop 

insurance, the federal government has contributed nothing, nor does it seem that they intend to from the 

Brandon Report, just recently announced. In other words, there is no protection for individual farmers’ crop 

coverage for specific fields which were damaged or totally destroyed by migratory birds. That is where all 

the losses are, Mr. Speaker. That is the weakness in the federal participation today. As already I have stated, 

Mr. Speaker, a $10 million spot loss last year and possibly a bit of a recovery through crop insurance, but to 

the greatest degree it’s the farmers and the province that are the losers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is even more discouraging and scary is that the most recent news from informal talks now 

being held with the officials, the provincial officials, is that even the Brandon proposal is of a one year 

duration only, so the federal people say and further, Mr. Speaker, is that Ottawa then wants to get out of their 

responsibility in the crop depredation program altogether. 

 

That’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government continues to display that kind of irresponsible 

attitude. I say it is irresponsible. This isn’t the program that was first inaugurated by the province and so 

interpreted as indirectly being forced on the federal government. It isn’t the program that can be branded as 

some sort of a welfare scheme. It isn’t a program that could be interpreted as a socialist brain wave. It is a 

problem, Mr. Speaker, that became a problem when the first settlers came to this province to farm. It’s a 

problem that has had continuous disastrous consequences for the farmers for many, many years. It’s 

distinctly and definitely a national problem and in no way should be sloughed off by the Canadian 

government onto Saskatchewan people. 

 

We thought we had gained a toehold and I think we did in 1974 with the federal government, but it seems 

like it wasn’t enough. It was mutually agreed upon then that migratory waterfowl depredation was a national 

responsibility. The then Minister of the Environment, Jack Davis, was most responsive in that respect. He 

admitted that of the loss costs involved these should be considered as national and not as an impost on 

Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan sportsmen, and certainly not on Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 

Speaker. After all it is again, I repeat, fully recognized that all of that waterfowl, ducks, geese, and so on are 

hunted all over Canada, they are hunted all over the United States, Mexico and even some of the smaller 

countries in Latin America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what was so disturbing then, that almost immediately after the signing of the Waterfowl Crop 

Depredation Agreement in 1974, the federal government raised 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

548 

 

the price of the waterfowl hunting license from $2 to $3.50 — and even worse, they reneged on a 

commitment they had made. They were stating that the financial input by the federal government was in fact 

going to be recovered through an additional $1.50 impost on Saskatchewan hunters. The fact that it was a 

national and international obligation was forgotten and was completely ignored and I would like to read 

some of the correspondence that went on between the then department of Tourism of the provincial 

government and the federal government in Ottawa. 

 

To show you and document to you just exactly how it occurred and in reality that the federal government 

was taking the position that they were responsible for it and as I said, at the end of April we had just 

completed signing the agreement when the letter of July 4 stated to me then, which says this and I quote: 

(From Mr. Jack Davis) 

 

I have been instructed by Treasury Board to increase the price of Canada migratory game bird hunting 

permit from $2 to $3.50 starting with the 1974 season. The Treasury Board’s reason for increasing the 

price of the permit is to raise revenues to cover the requirements for federal funds for compensation and 

insurance programs under the Waterfowl Crop Damage Agreements with the prairie provinces. 

 

And so Mr. Davis, in the next paragraph, acknowledges that they indeed have made certain commitments. 

 

The purpose of attaching a fee to the Canada Migratory Bird Hunting permit was originally to ensure that it 

became an effective sampling to the universe for the purpose of getting information from hunters. That 

purpose remains valid. 

 

What the Treasury Board has now decided in effect is that the new costs of the Waterfowl Crop Damage 

Agreements should not be borne by all of Canada (the people of Canada) but by waterfowl hunters (and in 

this case mostly Saskatchewan hunters) since they formed a segment of the population most concerned 

with the maintenance of the high waterfowl regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could quote a number of letters in that regard again, where Mr. Davis stated that it is a 

waterfowl depredation. The waterfowl are a federal responsibility. Right after he let that post go and, I think, 

if I pronounce it correctly, Jeanne Sauve reiterated the same remarks but still maintained that the impost is 

going to be put on Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan hunters and Saskatchewan farmers who are going to 

have to bear the loss. We think that is not correct. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am deeply disturbed about this and I know many other farmers in Saskatchewan are. I am 

even more disturbed that they didn’t even have the courtesy to ask for a meeting to discuss this cost sharing. 

They first flatly announced, in Brandon, what they were going to do, and then later proceeded to discuss their 

actions with the provinces. I think it’s a most unforgivable and discourteous procedure, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it’s time Ottawa bore up to its responsibilities in this matter. When you look at the losses incurred, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that is a point for us to consider very strongly. The losses incurred by the Saskatchewan 

farmers, as recorded since 1974 and I have the figure which says 1974, $6.1 million, 1975, $4.5 million and 

1976, $5 million. In 1977 the loss was $10 million, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

549 

 

Now, the figure of a half million dollars as a federal share for Saskatchewan, as it was until the end of this 

year, is unacceptable. The new Brandon proposal giving an additional $2.8 million for all of western Canada 

is totally inadequate and unacceptable. 

 

Let me repeat to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of this Legislature that The Migratory Birds 

Convention Act and the international treaty with the United States placed the responsibility of migratory 

birds squarely on the shoulders of the federal government. We know that waterfowl are protected birds and 

so it should be. We also know that the provincial government has made a most valiant attempt, through crop 

insurance, through newer programs, etc., to do all in its power to alleviate the great losses to farmers. 

 

Let us not forget as well, Mr. Speaker, that this province has the added responsibility of all other creatures of 

the Crown — elk, deer, bear and so on, where at times depredations by these animals are indeed a costly 

item and totally borne by the province. Therefore it is imperative that Ottawa do far, far more in this area of 

waterfowl crop depredation than is now being proposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recently a western provincial proposal set out the formula of shared costs with Ottawa on a 

75/25 per cent basis — Ottawa, 75 per cent, Saskatchewan 25 per cent. This proposal has merits, Mr. 

Speaker. I think we should put strong, unanimous pressure on Ottawa to accept this proposal. I know that all 

members of this House acknowledge and recognize the problem, know where the responsibility lies, and will 

jointly support us in asking for a more equal and responsible share of the depredation costs. It’s with this 

point in view that I propose this motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for Redberry. I sincerely 

hope that unanimous support will endorse this message. 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— Mr. Speaker, in reply to the motion put on the order paper by the 

member for Melville, I appreciate the concern he has and the sincerity by which he presents the motion as 

he’s introduced it to this Assembly on the wings of a snow white dove. I think it becomes a question of just 

whose birds are these? After all, the only thing that’s stopping in Saskatchewan now is those things that 

don’t use fuel. I wonder if the member for Melville has consulted with the Minister of Tourism and 

Renewable Resources. After all, if we stop these birds from coming in here, we’re not going to have 

anything else. Furthermore, if I was a bird, I can’t think of any other place I’d sooner stop than on NDP area 

on this continent, after all they’re feeding everyone else, they may as well feed the birds, too. 

 

We know that the Premier of Saskatchewan and the Prime Minister of Canada have got tremendous 

dictatorial powers but I don’t know whether they have the powers to keep the birds up in the air or to bring 

them down in the right places or not. And after all, these birds really come from the United States, in reality 

they’re Carter’s birds. They’re only exercising their right to mate and after all, we don’t want to come down 

too hard on the birds’ rights to mate, and we think Canada’s a good place. We welcome the birds here in 

Canada and in particular in Saskatchewan. You speak of $10 million that losses to Saskatchewan farmers 

and you suggest possible federal government funding, handled by SGIO and distributed by SGIO might be 

the answer. I suggest that any funding we might be so fortunate to get from Ottawa for this province of ours 

would be placed in serious jeopardy if we left it in the hands of SGIO. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

550 

 

There’s one thing that we don’t want to happen as a result of damage to farmers’ crops. We don’t want to see 

the hunting permits go up. It’s questionable as to whether those losses should be placed on the shoulders of 

those that enjoy the right to hunt in our province. I’m wondering if we could not maybe consider placing 

more of the responsibility under the crop insurance program which the Minister of Agriculture speaks so 

highly of. And I might note too, at this time, Mr. Speaker, that the crop insurance program does not cost this 

government any money. It is not an expense to this government. 

 

I would like to look further into that possible solution of making better use of the crop insurance program 

that we have, in covering some of these losses. Furthermore, I always have to balk a little when I see the 

government here in Saskatchewan trying to slough its problems off on Ottawa. After all, Ottawa has an $11 

billion deficit now. I suppose your thinking is, well, what’s a few more million in $11 billion. Well, I suggest 

it’s time that the federal government started bringing its budget in line as well as the provincial government 

here in Saskatchewan. Therefore I don’t accept that approach wholeheartedly, it may in part that the federal 

government could share in a cost-share program with Saskatchewan in offsetting these tremendous losses 

that you speak of to our farmers here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The new Minister of our new Department of Revenue spoke yesterday or the day before. I heard him make 

reference to himself being associated with birds and I’d like to spend some time talking to him. Maybe he’s 

got some answers to this problem. But I certainly am not convinced that the motion as you have presented it 

is the clear-cut answer. I would like to look further into it and to see if there aren’t some more workable 

solutions, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 — BREACHES OF THE ELECTION ACT, 1971. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by Mr. S.J. Cameron (Regina South): 

 

That this Assembly records its contempt for the decision of the Government not to further inquire into the 

breaches of The Election Act, 1972, as disclosed in the Bryant Report and as underlined in the Report of 

the Director of Criminal Justice. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, a few years ago the NDP government brought in an amendment to The Elections Act 

in the province of Saskatchewan with a great deal of fanfare and acclaim. They were going to control the 

expenses of political parties and attempt to prevent an individual political party from buying an election 

campaign or buying a by-election because of the amount of money that they might spend, or the amount of 

money that they were capable of generating from their own supporters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that time, we in the Liberal opposition accused the government of deliberately drafting a bill 

that was specifically designed to give every advantage to the government of the day. Today we have a report, 

today we have almost evidence that is without question of the violation of that act by all three parties and yet 

the government of the day has refused to prosecute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go very briefly into the background. All of us are aware that there 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

551 

 

was a by-election fought in Pelly this spring. That by-election was one of the hardest fought campaigns that 

in my brief tenure in the politics of Saskatchewan, which included about five elections and about eight or 

nine by-elections. It was without question the hardest fought, but what is even more important, it was the 

most extravagant. And that the cost, I hesitate to say, would run not to the $60,000 limit, but I would 

question if there could have been spent less than $160,000. Mr. Speaker, despite that, all three political 

parties have submitted an election return that would appear to comply with the act, the act that has been 

more honored in the breach than the observance. All three political parties, my own included, provided weak 

excuses as to the non-compliance with that act. They appeared to have a lack of knowledge of the spending 

of their parties and the reasons behind it. In other words, the act itself was not important. They seemed to 

have a clear lack of respect for the law. 

 

The NDP then asked the Chief Electoral Officer of the province of Saskatchewan to investigate. I want to 

talk about that investigation in a few moments. 

 

When it was finished the NDP then issued a statement saying that they would follow the recommendation of 

the criminal officer and not prosecute. I have to ask a question — why? Because I think everyone in the 

province of Saskatchewan is asking that question, why? Mr. Speaker, I think there are three basic reasons 

why I object to that decision. 

 

1. As my colleague the member for Regina South has indicated, surely if we believe in equality before the 

law, then no political party or institution should be treated any differently before the law than an individual 

citizen of this province. The most unfortunate part of it is that the man who made the decision was the 

Attorney General of the province who has the responsibility of upholding the law and enforcing the law. 

 

I am not going to go into the legal jurisdiction of the individual versus the political parties in this regard. I 

hope some of my legal friends will go into the legal implications as to what has occurred by the refusal of the 

government to prosecute what I consider a deliberate attempt by all three political parties to violate the law. 

Surely the heavens we as legislators cannot place ourselves or treat ourselves any different than we would 

treat ourselves as individuals. 

 

The second one, I believe and I think the Liberal Party believes that the basic law is unjust and is nothing 

more than a gerrymander far more vicious than the gerrymander that the NDP criticised so violently a few 

years ago. And when I talk about a gerrymander I mean a financial gerrymander which can strangle the 

activities of a political party far more than the movement of 100 votes on one side of a line or another. And a 

political gerrymander that occurred with the passage of The Election Act by the NDP government in ‘71 and 

1972 was in my judgment far worse than any that Clarence Fines or that the Liberal government from 1964 

to 1971 ever perpetrated, far worse. It was an economic gerrymander, a financial gerrymander which was 

deliberately designed to perpetuate the government in power or the government of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also believe that the refusal to prosecute was a cover up. A cover up to prevent 

embarrassment of a government to re-pass the act, to prevent the embarrassment of a government who had 

put themselves up in front of the people of Canada as a political party who are going to reform the 

electioneering process in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

552 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just quote very quickly a few passages but one to begin with on page two where the 

chief electoral officer said, "I spent a great deal of time in the Pelly constituency during the by-election" (and 

I am quoting) "a number of people brought to my attention their concerns about the amount of money 

apparently being spent by the political parties during their campaign." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have run five campaigns for myself for a $10,000 limit. Everyone in this establishment knows 

how difficult it is to stay within them. To get a 1,000 papers signed the limited amount of advertising, a very 

basic constituency office and constituency expenses for organizers, an extremely difficult ask to stay within 

the limits. You know we could have had the Legislative Assembly in session during the Pelly by-election, 

not only that we would have had enough civil servants and executive assistants to run and provide all the 

information for all the departments that we might have needed just as if we had had it in the Kamsack Hotel. 

We might well have had a better attendance if we had had the Legislature in Kamsack than it would this 

afternoon in the city of Regina in our current Legislative Assembly and, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you, 

anybody that dropped in there at breakfast time and saw how long you had to wait to get bacon and eggs or 

even toast and coffee, will know and visualize the amount of money that was invested by all three political 

parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the sign campaign, I say of the Conservative Party, could never have been done with less than 

$20,000. I say that if the RCMP investigated this today, it would validate this. Mr. Speaker, the sign 

campaign of all three parties was far, far the most extravagant I have ever seen. MLAs and people who 

worked for the government of Saskatchewan spent days and weeks and some of them a month or more in 

that constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that when the Chief Electoral Officer said that people brought to her attention the 

amount of money that was spent in Pelly, she was not exaggerating in any sense of the imagination. 

 

We are going to have an Election Expenses Act. I have also participated in by-elections with $30,000 and 

$40,000 expenses in our political party which could never have touched the Pelly by-election. I say any news 

media or any MLA or anybody who has ever had any experience in the province of Saskatchewan in 

electioneering would know that what I say is the truth. The expenditures of all three parties were 

astronomical. With the entrance of a third party on the political scene in Saskatchewan, the vying of those 

two parties of the opposition vote in Pelly generated the kind of a contest rarely seen in this province. The 

government not only attempted to match it, but to surpass it, for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that to me, is the real issue and what I am trying to say, Mr. Speaker, is that The Election Act 

and the expenditures and the amendments or the law passed by the NDP government in no way attempted to 

control the expenditures of political parties; it only intended to control the type of expenditure of political 

parties. It only intended to control the type. Oh yes, the media — some of the signs and so forth were very 

visible — but left loopholes in The Election Act where the NDP or the government of the day could spend 

not only thousands, but many thousands of dollars and then have the Chief Electoral Officer come in and say 

that the return is in compliance with the act. The act has such gaping holes that it makes it possible for the 

government of the day to utilize that act to their own advantage. Let me give you a couple of examples, Mr. 

Speaker. I am going to quote a little thing that my colleague, the former leader of the 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

553 

 

Liberal Party, said the last time this particular act was amended in the House. He said, 

 

I am extremely suspicious when a government, in a very sanctimonious way as this government does, we 

are going to put limits — but the limits are on whom? They are on the opposition because there is literally 

no limit on the number of civil servants who will be plodding around Sutherland from now until the by-

election is called and until that election is held. There is no limit on the mail-outs. Ministers will find that 

it is incumbent on themselves to suddenly mail out, and Sutherland will be the target for a great many of 

these mail-outs. There is no limit on that — they have the public purse. 

 

This leads me to the point that I am going to ask the Attorney General to consider — this very article and this 

very document of the Chief Electoral Officer, that she brings those two things very clearly to the attention of 

Saskatchewan into the House. 

 

Look at page 10. "I talked to Mr. Lowell Monkhouse (and I am quoting again) General Manager of Struthers 

Advertising on Wednesday, December 28, 1977, regarding the invoice deleted from the Return". Of course 

the invoice was the strange and sudden letter of the Premier of Saskatchewan to every voter in the Pelly 

constituency. He has never written a letter to the voters in Indian Head-Wolseley; he never wrote a letter to 

the voters in Milestone. Is there anybody in the opposition that the Premier bothered to write a letter to? 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— . . , Lakeview, in the by-election. 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— Oh Lakeview in the by-election. Pardon me. But that particular mail-out and the 

costs of that mail-out were deleted, just as Mr. Steuart said they would be. They were deleted from the 

election expenses. Now, Mr. Speaker, on page 14, the most interesting one . . , Inaudible interjection . . , we 

are talking about expenses, we are not talking about who paid them. Now, Mr. Speaker, on page 14, the 

second thing — Mr. Steuart talked about civil servants. Here is what the Chief Electoral Officer says about 

Pelly: 

 

Mr. Knight indicated that they have no record of the contribution of $1,500 from a Mr. Alex Leis of 

Runnymede. The amount shown on the voucher for the Duck Mountain Motor Hotel was the amount 

deemed not to be the normal expenditures of the party or its staff. Therefore, the amount shown on the 

return for $422.60 is accurate. Executive Assistants and civil servants volunteered their time during the 

election campaign and executive assistants and civil servants did not act as scrutineers on that polling day. 

 

Wasn’t that nice of them, not to have as scrutineers, civil servants from the city of Regina acting as 

scrutineers in Pelly by-election on election day! 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, what that Election Expenses Act has done, has made it possible for the 

government of the day to utilize executive assistants or a political machine that is fostered and nurtured by 

the taxpayers’ money and paid for with the taxpayers’ money to perpetuate their own existence. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is first of all, what we are speaking of, executive assistants. Now, let’s talk about civil servants. 

You know, the funny thing, Mr. Speaker, is that if that happened in Ottawa there would be a revolution by 

the national press that would drive the government of the day out of office, if they were to use the taxpayers’ 

money and civil servants and executive assistants to campaign on a door-to-door basis for weeks and days 

and days on end in a 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

554 

 

by-election in any part of the country. 

 

Ralph Goodale, the member of Parliament, used a telex machine to send a press release and was severely 

criticized right across the nation. Mr. Speaker, I say to you, that The Election Expenses Act is a deliberate 

attempt by the government of the day to perpetuate their own existence by limiting the expenses of the 

opposition and making it possible for them to expend all kinds of money of a different kind and a different 

type. 

 

Let me give you an example. When that act was first brought in, I brought up the question of personal 

services, how the National Act defines personal services and people are charged for it. Oh no, the NDP said, 

we won’t include personal services. How many thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars of 

personal services of the NDP were put into the Pelly by-election and other by-elections? Union workers from 

across this nation can come in; the union can pay for their time and their salary, gas, hotel and meals. You do 

that for a month at maybe $2,000 or $3,000, with no exaggeration, just for one man. Mr. Speaker, that was 

eliminated. Mr. Speaker, that is the major reason why the NDP has refused to prosecute. What is really even 

more astounding about this report, and I want to talk about that, how in heaven’s name, when the 

Conservative Party was accused by members of the press of submitting a false statement — or a false 

election return — how would the Attorney General of the day ask the Chief Electoral Officer, who has no 

investigative responsibility or authority, to do the investigation? When she does investigate and call the 

president of the Liberal Party before her, he has no legal responsibility even to reply. He can lie, he can say 

what he likes and she can do absolutely nothing about it. That’s some investigation; that’s some 

investigation. Despite that, Mr. Speaker, despite that, this young lady, and to her credit, makes some very 

specific accusations in this document, very specific. I could go through some of them if you wanted, the 

lumber Conservatives on page 16, the Liberals on page, I think it’s 7 and 8; anybody can read them and I’m 

not trying to white wash any political party. I’m just saying that in 1971 we told the NDP that they would 

make crooks out of every political party in Saskatchewan because their terms and their expenses were 

unrealistic and dishonest. Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what has occurred. Mr. Speaker, after the Chief 

Electoral Officer goes to the thing and makes this kind of a report with specific accusations, specific ones, 

then the NDP turn around and the Attorney General, the man responsible for the upholding of justice in 

Saskatchewan, says, no, I will not prosecute. And I’m going to tell you something, Mr. Minister, during the 

next by-election, if there’s two held, there may be two held when my two colleagues get elected in the fall, 

it’s going to be very difficult for you to insist on those constituency organizations to abide by the law when 

the Attorney General of the province of Saskatchewan has ignored the law. Very difficult. Very difficult 

indeed, Mr. Speaker. I want to say some other things and I would like to have some other debate on this and I 

hope that every member will get into this and that everybody on this side and you know because I don’t think 

that The Election Expenses Act of this province is the personal prerogative of the member for Biggar and 

that’s what it’s been and of the Attorney General. Can you imagine any Election Expenses Act in the 

Dominion of Canada or any democratic country being controlled strictly by the government? Can you 

imagine that? Can you imagine in Ottawa what all the political parties would say — the howl of Tommy 

Douglas, Mr. Broadbent, Mr. Benjamin, Mr. Nystrom and Stanley Knowles, that old vicar of parliament — 

if the Liberal Government said, oh no we would will have a little committee in the back room of our political 

cabinet ministers, like the member for Biggar and the Attorney General and we will decide how this Election 

Expenses Act will be written . . , interjection . . , what will the terms of office be? No, no, everybody knows 

that the Premier has removed all of your responsibilities, my goodness, you never even speak in the House 

any more and yet you’re one of the very 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

555 

 

capable ministers because you don’t have political responsibilities anymore. So that’s the reason you have. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask yea, if it wasn’t for this debate, he wouldn’t even be here. Yea, he wouldn’t 

even be here if it wasn’t for this debate. And it would be interesting to hear, Mr. Speaker, you know what 

he’ll do, he’ll go back over all that gerrymander of the Liberals, you remember back in 1969 and they moved 

the boundaries for the old Minister of Environment there and oh, I remember my, that zig zag line was an 

interesting one, I had to approve, I was even on the committee. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they presented themselves to the people of Saskatchewan as the sanctimonious saviour of 

honesty in electioneering. That is how they attempted to present themselves to the people of Saskatchewan 

and I say there has never been a more dishonest by-election statement of election returns filed anywhere 

perhaps in Canada than the Pelly by-election the NDP completes to ignore them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to have a lot more to say because I do have the opportunity of winding up the debate 

and am very interested in hearing what the others have to say, but I do want to say that I am throwing out two 

suggestions to the government. Number one is a full judicial inquiry into the Pelly by-election with full 

investigative powers so that the truth can come out and the fallaciousness and the hypocrisy of this Election 

Expenses Act is put forward and because the judge, if its an honest judge, will comment and the terms of 

reference should include the total spending, the total spending that was involved in the Pelly by-election, the 

total spending and show what kind of an Election Expenses Act we have in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the second, Mr. Speaker, the second thing that we should do is to inform the government in no 

uncertain terms that we and the opposition and the people of Saskatchewan will not tolerate the government 

of the day bringing forth more amendments to plug the small loopholes that they see in The Election 

Expenses Act in this session of the Legislature. And if they want to have a reform of the Election Expenses 

Act, they want to have a honest and sincere one, then let’s have a three party committee, a legislative 

committee set up throughout the summer, with an independent judge as Chairman if you like, and let them 

investigate the report of the judicial inquiry and judiciously and honestly with some integrity come up with 

recommendations for an Election Expenses Act that can be a model for Canada, that isn’t a farce, that isn’t 

designed to help the NDP, that isn’t designed to limit and strangle the opposition and that isn’t designed in 

such a way that political parties will have no alternative but to be dishonest. Because to suggest that for 

$20,000 you would have to pay for a TV market that involved 20 or 30 constituencies, it is time that some 

realistic and honest limits on spending are placed before the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the two things that I recommend. I urge the government to look at them carefully, I ask 

the Attorney General to respond to both of them, I ask them to hold back the amendments to The Election 

Act. We have another year and a half to go before a provincial election unless you want to spring one. You 

will have lots of time next fall and next winter to pass those amendments to the election expenses and plug 

the loopholes that are so apparent. But at the same time we can come up with an Election Expenses Act or an 

Election Act that the people of Canada can be proud of and that would be a three party operation and not just 

a one party deal like a one party state. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move the resolution. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— Mr. Speaker, as the seconder of the resolution 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

556 

 

and as a member who has taken a particular interest in this matter, I want to speak to the resolution briefly. 

 

I take no relish in a debate of this variety as I am sure no other members of the House do either, because 

essentially what we have under debate is a breach of the law, in the province, by each of three political 

parties. There can be no credit really in this situation to anyone with one or two rather small exceptions. I 

have said in the House before and I repeat that the Liberal Party overexpended its limit and there is no proper 

justification for that. The law was there before, like it was before everybody else, and it ignored it. For that 

there is no proper justification. What one can say is at least it was candid and honest in admitting that it had 

overexpended. 

 

I think the attitude that was abroad in Pelly, and it is an attitude that is still abroad in the political parties and 

in the politics of this province, is the thing that we have to get at. It is an attitude which is reflected as we see 

every day of the extensive government advertising that is now underway in the province. Every morning 

when you turn on your radio, or you pick up your newspaper, or turn on the television you see extensive and 

expensive advertising by the government of the day. For what purpose? For the same purpose to perpetuate 

itself in office. It is that kind of attitude that we have to get at in respect to this debate and in respect to the 

politics in this province. 

 

The government knows full well that it has some problems, politically, on its hands. It has had them now for 

some months. Maybe 65 per cent or 70 per cent of the electorate in this province at the moment is not 

prepared to support the government. It is being challenged by the Liberals, it is being challenged by the 

Conservatives and it knows it. That’s what accounts for the fact that we are seeing a flood of government 

advertising of the kind we have never witnessed before. That is the kind of attitude, which is so very wrong 

and that is the kind of attitude that was so prevalent in the entire Pelly by-election. 

 

When you look, Mr. Speaker, at the question here, it isn’t so much what happened in detail in Pelly past. The 

question here, the more essential one is whether or not there was a proper administration of justice in the 

province and whether we are going to have the proper administration of justice in the province in the future 

with respect to this and similar matters. 

 

The investigation that was here conducted by Carol Bryant was totally and completely inadequate. She was 

faced, and freely acknowledges that she was faced with each of the three political parties filing less than 

adequate returns under The Elections Act. In the case of the Liberal Party — a clear overexpenditure. 

 

MR. MESSER:— A blatant disregard for the law. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— No question; no justification for it — overexpended by a large measure. The 

Conservative Party return which showed spending under the limit but accompanied by no receipts with 

respect to two or three vital expenditures and receipts which she was never able to obtain, despite having 

been assured by the people that she would have those receipts. But nonetheless, an oral indication from 

persons from whom the Conservative Party ordered material indicating that they had spent substantially 

more than what had been indicated in the return. 

 

The New Democratic Party filed again, a most interesting return and, as members know, had no right 

to begin with, in filing an amended return — a second return. It had no right 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

557 

 

 to amend its return in the first instance. All kinds of interesting little things there — juggling out $1,500 of 

expenditure here, taking it out of the return, inserting something else in the return, adding this and removing 

that — in effect, filing a new return which it had no right to file. 

 

One of the aspects, if the Chief Electoral Officer was to investigate, was the allegation that someone in 

Runnymede by the name of Mr. Laize or Lize had made a donation to the NDP of $1,500 which had not 

been reported and had not been disclosed. That in itself, if accurate would be a major offence under this act. 

How did she investigate it? Did she go to this gentleman? Did she even telephone him? Did she go to him 

and say, did you make that donation? No, she didn’t. Did she ask for his bank records? No, she didn’t. Did 

she ask for his checking records? No. Did she ask for the records of the NDP? No. What did she do? She 

went to Bill Knight, her old friend, Bill Knight and said, what is this donation of $1,500 — did you know 

anything about it? He said, oh no we have no record of it. That was the investigation and on that basis he 

received total absolution. That was the extent of that investigation. 

 

Then there is an item of an expense account in the Duck Lake Motor Hotel. The return shows some $400 

spent. There is a suggestion by the president of the Conservative Party that it was more like $1,500. Again, if 

the allegation was true it would be the suppression of an expenditure of $1,100 $1,100 under the act, which 

would be a major offense. What was the investigation? What was it? It was virtually non-existent. Did she 

go to the executive assistants with respect to whose expenses the allegation was made and ask them about it? 

No. Did she go to the civil servants that were mentioned and ask them? No. Did she go to the Premier, 

whom she answers to in her responsibilities as the Chief Electoral Officer and say, here, Mr. Premier, I want 

information on what executive assistants and what civil servants these were, and who was paying them 

during the period, what are their expenses and why weren’t they disclosed? No, she didn’t do any of that. 

What did she do? She talked to Bill Knight, her old friend, Bill Knight. Then there’s the matter of Struthers 

Advertising Agency and an expense there. What does she do in respect to the allegation that was made there? 

She goes to Lowell Monkhouse, the manager of Struthers, her old friend . . , Lowell Monkhouse asks about 

that and gets an explanation. That was the extent of the inquiry there. 

 

One of the things that emerges among all the other questions here is this one. It’s almost sort of an 

incestuous relationship that has developed between people in the party and people in government. Who are 

the actors in the piece? Carol Bryant, number one. Who is Carol Bryant? She’s an activist in the NDP Party, 

came up through its ranks. And I don’t make any condemnation for that fact. But she rises ultimately to 

become the Chief Electoral Officer. Whom is she dealing with? She’s dealing with Lowell Monkhouse. Who 

is he again? Another party activist who rose through the government ranks, minister’s assistant; ultimately 

got to be the manager of Struthers Advertising firm which is, as all members know, is the firm that now does 

the government’s advertising. Bill Knight, well known, and again I say this with no condemnation of him. 

But an active member of the NDP Party and a very effective one, a former government employee. Former 

NDP member of Parliament, now a candidate, secretary of the NDP Party. Whom does Carol Bryant go to? 

When she doesn’t go to Lowell Monkhouse, her old friend, she goes to Bill Knight, her old friend. 

 

Then we see disclosed as well again, Service Printers arising. Service Printers. A printing party which we all 

know and have known for a long time and which for some reason or another has never embarrassed the NDP 

Party into doing something right about that. A printing company owned by the government; a printing 

company which 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

558 

 

does the NDP Party’s printing. And again, the question of Service Printer’s expenditure arises here. There’s 

the company owed by the NDP Party doing the NDP Party’s printing in the by-election, all the while doing 

the government printing at taxpayers’ expense as well. The Attorney General, a power in his party as deputy 

leader, aspirant for the leadership of the party — known to us all as a political activist and a very effective 

one in his party. Charged though, as well, with the responsibility of the function and the office of the 

Attorney General in the province, an issue that we have long said, those offices are not compatible because 

the Office of the Attorney General has to be exercised in the absence of political considerations and how 

difficult it is for an Attorney General, who is so active within his political party, to make decisions stripped 

of political consideration. It’s again something that that government ought to be giving its attention to and 

here again is another example rising to the surface of an Attorney General who has to be concerned about his 

party on the one hand and the proper administration of the other when his party is involved. If there is the 

improper administration of justice here, I don’t know with certainty, but I know it has every appearance of 

the improper administration of justice and as the Attorney General will recognize, that’s as important as the 

reality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON:— The ones here, Mr. Speaker, to make the point of a totally inadequate investigation, 

ought to be clear to all members if they have taken the time to read the report. My colleague has asked, why 

in those circumstances was the investigation so incomplete? What embarrassment was the government 

sustaining or about to sustain, the question a lot of people ask, resulted in the non-investigation. That’s the 

dilemma the government is in with respect to this question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the universal symbol of justice, as all members will know, is a clothed lady holding in her hand 

a finely tuned scale, the balance scale, and is blindfolded. Why is she blindfolded? She is blindfolded to 

reinforce the notion that has been with us ever since we adopted the British system of justice and that is that 

in the administration of justice there is no room for extraneous consideration, such as political considerations 

to enter into the decision making. That is why she is blindfolded, blindfolded to reinforce the point that she 

cannot see, matters of prejudice or issues of political consideration, color, creed and so on. She is to be 

blinded from all that. The question here is whether in this situation we had a blindfolded lady of justice 

administering justice here because it has every appearance that the blindfold being off, and the eyes of the 

lady shifting around from side to side to see what embarrassment there might be here for the government or 

what political consideration should apply here or what political personality was involved on this side. That is 

the kind of justice which I don’t want to see in our province and I am sure most others don’t either. 

 

Then was does Attorney General say as to why there is no follow-up investigation despite these sentences 

taken from his own department’s report and I read them, three of them. The Bryant Report is not clear and if 

we were to further pursue this matter, further investigation would have to be done to pin down what hard 

evidence there was to sustain a prosecution. And he goes on to say, a second reference, the next allegation 

relates to an incomplete return pursuant to Section 202(j) related to Elections Expenses. There would have to 

be a substantial investigation to obtain hard evidence to sustain a prosecution for this alleged violation. Then 

again, a third reference, the last alleged breach of The Election Act is the allegation of an incomplete return 

pursuant to Section 201(c) of The Election Act. This has to do with the expenses and whether they should 

have been included in the return. Here again, to sustain a prosecution he says 



 

March 21, 1978 

 

559 

 

that we would need hard evidence and, therefore, further investigation. Three references to an allegation of 

the offence, three indications that further investigation was required, three times the further investigation was 

not undertaken by the Attorney General. Mr. Speaker, I see it’s shortly after 5:00 o’clock and accordingly, 

Mr. Speaker, I would call 5:00 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly adjourned until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 


