



















































Hansard: January 10, 1978


(1568) 1569 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

January 10, 1978 

 

EVENING SESSION 
 

Committee of the Whole Debate Continues on Bill 47 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! 

 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Messer: — Are you going to read something to us? 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I was going to read the whole thing. I was going to read the whole thing to you and 

then . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! Will the member proceed please. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — As soon as I finish the book, Mr. Chairman. I’m working it into line with section, 

subclause 18 or whatever. 

 

Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Interjection 

 

Mr. Merchant: — No, no, the hon. member knows that I would never get close to the Bible while 

speaking in this House. 

 

Mr. Chairman when we arose the minister was defending, if I can use that word, the fact that here we 

have an income tax act which I suggest is being dealt with differently from other taxing legislations of 

an income tax variety. Under the federal income tax legislation there is the right of the same 

administrative review that the minister describes — the same sort of thing that exists with the Board of 

Revenue Commissioners. After that there is a right of appeal on facts and law to an Income Tax Appeal 

Board. Following that there is a right of appeal on law alone to the Exchequer Court, now the federal 

court, and following that a further right of appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

The minister said repeatedly, well, what used to be simple little candy appeals to the Board of Revenue 

Commissioners and we’re adjusted to that and that is what we should continue to do. Well of course 

we’re adjusted to it. Any system that is simple is easy to get used to. The question is whether it’s fair 

and whether it really provides an adequate appeal, and I suggest to you that it doesn’t. 

 

Then the minister said, well when there was an income tax appeal, because that is different from an E & 

H tax appeal or some of the other appeals, when there was an income tax appeal the Board of Revenue 

Commissioners heard those appeals then, and therefore, Mr. Chairman, he said, that means that doing it 

this way now would be a fair way to do it on this income tax. Well, Mr. Chairman, it is true that when 

we had a provincial income tax law as opposed to an income tax law that is a part of the federal 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1570 

 

act, under the Treasury legislation we had a Board of Revenue commissioners and the Board of Revenue 

Commissioners dealt with this kind of legislation, but Mr. Chairman, because they were dealing with an 

income tax matter, section 41 said that ‘an appeal shall lie with the judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench 

from the decision of the board’. In other words at that time, the minister when we rose, hung his hat on 

the fact that there used to be appeals to the Board of Revenue Commissioners. At that time there was, 

following that, an appeal to the Court of Queen’s Bench on a question of law, (granted, I’m not arguing 

with that) arising in an appeal from a hearing before the Board of Revenue Commissioners. That is 

exactly the same kind of amendment that we propose in the amendment to section no. 18 (3). The 

legislation then, and this is old CCF legislation, Mr. Chairman, and I know that the NDP is a lot 

different from the old CCF and perhaps a little more prepared to tread on people’s rights as individuals 

than the old CCF, and a little less interested in individual rights than the old CCF but it gives some 

guidance to members. The old CCF, their legislation was that they were going to protect people, and 

they give some review to the Court of Queen’s Bench, the King’s Bench as it then was. Exactly the 

same kinds of legislation were embodied then as the next amendment which gives the right to 

cross-examination and so on and the same sorts of things that are suggested in the next bit of legislation. 

So again, I simply say to the minister, if you want your legislation and your appeal to be viewed as fair 

and a legitimate appeal rather than an appearance of appeal, then I ask you to consider passing the 

amendment to section 18 (3) which would put us on exactly the same base that there was when the 

Board of Revenue Commissioners last operated on income tax. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Section 18 of the printed bill, the amendment by the hon. house leader, amends 

section 18 of the printed bill by striking out 1977 in the second line of (3) and substituting 1978. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Amendment to section 18 (5) amends by striking out the words ‘but this subsection does not apply to the 

minister or to any officer or servant of the Crown other than the assessor, an assistant assessor or a 

special assessor’ and substituting the following: 

 

and this subsection applies to the minister, any officer or servant of the Crown including the assessor, 

an assistant assessor or a special assessor. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, are you going to eliminate section 18 (4) or are you going to go back to 

section 18 (4)? You are not doing it that way — section 18 all together. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — We are doing the amendments as they are presented to us. We will go back to 

section 18 (4). 

 

Mr. Collver: — You’re doing amendments first. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, I move the amendment that was previously submitted. Again this is 

different from the other two arguments. The first argument members will recall was whether there 

should be an administrative review or a legal and factual review. the government says, no, we want the 

most narrow review we can get. The second argument is whether there should be an appeal from that 

narrow review, an appeal to what one might expect would be a less bias group of people than 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1571 

 

the potentially biased Board of Revenue Commissioners. Again, the government says no, we don’t want 

to go beyond what could be a prebiased Board of Revenue Commissioners, we don’t want BPO going 

outside of our own shop where we have got control of the appointments and people are there for a month 

or two and we can appoint them and fire them and they’ll do as they are told. They don’t want it to go 

outside of that. 

 

Now this last amendment says, well, at least when they come before this potentially very biased 

commission, this board, this in-house little group who will get together and decide whatever they want 

to decide or whatever the minister wants to decide — at least the last amendments says, put people on all 

fours, put people as equals. If the company has to disclose all sorts of information, make the government 

disclose the same sorts of information. Members will know in any kind of litigation everybody is treated 

fairly. If one lawyer can question the other, the other lawyer can question. If one has to disclose 

documents and information, the other lawyer has to disclose documents and information. This 

legislation says that the companies, before they have this so-called fair appeal to the so-called fair Board 

of Revenue Commissioners, the companies are to disclose everything but the government disclosed 

nothing. The government will be coming before the Board of Revenue Commissioners almost as a 

litigant trying to substantiate the position that they took. 

 

Now again I say to the minister, if you want the legislation to be judged at all fairly, if you want people 

to believe that this is an appeal of substance, an appeal in fairness and not just the appearance of an 

appeal, then you would have passed the last two amendments but certainly you would pass this 

amendment which is the least onerous to the amendment. All it says is surely both sides will be treated 

in the same way before this “fair” Board of Revenue Commissioners’ hearing. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I am going to urge the members of the committee to reject this 

amendment as well. As I have been saying to the House, the administration and the enforcement of this 

act is given to the assessor or any assistant assessor or special assessor or assessors that may be 

appointed. That’s where the administration and the enforcement of the act is given. They are the people 

who are going to be making the decisions. Thus I can’t see any reason why any other officer or servant 

of the Crown should have to be examined in any appeal or in any action under this act since it is the 

assessor and his people who are likely to have all the knowledge and all the relevant information which 

is relevant to the taxpayer. That’s what we are talking about, the rules of the Court of Queen’s Bench 

regarding the attendance of examination and production of documents supplied to any appeal under the 

act or to another action brought under the act. That’s what we are talking about here and we are deciding 

to whom those examination of discovery rules and production of document rules apply. 

 

Now, the member says that somehow we are doing something which is bad or something new. I remind 

the hon. member that the Ontario Mining Tax Act has a provision if not identical to this, very similar to 

this, exact provision and it is judicially approved, that case, that statute. I keep on saying over and over 

again and as a result I see no merit in the proposed amendment that the member for Wascana makes. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Attorney General in his room has had a chance to review 

the entire matter of the appeal procedure under this act going in the same fashion as a sales tax is going 

in the province of Saskatchewan and when in fact we do have another example and that is that of an 

income tax appeal procedure. I wonder if he has had a chance to examine that procedure in the light of 

this bill and the 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1572 

 

comments that he just made in being totally fair, so that the people should understand clearly the appeal 

procedure and the regulations that are going to be in the hands of an assessor as he says, who shall have 

the ability to decide, he says, and that’s it. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, indeed I have considered the matter we talked about just before 

adjournment for the dinner hour. As I was indicating to the member for Wascana just a few minutes 

before you came, I am not impressed with the suggestion that we should go on the federal income tax 

route. There is a mechanism for appeal set out in this bill. Now if the hon. Leader of the Conservative 

Party is saying that because this appeal mechanism does not track identically with the federal income tax 

appeal mechanism that as a consequence, because this bill is an income tax bill, it will be in jeopardy as 

being potentially not an income tax act, there is no relevance to that argument. My officials indicate that 

that is not how the courts will look at any test of this bill. The courts will look at whether or not it is a 

true direct tax within the legislative competence of the province of Saskatchewan. Now we do have a 

very good appeal procedure set out in this bill, through the Board of Revenue Commissioners and then 

subsequently to the Court of Queen’s Bench and the Court of Appeal. I think those are very extensive 

appeal mechanisms, indeed, I haven’t had as extensive an opportunity to look in real detail at the federal 

Income Tax Act but from my very general understanding of it, it is much better for our purposes in this 

situation than we could hope to get under the federal Income Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Attorney General could provide for this Assembly and 

the edification of everyone here the difference between a sales tax in the administration thereof and an 

income tax in the administration thereof? Does the Attorney General understand or believe that there is a 

difference in the means by which you can administer those two methods of taxation? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to get into the situation of whether they are 

administered differently or not. I am not so sure in many ways that they are but I don’t want to get into 

the details of that but I fail to see the relevance of that with respect to this particular section of this 

particular bill. The relevance of, surely, any kind of questioning which compares the sales tax with the 

income tax must go to the route of whether or not the bill is constitutional and that surely must be the 

test but methods of administration, the methods of appeal may be different, may be similar, that may 

only incidentally at best have any impact on a court in the case of a challenge in that court as to the 

constitutionality of the bill. In the essence of it the court will look at whether or not the tax is a direct 

tax, income tax, sales tax, whatever. The sales tax has been moved to be a direct tax. Income tax has 

been ruled to be a direct tax. The method of appeal, I think, is largely irrelevant. 

 

The member for Wascana doesn’t even argue that. The member for Wascana argues that the method of 

appeal is unfair. He says we should have a fairer mechanism. He doesn’t argue that because of the 

method of appeal set out it makes the bill unconstitutional, he says that it just isn’t fair and I don’t agree 

with him. But at least he doesn’t argue the constitutionality and I commend that to the Leader of the 

Conservative Party. The constitutionality namely whether or not the appeal mechanism is like E & H or 

whatever does not affect the constitutionality of the bill. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I, with deference to the member for Regina Wascana who I don’t think 

holds himself out to be a constitutional expert, mind you he may be, he certainly is more than I am and 

certainly the Attorney General is becoming a constitutional expert more than I am, but I would suggest 

to the Attorney General that in 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1573 

 

the past he has had difficulties with the courts in our country, with the constitutionality of legislation that 

he has put before this Legislature. The reason that he has had so is because of the kind of adamant stand 

that he is taking right now on a reasonable suggestion that might affect, he didn’t say that it wouldn’t 

affect, he said it probably won’t affect. I said to him earlier today, what is the matter with that kind of an 

appeal procedure? The member for Regina Wascana has suggested a problem with this particular appeal 

procedure. I may agree or disagree with the member for Regina Wascana as to whether this appeal 

procedure is reasonable or unreasonable. I am prepared to accept both your suggestion as a lawyer, Mr. 

Attorney General, and your suggestion as a lawyer, Mr. Member for Regina Wascana that the bill may 

or may not be a fair appeal procedure. As a non-lawyer I don’t see the difference between one fair 

appeal procedure and the other fair appeal procedure. 

 

What I do see, however, is a bill here that is labelled an income tax. It is purported to be by the 

government of Saskatchewan an income tax. And I see an Attorney General who is picking holus-bolus 

for what appears to be merely ‘ease’ reasons because it is easy, who is picking an appeal procedure out 

of a sales tax and stuffing it into an income tax and then saying it makes no difference to the 

constitutionality of this bill whether or not the appeal procedure applies to an income tax or to a sales 

tax. I suggest to the Attorney General that that may be wrong. If it is wrong, why jeopardize the 

constitutionality of the bill for an appeal procedure that the people already understand, that is already 

before the people in another jurisdiction and that you could follow in this bill that would be tailor-made 

for an income tax? Why not? That’s what I am asking the Attorney General. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Because, Mr. Chairman, there is absolutely no reason that has been advanced by 

anybody, neither the member for Wascana, nor yourself, which suggests that this appeal mechanism 

could threaten the constitutionality of the bill. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I thought that’s just what I said! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, but you acknowledged that you had no basis for it. 

 

Mr. Collver: — You said it too. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No. I am saying that this bill is untouched by the appeal mechanism. That’s my 

whole argument. Your argument is, well you may accept my argument but in case that it does, why 

don’t we go this federal income tax route. Well because there is no evidence of any need to have that 

kind of appeal mechanism in order to meet your argument which nobody in this House raises except you 

on this point. My point is, therefore, that there is no need for an appeal mechanism for those reasons. 

There might be on the question of whether it is fair or unfair. 

 

Mr. Collver: — So why not go with them both? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Because I don’t accept his because I think it is fair; I don’t accept yours because I 

think the bill is constitutional. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Therefore, Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan are supposed to accept the 

Attorney General’s sound, clear-cut, concise judgment on constitutional matters, based on his past 

performance as a constitutional expert with going right in the face of any advice whatsoever from this 

House and for no reason. He says he doesn’t know that it would be any different if we had an income tax 

appeal procedure here. He doesn’t believe that it would materially affect the bill. It would then be a 

tailor- 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1574 

 

made kind of an appeal procedure and the objections of the member for Regina Wascana would be met. 

He says to the people of Saskatchewan, I don’t agree with the member for Regina Wascana but he might 

have a point. I don’t agree with the member for Nipawin but he might have a point. No one else is 

advancing it but he might. I don’t really see any problem with the federal appeal procedure (or at least I 

am not prepared to tell this Assembly of any problem with it) but we are not going to go with it because 

this is the bill we are going to go with. That’s what you are saying to the people. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I only want to say one thing before I sit down, lest it be 

misinterpreted. I do not concede that the member for Nipawin or the member for Wascana has a point on 

either of these operations. I just want to make that absolutely clear. I just don’t agree with their 

propositions. 

 

Section 18 (5) negatived. 

 

Section 18 as amended agreed on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 25 
 

Thibault Robbins Faris 

Bowerman MacMurchy Tchorzewski 

Smishek Mostoway Shillington 

Romanow Banda Vickar 

Messer Whelan Skoberg 

Byers McNeill Johnson 

Kramer MacAuley Thompson 

Kowalchuk Feschuk Lusney 

Matsalla   

 

NAYS — 12 
 

Wiebe Anderson Collver 

Merchant McMillan Lane (Qu’Ap) 

MacDonald Nelson (As-Gr) Katzman 

Cameron Clifford Wipf 

 

Mr. Chairman: — It has been recommended to me that we revert back to section 8 I believe it is. By 

unanimous consent of the House I would like to revert back to section 8, which was agreed earlier today. 

Is that agreed? 

 

Unanimous consent given. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that there is a government amendment. I don’t know 

whether the minister would prefer to deal with my amendment before dealing with the government 

amendment or not. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1575 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I would like to inform the member that we have already dealt with the government 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — No. Am I correct in saying, Attorney General, there is a government amendment that 

is coming? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, another one. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — It is an additional amendment then Mr. Chairman. 

 

I ask the Attorney General whether the amendment that he proposes . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I will call this one. Amend section 8 of the printed bill (by the member for Wascana) 

by striking out the first five lines and substituting the following: 

 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, a deduction may be made for the tax payable by a 

person for a taxation year pursuant to subsection (1) of the section 3 in respect of any amount paid or 

payable by him in the taxation year, except any such amount paid or payable to the Crown under a 

Crown lease as on account of or in lieu of payment of or in. 

 

Does the member so move? 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I previously described Mr. Chairman, the purpose of this 

amendment to the Attorney General. As far as I can tell and the people advising me, including a number 

of lawyers, the way the legislation now works, it works a particular disadvantage to those people who 

paid without paying under protest, an amount of about $60 million to $80 million or so we are informed, 

a particular disadvantage to the small oil companies because the way the legislation now reads, they get 

to deduct as a deduction from income, taxes paid under Bill 42 while instead they should be allowed to 

take the taxes paid under Bill 42 as a tax credit against taxes due under Bill 47. The purpose of this is to 

allow for a tax credit allotment. I think if the Attorney General examines his current legislation and I 

have pointed it out to him and to the Minister of Mineral Resources, you’ll find that the way the law 

now works, a company ends up with taxable income under Bill 47 where if they had been under the 

same kind of income regime under Bill 42 they would not have had any taxable income deals. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll be moving a House amendment which more particularly deals 

with the point raised, for the purpose of clarification, to the point raised by the member for Regina South 

last night with respect to net royalty leases and the deductions of the net royalty leases from the . . . You 

will recall our debate on preproduction expenses, that royalty leases, I’ll be doing that in a moment after 

we dispose of the amendment proposed by the member here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we have here in very rough terms under section 8 is the following: Section 8 really 

means that any royalties other than those paid to the Crown can be deducted in the calculation of a 

taxpayer’s oil well income. Such royalties though, are taxable in the hands of the recipient under this act. 

Section 37 of course then is looked at. Section 37 provides an exemption to small freehold owners and 

farmers who 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1576 

 

receive royalty income. While these receipts are not taxable under this act, they are deductible from oil 

well income by the lessee. Now what the hon. member for Wascana is doing is making an amendment to 

this intent, section 8. This proposed amendment that the member for Wascana makes would make 

freehold royalties, that is to say, royalties paid other than to the Crown, this proposed amendment would 

make these freehold royalties deductible from tax otherwise payable rather than from the oil well 

income. Now, I don’t know whether or not the member intended this in the context of section 8 but I 

think that’s the consequence of it. As drafted in the bill, as I have explained, section 8 also provides for a 

flow through of revenue received by a taxpayer particularly an operator, then paid by him to another 

taxpayer in the form of a freehold royalty, namely, as a landowner’s royalty or as a gross overriding 

royalty. In computing his oil well income under this section the royalty payer is allowed to deduct the 

amount of the royalty that he pays in determining the income deduction; revenues minus deductions 

determines the income. In effect to offset the inclusion in his income represented by the revenue that he 

received and that he put straight through on the flow through. The recipient of that royalty, however, 

must include it in his oil well income unless, under section 37 he’s a 1280 acre or less landowner. He 

must include that under those circumstances to that the tax is fairly distributed between the royalty payer 

and the royalty receiver in accordance with their respective beneficial entitlements with respect to the 

well and to the revenue from the well. 

 

Now, if this proposed amendment were accepted, the proposed amendment by the member for Wascana, 

in the light of this explanation, what it would mean is that the royalty payer could deduct the amount of 

the freehold royalties paid by him from his tax, not just from his oil well income. In effect then, tax 

dollars that properly should be going to the government would be going to the recipients of the private 

freehold royalties. In fact, taken to its logical conclusion, I suppose, this amendment could mean that 

taxpayers could rearrange their affairs to pay enough of their oil well income out in the form of royalties 

to reduce their tax to nil, conceivably, with the recipients doing likewise all the way down the chain. 

Conceivably then, no tax could be collected under this act. So, for those reasons, because I think that we 

do not intend that here, the amendment made by the member for Wascana is really misplaced and should 

be defeated. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, let me say this to the Attorney General. As I look at the amendment, I 

believe that the effect is the effect as you describe it. How do you get around the problem of substance 

as it now exists? The wording was designed to avoid using the name of Bill 42 . . . well not Bill 42 as 

such, but was designed to avoid using taxes paid pursuant to that legislation because of the colorability 

problem. How do you get around the substance of the legislation as it now exists and that is this: Let’s 

take a company that earns $1,000. Under Bill 42 they earned $1,000. They had administrative expenses 

and so on of $200. They were left with $800. Under Bill 42 you taxed them $700 and they were left with 

$100 in profit. They could keep the $100. Now under Bill 47 that same company will be recomputing 

their tax for the same year. They earned $1,000. They paid $200 in administration and you will give 

them a credit . . . well, not a credit quite, but you will allow them a further exemption of $700, an 

exemption because they paid the $700 under Bill 42. They will be left with $100 and that $100 is going 

to be taxable. The problem with your current legislation is that you should be giving them a tax credit 

for the $700 and instead you are giving them a tax exemption for the $700. It’s a serious fault with the 

legislation and it’s a fault that you are going to have to correct. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, I think the hon. member has misconstrued the argument here. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1577 

 

First of all, and I don’t want to get into this, but he misconceives the nature of what Bill 42 was because 

in effect he describes in his example company A earns $1,000 less $200 in expenses, equals $800, in 

income tax $700, so he’s computing that as an income tax. Obviously Bill 42 as the Supreme Court told 

us in the decision, was not an income tax, is not an income tax. Of course then his argument flows from 

that. I think the assumption, having been a faulty assumption it’s difficult to apply, that’s point number 

one. 

 

Point number two, where the member says, how do we give credit for this $700 which has been 

collected under this bill, Bill 42, the amount collected under Bill 42, how do we give credit for that 

under this amount? We have taken the position throughout the piece, I think I went through this last 

night at some length with the member for Regina South, Bill 47 is a new bill. We in Bill 47 do not relate 

to Bill 42, there is no mechanism for Bill 42 because this is a new bill. This is an income tax bill unlike 

Bill 42. There is a tax which will be imposed according to the various sections of Bill 47 under this 

particular statute from January 1, 1974 to whenever perspectively there’s an amount owing, period. 

That’s the simple fact of the matter. 

 

Now, the member for Regina South yesterday was saying, well what happens under Bill 47 if there’s a 

company that’s paid X dollars under the November 1, 1976 royalties under The Mineral Resources Act. 

What happens? Well there is an offset or an adjustment provision which is allowed, I think it’s section 

12 where he dealt with that part of the section. Then the member proceeds further and he asks, what 

happens under Bill 42, under these kinds of . . . what do you intend to do with Bill 42 vis-à-vis Bill 47 

and my answer (and we went through this round and round last night) was look it, Bill 47 is a tax. He 

says, yes, but what happens if you pay it under Bill 42? What is your position? I said, my position is we 

would tend to honor any legal obligations that we have, we tend to discuss and consult with the industry 

with respect to this operation. So if the amendment is predicated on the assumption that somehow there 

has to be a statutory base to tie Bill 47 into Bill 42 in order to make sure there is no double taxation and 

the like, is making a wrong assumption. These are two independent streams of taxation which will, in 

consultation, presumably, because it is not our intention to double tax (we went through this last night 

with the member for Regina South), our intent will, through administrative and other detail, iron itself 

out I hope. 

 

Now coming back to section 8, section 8 and section 12 are the two sections which are relevant for our 

discussion right now. Under section 8 as I tried to explain and as I understand the bill, what we are doing 

here is allowing (actually it is not quite what I am going to say because section 7 does this) but we are 

really talking about kind of a deduction from revenue to determine taxable income, if I can put it that 

way. That’s what we are talking about. And we are saying that if I have gotten royalties which as a flow 

through go straight through to somebody else, I paid them to somebody else. I must record that which I 

have received and, therefore, I don’t get paid because it is a simple flow through, but it keeps the 

integrity and the wholeness of the tax and the income in place. That’s what we are doing under section 

8. Where I say you have misconceived your amendment, with all due respect, is that somehow you are 

viewing that legally we are trying to hook right on to Bill 42, or that we should be hooking onto Bill 42. 

We went through this last night at length. We say that these are two different streams. With respect to 

the offsets for other taxes paid under other legitimate operations well there are other provisions then in 

section 12 that look after that. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1578 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Is the committee ready for the question? The question before the House is to amend 

section 8 of the printed bill, that: 

 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, a deduction may be made from the tax payable by 

persons for a taxation year pursuant to subsection (1) of section 3 in respect of any amount paid or 

payable by him in the taxation year, (except any such amount paid or payable to the Crown under a 

Crown lease) as, on account of or in lieu of payment of, or in. 

 

Amendment to section 8 of the printed bill negatived. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have a new amendment which is not on your list of government 

amendments and this is as a result of the point raised by the member for Regina South, dealing with 

section 8. I would like to send a copy over to the member for Regina South if I can and then I will table 

this amendment the moment that I have read it, with you, Mr. Chairman. In fact, I will give Mr. 

Chairman a copy now, one for Mr. Cameron and one to the Chairman. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the member for Regina South last night raised a good point relating to the net 

royalty leases. You will recall this was I think the one point in the discussion of this bill which 

determined a good issue which, after consultation with my officials overnight and today, I feel needs 

some further clarification. 

 

What I did ask the officials to do after the point raised by Mr. Cameron, by the Liberals, on net royalty 

leases, was I asked the officials of DMR on behalf of myself and the minister of DMR to get in contact 

with certain net royalty leaseholders this morning, which they did. And I am advised that the 

interpretation of the relevant sections, by these certain net royalty leaseholders that were contacted, were 

such as to agree with that of the government as we tried to explain it last night — you will recall bonus 

bids and likening it to bonus bids. It was nevertheless felt that the point raised by the member for Regina 

south needed clarification and that this amendment which I have provided should be made. 

 

Now the amendment will read as follows, Mr. Chairman: 

 

Amend section 8 of the printed bill by renumbering the section as subsection (1) of the section and; (b) 

adding the following subsection (2): 

 

Notwithstanding section 4 (1) of section 7 and subsection (1) of this section, in determining the oil 

well income of a taxpayer for a taxation year, a deduction may be made in respect of any amount paid 

or payable by him to the Crown in the taxation year, as, on account of or in lieu of payment of, or in 

satisfaction of, any net royalty or farm out share payable under a net royalty lease or a farm out 

agreement, relating to an oil well or the production of oil therefrom, or the output thereof, but 

notwithstanding subsection (1) of section 12 such amount of net royalty or farm out share shall not be 

deductible from the tax, otherwise payable under this act. 

 

You will recall our interpretation last night that under section 7 (2)(c) preproduction expenses probably 

would look after this point and the member for Regina South said, no, we were wrong. I think he has 

sufficient to merit the argument, especially after 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1579 

 

discussions this morning, we needed to clarify this. 

 

So, section 8 is amended as I have indicated in reading this, by adding subsection (2). 

 

Now what is the effect of this? This has the effect of allowing payments to the Crown under a net 

royalty lease or farm out agreement as an expense of doing business, much along the lines in my 

explanation to the member for Regina Wascana about the previous amendment, rather than as a tax 

credit or offset as is provided in section 12. The reason for this differentiation is of course, that a net 

royalty lease is a substitute, in our judgment, for a land acquisition and takes the form of kind of a 

payment to the Crown, working interest payment to the Crown. So it would seem to us that such 

payments should be treated in the same manner as working interest payments or land acquisition costs. 

We thought we could do it under preproduction expenses. Perhaps that’s not quite the way it should be. 

Therefore, it is not reasonable to allow them to be deducted from the tax payable in the same manner as 

say a royalty to the Crown, but something in the neighborhood of a working interest payment or a land 

acquisition cost namely in the case of a cost of doing business. I tried to explain that last night by 

comparing it to bonus bids and the like, but I say that this should clarify this point which was raised 

necessitating this amendment, raised by the member for Regina South on behalf of the Liberal caucus. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I so move this amendment. 

 

Amendment to section 8 agreed. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Then is the committee prepared to adopt section 8 as amended? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, I indicated to the Attorney General that last night, of course, I raised 

two points. One was the point he has now just dealt with. The other was I thought I had drawn from the 

matter in the course of time an admission insofar as Bill 47 applies retroactively to retain what he drew 

under Bill 42, it would be colorable and, therefore, unconstitutional. Now maybe he can address himself 

to that second minor point I raised with him in respect of which I thought I had an admission from him 

as well. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I do not admit. 

 

Section 8 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 11 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Section 11 of the printed bill, there is this amendment introduced by the member for 

Regina Wascana. It is: 

 

Amend section 11 of the printed bill by striking out 90 in the first line of subsection (1) and 

substituting 180. 

 

Does the member so move? 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I so move. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We’ve already amended it. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — What do you mean you have already amended? 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1580 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We amended. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — No you didn’t. 

 

I can’t honestly understand why you would say that. The past legislation deals with a number of years. 

The oil companies are faced with a massive problem in recomputing at their own expense all of the 

figures, recomputing all of the figures because of the error of this government, they’re told by the 

government that they’re not sure that the tax rates or the regulations will be in place at the time of 

proclamation and yet they’re asked to bring forth all of their information, file all of their information 

within 90 days and they’re not even guaranteed that they’ll have all the regulations within the 90 days. 

Some in the industry have been told it may take six months before all the regulations are in place. Now, 

what possible problem could there be in granting this amendment, an amendment that just brings it into 

line with the same 180 days that the industry will be given in every following year? In years to come the 

government conceives that it will take a 180 days to reasonably file the return but for some curious 

reason says that when you do four at a time you can do them in half the speed and, no doubt because 

you’re doing it for the first time and you’re not familiar with how it will work, you can do it in half the 

speed, half the time. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I have already dealt with this partly to meet the argument raised by the member for 

Wascana, by a House amendment which says the words added have already been agreed to by the 

House, so within such longer period as may be prescribed, I know that that might not totally satisfy the 

member; he’ll say look, I want it in black and white rather than leaving it to the discretion of the 

Cabinet. But I said the other night to the House that the industry itself in its review of this bill indicated 

that 180 days would be more realistic. That’s correct, but they said that provision for some sort of 

ministerial discretion to extend the period would be desirable and that was basically the thrust of the 

remarks and what we’ve done is given that kind of discretion there. It’s a compromise, it doesn’t go for 

the full 180 days. I probably would suspect we’d go 180 days and still have to have some sort of 

ministerial discretion if they didn’t make the 180 days on some odd possibility putting it to the extreme. 

Now, I say that this really should be looked after by the House amendment which has already been 

passed. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Is the Minister saying that you expect that probably you will be granting further time 

to the vast percentage of the industry? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I think the answer to that is yes, but I can’t, you know we need a little more time 

down the road to meet with some decision, but I would say yes to that. 

 

The amendment negatived 

 

Section 11 as amended agreed 

 

Sections 19 and 20 agreed 

 

Section 21 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Section 21 (1) and if I might read the amendment please. 

 

Amend section 21 (1) of the printed bill by striking out the first six lines and substituting the 

following: obtaining permission from a Judge of the Court of 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1581 

 

Queen’s Bench by ex parte application it shall be lawful during normal business hours for the assessor 

or any assistant assessor, or a special assessor, to enter upon the premises of a taxpayer, for the 

purpose of making inquiries, obtaining information, and otherwise performing his duties under this act 

and he shall be: 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I move the amendment, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, section 21 as it now reads 

gives the assessor massive power, more power than is given to anyone under any law except the law that 

we give to narcotics officers acting with a rate of assistance and they’re pretty rare, in criminal 

prosecutions. Now, we say that it is not appropriate for the assessor to have the kind of power to just 

move in, in that way, and say that instead, before it should be possible for the assessor to move into 

somebody’s property, they should in the same way that you have to obtain an order for instance before 

you lay a wire tap, you would go to a Judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench ex parte, that means in 

private, the other side wouldn’t know and then you would be given the right to enter during normal 

business hours and do the things that are described in the amendment, to make the inquiries and to 

obtain the information in the manner described. The power given by section 21 is just too much power, 

it encourages abuse, it encourages the kind of abuse that we saw with the similar legislation that exists 

under certain of our mineral legislation where officials from the government can enter on the land, can 

perform tests, can do things of that nature. Members may remember that when that legislation was 

passed the government said, “Oh yes, but you’ve got to trust us we won’t do that.” The minister of 

Mineral Resources will also tell you that one of the more embarrassing things that has happened to the 

government is an inspector going on to a piece of property, doing some explosions, doing a few ground 

tests without permission, without even advising the company, that took place two or three years ago, 

they apologized to the company, it created quite a bit of problem within the industry. That’s the kind of 

absolute power that the government now takes unto itself under section 21 and we think that power is 

too great and move instead an application to a judge in the usual manner which would ordinarily take 

place in inquiries of that nature followed by the power that would be granted to the assessor. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again I’m going to ask the members of the House to defeat this 

amendment. Sorry to say that in so many of the cases I have to recommend that the Liberal amendments 

be defeated. But the effect of this amendment would be to require the assessor to obtain a court order, 

virtually, before he could perform any of his duties under this act, certainly a significant portion of his 

duties under this act. Now, Mr. Chairman, I say to the House that this is undesirable, it would be 

administratively awkward if not unworkable and would apply it would seem, even where, I would like 

the member for Wascana to consider this, even where the taxpayer has no objection in effect to the 

exercise of these kinds of powers. The amendment would restrict the assessor to entering the premises of 

a tax payer when it is likely that many of the taxpayers’ records, say accounting records may not be kept 

at his own premises. I say, Mr. Chairman, that section 21 does not give the assessor unrestricted powers 

or indiscriminate powers. All it does is require persons to give the assessors access to certain things and 

information that would be required for the purposes of the administration of the act and required for the 

assessor to do his assessment under the act. I stress, that if a person obstructs the assessor, the assessor 

must then go to court under another section, section 27, which must be read in conjunction with section 

21 in order to obtain a court order. He cannot proceed on his own without court authority to enforce the 

powers under section 21 (1) in any event. 

 

I close, Mr. Chairman, in also saying why this amendment should be defeated, by 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1582 

 

stating that this section has been judicially approved. This section is virtually a direct copy, there may be 

some odd word changes, but a direct copy from the Ontario Mining Tax Act, which was judicially 

approved by the Supreme Court of Canada, no less a body in the case and this is an exception which 

comes out to do this, so I’m saying that (1) because it’s been judicially approved, (2) because it’s got to 

be read in conjunction with section 27 whereby a court order needs to be obtained in certain cases, (3) 

because the acceptance of the amendment would unnecessarily tie the efficient administration and the 

workability of this act. For all of these reasons this amendment as stated by the member for Wascana 

should be defeated. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, the minister says that it was judicially approved and tries to leave the 

implication that the Supreme Court of Canada said that it was a fair and an appropriate way to deal with 

the industry. All the Nickel Rim Case said was that it was constitutional for the government of Ontario 

to pass that kind of legislation, just as it would be constitutional for this government to pass legislation 

taking away my house if they wanted to and the Supreme Court of Canada would approve that too 

because that would be constitutional, that’s a far cry from doing as the Attorney General does to imply 

that somehow a court said that this was a fair, reasonable, just way in which to deal with the industry. 

The Supreme Court of Canada certainly didn’t say that, they just said it is within the power of the 

government of Ontario to do what they have done. Well I’m not questioning the constitutionality of this 

section. I’m just saying that it is too much power to take unto yourselves. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I concede to the member for Regina Wascana that there was not, so 

far as I can recall, a specific section in the Nickel Rim case that said section 21 (1) hereby is officially 

approved. If I left that impression I retract that but that nevertheless only mitigates somewhat against the 

point that I make in rebuttal to the member for Regina Wascana is that this is not without precedent and 

that this statute was looked at, and the statute was challenged as unconstitutional, and I don’t know what 

lower levels brought other grounds, but presumably the plaintiffs in the Ontario Nickel Rim case felt 

that there was some legal grounds for this kind of an attack. If there was something contrary to natural 

justice or whatever, it would have been in there. My only point in raising it is that Nickel Rim approved 

the Ontario Mining Tax Act. When the member gets up and says, “Look, this is something which is 

done nowhere else and you are taking too much power, etc.,” he’s wrong. It has been done in Ontario. 

all right, he still says, “I don’t care if it’s done in Ontario or if it’s done in Saskatchewan.” He doesn’t 

like it either way. Fair pool, I understand that argument. I’m only saying to him then in response to that 

argument, for the reasons I have articulated, we still think there is a fairly clear circumscription of the 

powers and it does allow for a kind of administrative flexibility which I think it necessary under the act. 

I don’t know what else I can say in rebuttal to this particular section but I again repeat to the House that 

we should be voting ‘no’ on the amendment. 

 

Amendment to section 21 (1) negatived. 

 

Subsection 2, agreed. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — We have an amendment to section no. 21 by adding after subsection 3, the following 

subsection: 

 

(4) any assessor or assistant assessor or a special assessor who discloses information of a private or 

confidential nature acquired pursuant to this section by him where it is not necessary to do so for the 

purposes of this act, 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1583 

 

is guilty of an offence and is punishable pursuant to the provisions of section 30 of this act. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, before I discuss this amendment and its purpose I would like to 

comment just briefly on the attitude of the government in terms of dealing with the amendment and the 

sort of difference of opinion that existed within the Liberal caucus about the attitude of the government. 

 

Not long ago, it seems like a long time but some days ago at the press conference when we announced 

the amendments that are now before the House, my Leader, the member for Lakeview was asked, “Well, 

how do you expect the government will react to all of these amendments?” And he said, “They are 

pretty good amendments and we have put a lot of thought into them and they are valid and we rather 

hope that the government will listen and give them a fair view.” I thought and said actually at some later 

time that I thought that the government’s attitude would be a far more political attitude than that. I 

thought that what the government would do is they would deal with all of the amendments, and strike 

them all down as quickly as they could solely because the government would take the view that they 

already had their hands in the cookie jar over this legislation, they were already in trouble, they were 

already in trouble over this legislation. They were in trouble over Bill 42 and they would be darned if 

they were going to come into the House and now demonstrate by allowing some further amendments, 

the sloppy draftsmanship in bringing forth Bill 47. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, with those few conciliatory words, I want to move the further amendment to 

section 25. 

 

We have a law which says that if the assessor or people in his department disclose information, 

confidential information that they have acquired that they are told by the act not to disclose, if they 

disclose that information — and let’s bear in mind, Mr. Chairman, that we are not talking about small 

amounts of money here. It might be that the information that comes into the hands of the assessor’s 

office would be worth in the hands of a competitor, thousands, tens of thousands, perhaps millions of 

dollars. This is very, very crucial information; information that the assessor can get by going in and 

demanding further information. It is very important that that information not be passed from one 

competitor to the next. Now, the act says that the assessor is not to pass that information but imposes no 

penalty whatsoever for passing the information. If the assessor could only find himself passing the 

information in a deliberate way I suggest, and hence, Mr. Chairman, we believe that if the assessor 

passes that information which could be worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, some penalty other than 

possible dismissal from his position should be imposed and therefore the amendment that is proposed 

would saddle the assessor with the committal of an offence punishable under summary conviction. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I won’t rebut at length about the reason why we are rejecting 

the amendments, some of which would put this bill into doubtful constitutional status if we were to 

accept them, some which I think fall in the category of this proposed amendment, and that is, in my 

judgment it is simply not needed. 

 

I refer the members of the House to section 21, subsection (1) referring to the assessor’s right to get in 

and look at all the material. The very last four sentences or the last little bit there says that any 

information of a private or confidential nature acquired by him under the section shall not be 

communicated or disclosed to anyone except insofar as it is necessary to do so for the purposes of this 

act. It says, ‘shall not’. I 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1584 

 

presume that assessor is a person, and if you go into section 30, any person who contravenes a provision 

of this act, namely passes on of a private or confidential nature to anyone except where necessary in this 

act, I presume that is a contravention of the act because under that section it says you shall not do that. 

Assessor equals person, equals section 30. It seems to me that it is covered, therefore this amendment is 

not necessary. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Of course the Attorney General is aware that ‘person’ is defined in section 2 of the 

act. 

 

If that is the position of the government, I then ask the Attorney General why you would fear in some 

way the amendment that is proposed, an amendment that would make certain . . . of course the 

amendment says itself that it will then come under section 30. Why would you not make certain that the 

assessor comes within the ambit of the act? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well because, putting it shortly I think that its nature now, you don’t need to 

re-invent the wheel. 

 

Section 21 as amendment negatived. 

 

Section 21 agreed. 

 

Sections 22 to 24 agreed 

 

Section 25 as amended agreed 

 

Second amendment on section 25 negatived 

 

Sections 26 to 29 agreed 

 

Section 30 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Section 30 — offence and penalty and we have an amendment by the member for 

Regina Wascana: 

 

Strike out section 30 in the printed bill and renumber sections 31 to 43 in the printed bill as sections 30 

to 42 of the printed bill. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I so move. Again, Mr. Chairman that is a section which imposes criminal sanctions 

in addition to the criminal sanctions imposed by section 30, criminal sanctions that, to take the logic of 

the minister’s comments just a moment ago when he didn’t think that criminal sanctions were necessary 

against his assessor, criminal sanctions again against companies and criminal sanctions again that will 

operate against directors of companies who may not know what their subordinates have done. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What section 30, as amended, would do here if we accepted the amendment from the 

member for Wascana would be clear. Obviously any person contravening the act or any regulations 

would not be guilty of a summary conviction offence. That’s what he is doing, he is wiping out all of 

section 30. I would like to mildly just point out to the member for Wascana that I think it was in an 

earlier amendment that he proposed an amendment to section 30, not to wipe it out but to have the word 

‘willfully’ . . . 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1585 

 

Mr. Merchant: — No, later. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You are going to move that one a little later. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — When you vote this down. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Then comes willfully. O.K. then I apologize, actually not willfully but knowingly, I 

hope. But the point is, Mr. Chairman, still, speaking of the substance of the point, that is if we accept 

section 30, striking it out, we’ve got no penalty section. I say the government must have some 

mechanism whereby compliance of the act can be enforced. I think there is no reason to draw up a 

general penalty section such as this. I just simply argue that to knock this out would simply be to knock 

out any kind of a sanction and in some ways might render the bill meaningless with no way to enforce it. 

So, accordingly, Mr. Chairman, I urge the members of the House to vote, no, to this amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — We have another amendment: 

 

Amend section 30 of the printed bill by inserting after ‘who’ in the first line ‘knowingly’. 

 

Amendment agreed. 

 

Section 30 as amended agreed 

 

Sections 31 to 33 agreed 

 

Section 34 
 

Mr. Chairman: — We have an amendment by Mr. Merchant. 

 

Amend section 34 of the printed bill by striking out the first 19 lines. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I so move. I’m not going to strike out the whole section just the first 19 lines. Mr. 

Chairman, the effect of this section — it really is an amazing section. This section says . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order please! I understand the amendment is not altogether in order. The 19 lines, I 

understand, would be the complete clause. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — That’s right, that’s what it is supposed to do. It’s just a little colorful way to do that, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I understand you can’t move an amendment to do that, you can accomplish the same 

by defeating the section. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — All right, Mr. Chairman, I move that he’s right. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1586 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I declare the amendment is out of order. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — The purpose of the amendment as proposed, to strike out section 34, is that 34 is a 

section that says to the oil industry, if you do what everyone else can do, namely, you deal with your 

affairs in such a way as to pay the least tax necessary, then the government can come along and still 

impose additional taxation upon you because you have avoided tax. It doesn’t say that they can impose 

additional taxation upon you for doing something illegal or for dealing with your tax situation in some 

improper or inappropriate way. It simply says that if you do what all of us do, arrange our financial 

affairs to that we will pay the least tax necessary, if you do that under this oil tax legislation you are 

subject to the government imposing some kind of special penalty against you or whatever. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . lawyer . . . 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Well, then I say to the member as an analogy you probably buy something like a 

registered retirement savings plan. You put some money into that, you put money into a registered 

retirement savings plan and $2,500 because you are a member, that’s all you are entitled to put. If you 

do that, if you order your affairs so as to pay the least tax necessary, the government could, under this 

section if you did the similar kinds of things that the oil companies can do, they could come along and 

say, no, you’ll pay additional tax. If you own securities, for instance, and you as an individual had some 

securities that were down in value and you thought, well I’m going to sell them in January or February 

or November or December and you sold them on the last day of 1977 so that you would have a capital 

loss for 1977 and get a deduction from income tax, the government could come along and say, well you 

know, Mr. Member for Saskatoon Centre you deliberately did that to avoid paying some tax. It was legal 

what you did but you were trying to pay less tax than we think you should pay. Now, if you did that, you 

would be faced if there were this kind of section in the Income Tax Act with the government imposing a 

special tax against you. Now this cuts in two ways. First, a section like section 34 is unfair. We’re not 

talking about Shell or Imperial Oil. I’m talking about little operators, the Dave Surjiks of this world, the 

little operators in Regina. They earn a reasonable living, they’re professional people, Regina, Estevan, 

Swift current, they are all over the province. Those people have the right to order their affairs for the 

purposes of paying as little taxes as is necessary the same way I do, and I earn more than the gentleman I 

just named, in the business in which I am engaged and with the studies that I have taken to equip me to 

go into that field. Now, I’m not faced with this kind of section in the Income Tax Act and I say why are 

the oil tax operators all over the province to be faced with this kind section? 

 

Now, there’s another factor and that factor is that of the constitutional questions, one will be the 

colorability question, the other will be, is this an income tax? When they try to decide whether it’s an 

income tax the courts will look at the legislation and say, it’s part of the problem of deciding whether 

it’s an Income Tax Act, is it like ordinary income taxes and are there special deductions, are there 

special penalties imposed or does it work like ordinary income tax? This sort of a section really says it’s 

an arbitrary tax, it’s a tax that the government is going to sit down and decide how much people will 

pay. This kind of section will be used, mark my words, will be used as part of the proof that this 

legislation should fail because it is not in fact a legitimate income tax in the way that Mr. Justice Spence, 

who supported the government in the CIGOL case, described an income tax. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I move to delete section 34 from the act and renumber 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1587 

 

accordingly, seconded by the member for Shaunavon. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, the amendment before us moved by the member for Regina Wascana is to 

move to delete section 34 from the act and renumber accordingly. I move the amendment is out of order 

because he can accomplish the same by defeating this section as he does by deleting it and so, therefore, 

I rule the amendment out of order. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I thank you for the ruling. I just simply want to say in response to the member’s 

colorful words with respect to section 34, with all due respect to his argument, I think he’s 

misinterpreted section 34 because section 34 talks about improper avoidance. Section 34 comes from 

section 246 of the Income Act of Canada. It’s an income tax provision designed to avoid the kind of 

improper avoidance provisions which sometimes occur in taxation circumstances. When he cites 

Registered Retirement Savings Plans or capital losses in the sale of shares, all of these are allowable 

expenses. I’m sure the member for Qu’Appelle would agree with me on this and I’m sure everybody 

else, my friends to my right there and opposite, they would agree that that’s the case and those are all 

legal. Anything that is legal under the regulations of this act can be deducted, of course should be 

deducted and will be deducted. But anything which is an attempt to improperly avoid or reduce the 

payment of a tax, section 34 says no you can’t do that. And what the member wants is for the House to 

defeat section 34 thereby not giving the government any tool to fight improper avoidance and the result 

would be very much to cripple the impact of the bill. Again, the Liberals are at least consistent in this 

operation. Unlike the Tories who are sort of you know sitting there on the fence and keeping an ear to 

the ground on this one, but the Liberals want to see this bill crippled and defeated and this amendment 

falls or this motion falls within that operation. So, I urge very strongly to the members of this House to 

vote in favor of this section. 

 

Section 34 agreed as amended. 

 

Section 35 agreed. 

 

Section 36 
 

Mr. Chairman: — It’s moved by the member for Qu’Appelle and it reads 

 

Amend the printed bill by inserting after section 36 the following heading and section “Purpose of the 

Legislature” and then 37 the purpose and intent of the Legislature is to alleviate an extreme financial 

burden on the people of Saskatchewan and the provisions of this act are not intended to be used to 

interpret or construe any of the provisions of other income tax legislation as being retroactive in effect. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to make a few comments on this particular section that we 

are asking the government to add to this bill. There is some concern in the minds of many, especially 

those in the legal fraternity, that this bill as constituted and directed does not spell out specifically that 

the retroactive nature of this bill should not be applied and used as a precedent in other legislation and in 

other bills that apply to income taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. And what concerns the people of 

this province is the fact that the government of Saskatchewan might be considering an income tax, a 

retroactive income tax, for example, for the farmers of the province. A retroactive income tax for any 

member of professional people, a retroactive income tax 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1588 

 

for individual citizens. And we think, Mr. Chairman, that this particular section specifically states that 

Bill 47 is not to be construed as using its retroactive nature to be applied as a precedent for other income 

tax legislation. The people who ought to be assured that the government is enacting Bill 47 specifically 

to accomplish that which it states it wants to accomplish and that is that the half a billion dollars is not 

repayable to the corporations to the oil industry as a result of the Supreme Court decision and, 

furthermore, the province of Saskatchewan has the right to tax its resources as it sees fit for the future. 

What concerns the people is the fact that this is a retroactive bill and it applies to years gone by, even 

though a former bill has been struck down, and we believe that this particular section would assure the 

people that the government of Saskatchewan is serious about it stating that this particular bill is designed 

for that which it is intended to be designed for and not to be used as a precedent. I sincerely hope the 

Attorney General will accept that situation and will want to assure the people, the farmers and the 

dentists and the small shopkeepers and the small businessmen all over the province that the present 

government has no intention of passing any retroactive income tax legislation on them and that this is 

specifically designed to solve a particular problem. I am sure he will and the government members 

opposite will insist that that intended purpose in inserted in the legislation. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect to the remarks of the Leader of the Conservative 

Party, I can only categorize the remarks and the proposed amendments as mere political window 

dressing. This section 36, so-called in the proposed amendments by the Tories amounts to nothing more 

than a chance to justify what the editor in that paper called, ‘New Horizon’s or ‘Saskatchewan Horizons’ 

talks about. It’s the only attempt to do that. I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the legal effect of this 

amendment is absolutely useless. The first portion for example of section 36 has the purpose and intent 

of the Legislature is to alleviate an extreme financial burden on the people of Saskatchewan. Now, I 

wonder whether or not, Mr. Chairman, what impact that statement would have on Bill 42 and what 

we’re talking about in terms of this legislation. But leaving that aside at the moment, “to alleviate an 

extreme financial burden.” Right now there is the one judgment which is against the government with 

respect to the Bill 42 situation — that’s CIGOL. There is a potential of a massive injustice with others, 

that’s true. Maybe that’s what this is intended to state, but in effect it makes a statement of fact which is 

not good in this situation but that’s not my biggest argument. The next part of the amendment says, “and 

the provisions of this Act are not intended to be used to interpret or construe any of the provisions of 

other income tax legislation as being retroactive in effect.” And I say, Mr. Chairman, that this is 

meaningless. 

 

This second portion regarding the interpretation and construction of other statutes is meaningless in any 

event. To be retroactive and the member for Qu’Appelle, I’m sure would support me on this, a statute 

must specifically state that a particular piece, that it’s going to operate retroactively. And it would not be 

inferred that a particular piece of income tax legislation was retroactive simply because some other piece 

of income tax legislation was stated to be retroactive. I tell the Leader of the Conservative Party that it 

could be done that simply. I wouldn’t have put in there that last section about that retroactivity because I 

can give you literally hundreds of examples of taxation bills which are retroactive. Right here in this 

province. Let alone any other province, let alone the Dominion of Canada. And every one of them has 

that last little phrase saying that this bill is going to be retroactive. Without that phrase, it can’t be 

interpreted any other way. So when the Leader of the Conservative Party gets up and says, oh, we need 

to have this little statement in here so that it doesn’t apply to anybody else, he knows full well that it 

can’t apply 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1589 

 

to anybody else. And if he doesn’t know full well that it can’t apply to anybody else, he ought to know 

that it can’t apply to anybody else. And that’s why I say the whole thing is sheer window dressing. 

Because it allows him a little platform to get up there and say, oh, who’s going to be next? Maybe the 

farmers and maybe the small businessmen and maybe this and maybe that. And this is pure 

irresponsible, political hot air, Mr. Chairman. But luckily the people of Saskatchewan have caught on to 

the Conservative Leader. They know that’s all he and his caucus have, is a lot of hot air. And even the 

hot air is now beginning slowly to seep out of the balloon which is coming down politically, as far as the 

Saskatchewan people are concerned. I tell the Leader of the Conservative Party, Mr. Chairman, that 

what he wants and what he badly needs right now is credibility, political credibility. And this 

amendment does not add to his credibility. He needs an amendment which is at least something credible 

to argue. Not something which is to be politically argued. If he wants to argue about it politically that’s 

another time and another forum. But he ought not to come to this House with this kind of an 

amendment, Mr. Chairman, which is absolutely, totally one hundred per cent useless, in terms of law 

and is designed for only one purpose — and that is mischievousness. Political mischievousness! That’s 

exactly the situation because I repeat again, Mr. Chairman, no law can be retroactive unless the 

legislature says specifically that the law is to be retroactive but for him to raise that old bogey about 

farmers and the intention of this government is pure hog-wash and he knows it. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I’m very pleased that the Attorney General added . . . and now we have 

to return to personal things, is that it? Because you can’t attack the policy you want to start on personal 

stuff. Well, I can tell you, Mr. Minister of northern Saskatchewan, that there’s lots more than personal 

stuff that the people of Saskatchewan are interested in. They’re interested in the administration of the 

present government and most especially in the northern part of our province. Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. May I suggest to both sides of the House to try and keep in order here 

and deal with the amendment at hand. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Thank you. The amendment at hand has nothing to do with Switzerland. Mr. Chairman, 

the purpose of legislation, the purpose of this Legislature is not only to create legalese which will stand 

up in the courts. The purpose of this Legislature is to lead the people of Saskatchewan. The purpose of 

this Legislature is alleviate their fears. Now, the people of this province are afraid. They are afraid that 

the present government is going to enact retroactive income tax legislation on them. This clause, that’s 

not in the terms of the Minister of Finance, who decided to give an expletive similar to that provided by 

the present Prime Minister of Canada. I hope the Minister of Finance would say a few more of those 

expletives for the express purpose of bringing his true intent to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that this Legislature must assure the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that they are not going to see the present government enact retroactive income tax 

legislation in future. And they want to be assured that this particular bill, Bill 47 is not going to be used 

in a year or two years or three years . . . well, it won’t be in three years because they won’t be there, but 

is not going to be used in the next year or two by the present government as an example of the kind of 

legislation that they can use to attack farmers. To attack the druggist because maybe the druggist had 

stopped co-operating with the government. Or to attack other small businessmen because they’re not 

co-operating with the government. They want to be assured. The laborers because perhaps, the laborers 

are saying to the government of Saskatchewan, look, we don’t like what you’re doing, we want you to 

do something different. And you say, wait a minute we’re going to have a special laborer’s income tax 

bill that’s going to 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1590 

 

be retroactive in effect and put them all out of business. They want to be assured, Mr. Chairman, that the 

government is not going to use this bill as an example to extract that kind of blackmail from individuals. 

Mr. Chairman, since the Attorney General has suggested that this particular clause, as he says is useless. 

If it’s merely just a statement of intent by the government that should have absolutely no objection 

whatsoever to its enactment, because the first part of the statement, Mr. Chairman, is from the Attorney 

General’s very own speech. From the very first part of the enactment of this legislation. Directly from 

his speech. And it says the purpose and intent of the Legislature is to alleviate an extreme financial 

burden on the people of Saskatchewan. The Attorney General’s own words were why the purpose of the 

bill and all we’re saying is, vote for it. That’s what you said in your opening speech. Vote for it. And the 

provisions of the act are not intended to be used to interpret any of the provisions of other income tax 

legislation as being retroactive in effect. And the Attorney General specifically stated in his opening 

remarks that the retroactive nature of the bill was only intended to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan were able to retain the half a billion dollars which he said was in jeopardy, which he said 

is in jeopardy as a result of the Supreme Court decision which his members criticized the Supreme Court 

for, deigning to call one of the bills of the NDP into question constitutionally. He said the purpose of the 

bill is to alleviate an extreme financial burden and he said that this bill is not to be deemed to be 

retroactive for anybody else, its only in this circumstance we are going to use it and we say, you say it, 

insert it in the bill. It’s not going to do any damage, it could do a lot of good and it could alleviate your 

government'’ serious problem with the people of Saskatchewan and that is their concern that you are 

going to take over everything that they have and hold dear. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say to the hon. Leader of the Conservative Party that that is just pure political hot 

air. The only person who is going up and down the province, although the Liberals are doing the same 

thing but the only person who is going about the last — well it doesn’t matter you know from one 

Liberal over there to one Conservative over there and who knows maybe one Conservative from there 

back to one Liberal over there. Who knows what the situation is going to work out. But I am saying . . . 

 

Mr. Collver: — Terrific. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . terrific the hon. Leader of the Conservative Party says. Well, 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1591 

 

we’ll see how terrific it is. But I’m saying to the Leader of the Conservative Party that that’s laughable. 

You know when I got into politics and I did a little bit of reading about what the old days of 1940s and 

1948 election, the 1944 and 1948 election, what the Liberals were doing at that day. The allegation was, 

you know, you had to be concerned because the NDP and the CCF were going to take over the farms of 

Saskatchewan. The same thing 30 years later. What amazes me is that the press picks up that simple 

kind of statement and gives it a great deal of highlight. Statements which 30 years ago were buried — 30 

years ago. Now there is a new messiah spreading the doom and gloom of the new tyranny around which 

all of the right wing and all of the oil companies and all of the interests trying to rally to try to scare this 

whole routine together. And all of a sudden the press would think that he re-invented the wheel with all 

these arguments. Now I am telling Mr. Chairman and the House that this amendment is purely in that 

category, that’s what the nature of this amendment is. Anybody who can have any kind of credibility is 

going around Pelly constituency trying to tell this story about seat belts and how there is no freedom 

now. The next thing you know they are going to tell you that you can’t be farming your quarter section, 

you can’t be doing this. The people and the farmers of Pelly taught you a lesson as to about how much 

they were going to accept that kind of an argument . . . (interjection) . . . Yes they did, you got whopped 

in Pelly and you are going to get whopped in the next general provincial election if you are still around 

with your caucus in this operation, simply because you’ve got no credibility, you’ve got no credibility in 

those kind of arguments. I am saying to the Leader of the Conservative Party and members of this 

Legislative Assembly that if we were ever, ever to insert this kind of a provision we would be giving 

credence, credence to an argument that’s as phony as a three dollar bill and only could be propagated by 

a group which is as phone . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are those your own words, Roy. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, my own words — no, these are not my own words. You show me where 

they’re my own words. You pull out my speech give it to me right now and show me where they are my 

own words and I’ll wait until this committee, until you dig that up. Even if they are my own words, yes, 

even if they are, even if they are they do not require insertion in the legislation. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Why not? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Because I have said to you already the only way you can make a piece of legislation 

retroactive is by making that legislation specifically retroactive. You can’t do it by this, you can’t do it 

by anything but a specific amendment to it and you know it. So don’t seize on my words and say 

because it’s my own words you are going to put that in there. You know that’s the situation. Yes, you 

show me where I said it but in any event even if I did say it, it still doesn’t take away the argument that I 

advanced, the argument which is that it is as shallow and as cheap as a three dollar bill, that kind of an 

argument. Absolutely so and I know it’s going to get the headlines tomorrow because that’s the stature 

of the situation in the province of Saskatchewan. But I’m telling you and I’m telling the members of this 

House that this is an absolutely political argument only by the Conservatives. In fact all of this 

amendment which I’m going to talk about in a moment and I’m very, very interested about this or this 

next one coming up. 37, all of this is in that category of the Conservative Party. The Leader of the Tories 

should be ashamed of himself for moving such a thing. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — . . . Nipawin before I take my place again and let him get back into the shouting 

match . . . (interjection) . . . I agree it’s not much of a match, he’s not 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1592 

 

shouting as much as you are. What’s the purpose of the word ‘Legislature’ as opposed to ‘legislation’? I 

don’t understand the wording. 

 

Mr. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — That is the wording as given by the law clerk in drafting the legislation. 

That matter was raised by the law clerk in drafting the legislation, that matter was raised and she advised 

that historically the correct phraseology in this is the work ‘Legislature’ and not ‘legislation’. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I get the impression that the Attorney General hasn’t yet taken a position on our clause 

37. He hasn’t yet advised his members whether or not he’s in favor of this particular clause. The fact of 

the matter is, Mr. Attorney General, that we agreed. Of course this is a political clause, of course this 

clause is spelling out the purpose and intent as spelled out by the government when it had introduced 

Bill 47. After all, Mr. Chairman, Bill 47 is brought about through a very unique situation. This is not a 

new bill designed to raise money for the people of Saskatchewan, this is not a new bill designed because 

of some special circumstance in the oil industry that we suddenly have to bring a new bill before the 

House to obtain money for the people of Saskatchewan. This bill was brought about as a direct result of 

a Supreme Court decision on bill 42. It was brought about in the Attorney General’s own words as an 

emergency kind of situation that had to be introduced quickly and passed quickly, according to the 

Attorney General. Passed quickly, it must be passed this session and as quickly as is possible. Why, 

because the interests of the people of Saskatchewan must be preserved, they must be protected. And we 

agree, the interests of the people must be protected. The Attorney General and the government of 

Saskatchewan have many concerns of course throughout this province in terms of retroactive income tax 

legislation of this kind of magnitude. 

 

There are people throughout the province and the Attorney General knows it himself, farmers, 

individuals, small businessmen, people, little people, who are concerned that as a result of this bill the 

government of Saskatchewan will in the future hold it up as an example. They will forget, Mr. Attorney 

General, very conveniently forget what he said just six weeks ago and very conveniently forgets the 

purpose and the intent that he again spells out in his introduction of this bill. He very conveniently 

forgets it, and the people are concerned that the government of Saskatchewan will forget, in forthcoming 

months, that that is why they introduced this bill as an emergency bill and they will say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, possibly on one of the ads produced in the Saskatchewan’s family of Crown corporations 

— we need your money, says the family of Crown corporations’ ad. We are going to have to pass a 

retroactive tax to get the benefit of farm income because of all of a sudden farm income has dropped 

dramatically. And last year you guys had a big year and you all have cash sitting in the bank. How can 

we possibly pay for the roads, and pay for all the new potash mines we want to buy? How do we pay for 

it? We are going to have to retroactively pass legislation on your income to get last year’s income in 

which you had a good year. Not to be concerned about. And the government says, look, we have a 

precedent, just as they have said on this bill. We have precedents right across the country. We have a 

precedent in Ontario, a precedent in Alberta, we have precedents everywhere. Look at the precedents we 

have, now help us pass this bill. We say to the Attorney General, yes, we are helping you pass the bill, 

yes we are. Yes, we voted for you on second reading and, yes, we want you to state in the bill, so that 

you may not hold it up to the people as an example in the future of the kind of bill that can be passed on 

farmers and on individuals; that it was a bill designed for a specific situation, an emergency situation, 

and that it was a bill that you, yourselves, 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1593 

 

said was to alleviate an extreme financial burden. 

 

Mr. Attorney General, I suggest, very strongly, that you realign your thinking on this. This is an 

opportunity for the NDP to prove, once and for all, that any reasons that we have for going out to the 

people and saying politically, as you say, the NDP want to use this to tax farmer’s income and you say, 

no, we don’t. So prove it, put it in the bill. You don’t want the Progressive Conservatives to be able to 

go out to the people of Saskatchewan and say that is step one, that is step one in the retroactive kind of 

income tax that the government is going to impose on you, the farmer. Here is your opportunity, tonight. 

It does no damage to the bill, it doesn’t color the bill. Here is your opportunity to insert in your bill a 

statement of intent and purpose that will assure the people of Saskatchewan that you do not intend to 

pass retroactive legislation on them in the future, using this as your precedent. Here is your chance to 

clear it up. It is your chance to make sure that the so-called politics that you don’t want us to play will be 

played. Because if you pass that amendment, how can anybody play it? There it is right in the bill, right 

in the bill passed by the government. It was designed for a specific purpose and we are not going to use 

it as a precedent for the next retroactive legislation. We can’t use it then. Here is your chance. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the situation here, really the argument is almost laughable. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, I suggest to you that this section is inappropriate to this legislation, is 

irrelevant. I can cite authorities to you that the legislation has to be relevant to the act with which you 

are dealing. I questioned the member about the wording and the use of the word ‘Legislature’. 

Legislature is a word that is defined by the interpretation of statutes. Legislature means the 

Lieutenant-Governor acting by and with the advise and consent of the Legislative Assembly of the 

province. So that when you read this amendment it reads: “to be added to a taxing legislation, the oil and 

gas taxing legislation, the purpose and intent of the Lieutenant-Governor acting by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of the province, is to alleviate any extreme financial burden on 

the people of Saskatchewan. And the provisions of this act are not intended to be used to interpret or 

construe any of the provisions of any other income tax legislation as being retroactive in effect.” 

 

Now, while I am quite satisfied to accept that my friend, Mr. Porteous, acting by and with the consent of 

all the brilliant people in this House is to alleviate an extreme financial burden on the people of 

Saskatchewan, I am not sure what that has to do with the oil and gas legislation. 

 

I am interested, of course, that the Conservatives have now become involved in this debate. We have 

been at it for six weeks. We are almost into the seventh week. We are down to the last hour and we have 

heard about their amendments, and I knew they were coming and every day I waited. I knew this 

onslaught was going to come and then in the last hour down comes the onslaught and I don’t understand 

the amendment, Mr. Chairman. I think the amendment is out of order. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, referring to the point of order, the Conservative member’s amendments 

are designed for the Liberal Party, or the credit for the Liberal Party, but are designed for the people of 

Saskatchewan, which may mean that the only party in here, in the opposition, giving amendments for 

that basis. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1594 

 

I would like to advise the hon. member, as he misinterprets and misreads the legal aspects of it, that 

there is ample case authority and I cite, for example, the Russell case, wherein the motives for the 

passing of the legislation by a government are not a factor, knowing full well and stating full well, that 

the clause was legally neutral when it was drafted. So from the point of view of the criticisms of the 

member for Regina Wascana, of course, they are totally irrelevant to the point. I think the hon. member 

misses the point that in fact the legal position is, as has been stated by both the Privy Council and the 

Supreme Court, the motives of the legislation are not relevant in determining the constitutional validity 

of the matter. There is no doubt and I suggest that this particular clause is legally neutral, but it gives, 

and I suggest and I have urged that it does give, to the Attorney General a chance to reinforce and restate 

the basis for the legislation in the first place and at the same time to reassure the public that he will not 

use the legislation to run across the country and say that a precedent, a precedent, we can do it again in 

the future if necessary, a statement that he has used on other retroactive legislation. I think the point of 

order is irrelevant. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — If I might just give my interpretation of the ruling as I see it. I understand that the 

member for Regina Wascana says the amendment is not relevant and, therefore, is out of order. I 

interpret that the amendment is relevant and is in order. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 4 

 
Collver Katzman Wipf 

Lane (Qu’Ap)   

 

NAYS — 26 
 

Blakeney Robbins Faris 

Thibault MacMurchy Tchorzewski 

Bowerman Mostoway Shillington 

Smishek Banda Vickar 

Romanow Whelan Skoberg 

Messer McNeill Johnson 

Byers MacAuley Thompson 

Kowalchuk Kramer Feschuk 

Matsalla Lusney  

 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley) — Mr. Speaker I have to make a couple of comments 

and I would hope that the members of the House would listen to me. 

 

We have, all members of the Legislature, all members of the press, all of the public of 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1595 

 

Saskatchewan have been waiting for the member for Nipawin to indicate as to the reason why he is 

going to vote against this bill on third reading. And he wanted, after listening . . . first of all after taking 

the heat from the people of Saskatchewan as to what is going on, as to what kind of a representation is 

the free enterprise party, the Conservative Party, doing for the people of Saskatchewan, he decided that 

he has to justify just exactly why his party is going to vote this bill. I have never in my life in all of the 

time I have been in this Legislature, seen a more asinine, and I say asinine because the more asinine . . . 

and I would say that asinine means that it’s on the back of an ass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order please. I think I would have to rule that that is a little unparliamentary and I 

will ask the member to . . . 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, in all honesty if that happens to be a little unparliamentary, I’ll ask 

a decision from the member for Moose Jaw South. 

 

What I really want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that this particular amendment and the direction and the 

stance of the Conservative Party, I want to say in all honesty, that we in the Liberal opposition welcome 

it and I want to tell you why. Because the people of Saskatchewan have expected for a long, long time 

that those people who were elected as the free enterprisers in this province and who oppose the NDP 

socialists, would join together in a positive and constructive manner to oppose the kind of legislation 

that Bill 47 represents, and I want to predict to all the members of the House that this amendment has 

only one specific reason, to attempt to justify the member for Nipawin and his Conservative caucus for 

opposing this bill on third reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have welcomed the change of heart. The only thing that we regret 

that it doesn’t express a principle, it doesn’t express any integrity, it doesn’t express any sincerity for the 

opposition to the bill, and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the member for Nipawin, when he stands up 

to vote against Bill 47 in third reading, and the other members of his Conservative caucus will say yea, 

we support the Liberal opposition in all of their opposition for this bill because they were right to begin 

with and they will be right forever, that Bill 47 is a bad bill and has a great danger for Saskatchewan. I 

want to tell the member for Nipawin that has to be the most unbelievable amendment I’ve ever seen 

since I entered this Legislature, and it gave me a great deal of difficulty of sitting down, I didn’t know 

whether to sit down, stand up or say aye or nay because I couldn’t understand it. It was the most wishy 

washy, unbelievable amendment I have ever experienced in all the time I’ve been in here. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I certainly welcome the comments of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley and his 

obvious advisor tonight, Jim(sic) Barleycorn. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we would suggest very strongly that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! We had better, all of us, try to maintain and keep the decorum of this House 

a little big higher here and deal specifically with the amendment and section at hand, please. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly withdraw. I don’t know that the member for 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1596 

 

Indian Head-Wolseley had any advisors tonight. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that it is 

impossible for the member for Indian Head-Wolseley to know or understand the position of the 

Progressive Conservative Party because he is not a Progressive Conservative and because he doesn’t 

understand the issues facing the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are two major issues involved in this entire bill and perhaps it is incumbent upon me tonight to 

pass it along to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. One issue is whether or not the present 

government botched up its production of the legislation under Bill 42 in 1973. In that regard, we believe 

very strongly, Mr. Chairman, that the NDP did that. 

 

Does the NDP government of Saskatchewan, or any government of Saskatchewan have the right to tax 

the resources that belong to the people of Saskatchewan as they, the provincial government sees fit? In 

our judgment, yes they do. Those are the two issues. And which is the stronger issue in our minds over 

Bill 47? The stronger issue to us is whether or not the province of Saskatchewan and the government of 

Saskatchewan have the right to tax those resources as they see fit, that they are not to be dictated to by 

the government in Ottawa as the members to my right would have us believe, and they are not to be 

dictated to by major multinational corporations whose head offices aren’t in the province of 

Saskatchewan, as our friends to our right would have them do. 

 

We believe that the government of Saskatchewan has the right to tax resources as they see fit and that is 

why we are in support of Bill 47 and that is why we have supported Bill 47 all along. The fact of the 

matter is, Mr. Chairman, that the NDP in creating Bill 42 to solve the situation, to solve a situation, did 

so badly that now they are coming back with a piece of legislation to try to correct their mistake from 

four years ago and we must as representatives of the people of this province support the efforts of any 

government of Saskatchewan to protect the rights of the province of Saskatchewan to tax its resources as 

it sees fit. Now the fact that we would like to make this a better piece of legislation by introducing 

amendments is after all the purpose for this session here tonight. That is the purpose of Committee of the 

Whole. That’s the purpose of making amendments and the amendments don’t always have to be legal as 

suggested by the member for Regina-Wascana. Sometimes a good amendment to a piece of legislation 

can be legally neutral but can state a principle in the legislation that is spelled out that makes better law 

in the words of the member for Regina Wascana because it does make better law. It spells out the 

principles for which the bill was designed and it spells out the fact that the people of Saskatchewan can 

be assured that the present government isn’t going to use this clause or use the bill as a precedent for the 

future. 

 

Now government has voted down that legislation, has done so with the tacit support of the members to 

the right, has voted down that amendment. They sat in their chairs, did nothing in terms of that particular 

amendment so they must believe that retroactive legislation is O.K. with the farmers, it’s O.K. to use this 

bill as a precedent for the next bill which will produce retroactive income taxes for the farmers, 

retroactive income taxes for everyone else in Saskatchewan. Well, I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, and 

members of this Assembly, that it’s going to be the people of Saskatchewan, not the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley and not the members opposite who make the decision on who shall form the next 

government of Saskatchewan and I support the common will of the people of Saskatchewan, and I say to 

the members opposite that they will find a dramatic change come the next election. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — We would have liked to have voted for this section, we would 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1597 

 

have overcome the fact that the section does not make any sense and we might have voted for it even so. 

We listened to a lot of gobbledygook in this Legislature and I don’t see why we shouldn’t vote for some 

of it every once in a while, so we probably would have voted for it because we agree with it in principle 

even though it does not make an awful lot of sense. But the fact is that beyond any question Mr. 

Chairman, this would have contributed to the colorability of the act and the inclusion — beyond any 

question Mr. Chairman, to tie Bill 47 so closely to the financial disaster into which this government has 

placed the Saskatchewan taxpayer and to include it in the act so that you would not even face the 

problem of having to get the legislative comments or the comments in the press into the record, to go so 

far as to include it in the act and to say this is the purpose of the legislation to lift the financial burden by 

implication the financial burden caused by Bill 42, to do that clearly, Mr. Chairman, would have made 

far more colorable the act. Though we approve of the sort of motherhood principle that the section 

includes, we couldn’t possibly have supported making the legislation more colorable when our reason 

for opposing the legislation is that we do not think it will do the job of extricating the Saskatchewan tax 

payer from the mess in which the NDP has placed him. 

 

Mr. Lane: — I would like to make a comment. Now since day one, we have heard the Liberal Party say, 

we don’t know what we are going to do about the bill, we don’t know what stand to take. It took about 

eight or nine days before they made up their minds and found out that the other parties had already made 

decisions and they are down so low that they might as well go against it and see what happens. So 

tonight now we see after having had speech after speech after speech for the last six weeks about how 

bad retroactive legislation is, the Legislature finally had the opportunity tonight to say, “We do not like 

retroactive legislation, we do not like the retroactive provisions of this bill although we recognize that to 

alleviate our financial burden this particular bill had to be retroactive.” The Liberal Party has opposed 

retroactivity in other speeches and I’ll tell you Mr. Chairman, when they finally had a chance to put that 

intention into the legislation without affecting the operation of the bill, they bombed out, they failed and 

they sat there silent again, not being able to make up their minds. The member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley says one thing, the member for Regina Wascana says the other and again we sit there 

and see tonight the Liberal Party sitting on the sharpest picket fence in the province of Saskatchewan 

and we are waiting for the hon. member for Moose Jaw North to say a few words and to give his 

position on retroactivity and to tell this House why he is in favor of retroactive income tax legislation 

and I am sure the hon. member will stand up as soon as I’m finished and tell us why he favors 

retroactive legislation. 

 

This was a serious attempt to give to this Assembly as opportunity to say that we would support the bill, 

support the operation out of necessity on behalf of the people of this province and at the same time to 

say to the people of this province, we do not accept retroactivity as a principle of sound legislation or a 

principle of government operation and government management. It was an opportunity and tonight we 

found wanting the Liberal Party when it came to the crunch on retroactivity, the Liberal Party 

notwithstanding weeks and weeks and weeks of speeches about how they opposed retroactivity and how 

the retroactive part doomed a bill to defeat by the courts and that’s all we have heard, that’s all we’ve 

heard, all we’ve heard, retroactivity will kill this bill. When they finally had a chance to vote against 

retroactivity, tonight we found out that what we have been getting is verbal diarrhoea over there and 

nothing for the people of Saskatchewan and no substantive principle for the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1598 

 

Mr. J.L. Skoberg (Moose Jaw North): — I would like to suggest if I may, I believe that those opposite 

are suggesting that they are not in consideration of whether that they be Moose Jaw North or Moose Jaw 

North or South or whether or not they may be in consideration of the, what we’re consideration of the 

entire consideration of the, I would like to ask after sitting in the Moose Jaw consideration insofar as our 

(sic) 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, I think the member has made his point and I wonder if we could proceed with 

Section 36. 

 

Mr. Skoberg: — I would like to say this if I may, I would like to ask those people here right this 

evening, after finding out that they haven’t found out whether or not in fact, whether or not in fact, those 

people that had the right to find out and I would like to direct my address if I possibly could to those 

people and especially those individual members for Moose Jaw, the individual member for Thunder 

Creek which I have some difficulty in trying to remember. I would like to find out, Mr. Chairman, 

whether or not in fact, he finds out after what he has said, after what he has said, insofar as it’s 

concerning, whether or not he is correct in saying and I’d like to ask this your worship whether or not 

that individual member that is sitting opposite to me right now. Has the corrective individual that will 

say to me or anybody else in the Moose Jaw constituency, whether or not he will say right to me, to right 

now whether or not in fact, this is a fact, will say he say this right now? Will that member opposite to me 

right now say this, will that member, Mr. Chairman, say this type of a situation . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order please, if the member is going to speak he must confine his remarks to 

section 36 and I think he has made his point and I wonder if we could proceed? 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I thought that maybe I could supersede the member for Moose Jaw South and 

despite the generalizations of the member for Nipawin, and I say I look forward to the opportunity at 

some future date to taking that issue on and I say that in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, there is one comment 

the member for Nipawin made that I think should be very pertinent to this House, which has 

characterized the debate of the Conservative Party and the Liberal Party and that is that I believe that the 

Province of Saskatchewan has the right to tax the resources of this province as they see fit. And I would 

like to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that that has been the argument of the Liberal Party and unfortunately the 

Province of Saskatchewan or no other province has the right to tax the resources of this province as they 

see fit, they must follow the Constitution of Canada, the BNA Act, and that is the issue that CIGOL has 

brought before us and that is the shallowness of the argument or the member for Nipawin. 

 

Section 36 agreed 

 

Section 37 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Section 37 — exemption of certain owners. We have an amendment in section 37, 

by the member for Qu’Appelle. 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1599 

 

Amend section 37 of the printed bill by striking out subsection (1) section 37 and substituting the 

following: (1) notwithstanding any other provision of this act, the taxes imposed under this act do not 

apply to the owner of oil and gas rights where the owner is a corporation and (a) the corporation is 

incorporated pursuant to the laws of Saskatchewan, (b) the corporation has its registered head office in 

Saskatchewan, (c) a majority of the shareholders of the corporation are ordinarily resident in 

Saskatchewan and (d) the majority of the directors of the corporation are ordinarily resident in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Then (2) on the same section. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, the taxes imposed 

under this act do not apply to an owner of oil and gas rights in producing tracts for their aggregate area 

of oil, producing tracts beneficially owned by him and persons associated with him or in respect of 

which he and such persons hold any beneficial interest other than a lease does not exceed 1,280 acres. 

 

Does the member so move? 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to make a few brief remarks on this particular section 

that we are adding to the legislation. The members opposite and the government have suggested at all 

times both during the discussion of Bill 47 and also discussion of Bill 42, that it was the huge 

international corporations that they were concerned about leaving the rent (sic.) revenue out of the 

province of Saskatchewan to feed the directors and to feed the shareholders in other parts of Canada and 

other parts of North America. Well we are giving the government opposite an opportunity under this 

particular bill to exempt, to exempt the small Saskatchewan producer, small Saskatchewan owner who 

has enough trouble competing with the big guy anyway and to prove to the people of Saskatchewan that 

the NDP government in reality are for the little guy, we say and suggest that this bill should not apply to 

that little guy. Give them a break, give the local Saskatchewan oil producer a break, give him an even 

edge against that multinational corporation which has unlimited capital resources and give him a break 

by exempting him from this legislation. You’ll have two effects, Mr. Chairman, Number 1, it will 

provide some capital, not very much, but some capital to the small Saskatchewan producer to be able to 

re-invest in the province of Saskatchewan and that would enable us to build up the kind of oil industry in 

Saskatchewan, to give them the capital that they need as opposed to the capital that is coming in from 

outside. Number 2, it would prove to the people of Saskatchewan that the present government in fact 

wants to see the small Saskatchewan producer become self sufficient and become viable and really be 

able to compete against the major multinational giant from outside our borders. And it will prove once 

and for all I’m sure if the members opposite vote for this clause, it will certainly prove that the deals that 

they are making for the past number of months and years with the big giant corporations in their 

so-called joint ventures, that in fact those deals are not what they want, they don’t want to join together 

with the big guy, they want to support the little guy and let him grow. That’s an opportunity we’re 

giving the government to take today. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to express fairly strong exception to what this particular section does. I don’t 

want to be misconstrued as being opposed to perhaps a general intent in a very general way but I’m 

asking the members of the House to look at what the effect of this House amendment will be it it’s 

accepted. And I say the following are the effects: Firstly; an exemption of this kind would be almost 

impossible to administer. It’s 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1600 

 

not so much a matter of administration, Mr. Chairman, it’s a little more than that, tied into 

administration however. I say that if this House amendment were accepted there would be little if 

anything to prevent any of the large multinational companies from arranging for the incorporation of a 

number of small companies in Saskatchewan with Saskatchewan head offices, Saskatchewan residents 

as nominal shareholders, actually owned behind the scenes by the companies and Saskatchewan resident 

directors, and then claim for each one of those companies as an exemption. I invite the Leader of the 

Conservative Party to tell me how indeed this can be answered. This result would be in my judgement a 

serious erosion, of the province’s tax base and tax revenue in reality it would be to defeat the purpose of 

this bill. That is a very serious and major problem an objection that I have to this amendment. Secondly, 

Mr. Speaker, this act is an Income Tax Act and it is part of the traditional theory of an income tax bill, of 

an income tax, that it be applied generally to taxpayers in similar circumstances. I think a good argument 

can be advanced that any attempt to tax only one class of taxpayer, in this case non-residents of 

Saskatchewan, could seriously jeopardize the constitutional validity of the act as an income tax. Thirdly, 

any exemption of this kind could lead to the constitutional difficulties in the act that I’ve talked about. In 

the CIGOL decision the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that Bill 42 intruded on the Federal power to 

regulate interprovincial and international trade and commerce. If Bill 47 were to exempt Saskatchewan 

companies and tax only non Saskatchewan companies which is what this intended amendment seeks, the 

courts could again say that the province was really attempting to tax away the profits of those companies 

doing business in the province, but residing outside the province and thereby interfering with the federal 

power of Trade and Commerce. I know that the hon. member for Qu’Appelle knows of what I talk 

legally, the Leader of the Conservative Party may choose to ignore this but it is there. In fact the courts 

could even go so far as to say that Saskatchewan was not only trying to levy a tax on oil companies in 

general but rather was attempting to keep non-resident companies out of Saskatchewan or at least make 

it much more difficult for them to carry on oil business here. In addition to the prospects of transgressing 

on the federal power of Trade and Commerce this might also be said to be a violation of the exclusive 

federal jurisdiction over other aspects of the constitution, perhaps even argued over immigration or 

aliens or the resident non-resident situation. Mr. Chairman, I would say that those are three very serious 

problems in these amendments in extending section 37. I say that it would be impossible to administer 

this and indeed would open up the possibility for re-incorporation to abort Bill 47 if so put forward. 

Secondly, this would tamper with the traditional concept of an income tax and thirdly, in the light of the 

CIGOL decision this amendment could very seriously place Bill 47 into a constitutional challenge as an 

attempt to interfere with trade and commerce. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Conservative Party should know that these are three very 

substantive concerns and I believe that if he takes counsel within his own caucus he will know that what 

I say here is indeed all legally possible. It is probably probable — that’s awkward wording — but 

probable in any event in the light of the proposed amendments and therefore I can only recommend to 

the House that these amendments be defeated. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I would like to answer the three points raised by the Attorney General as they relate to 

these amendments. First of all he says that the administration of the act would be extremely difficult to 

administer, if not impossible, and would bring about re-incorporation by the major multinational 

companies of small corporations in Saskatchewan. That very suggestion we put to our legal counsel who 

helped us to draft the particular amendment and they are of the opinion and of the subsequent opinion 

that clause (c) or part (c) of that clause, the majority of the shareholders of the 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1601 

 

corporation are ordinarily resident in Saskatchewan. If you wanted to pin it down. Yes, not shares, 

shareholders, the majority of the shareholders in Saskatchewan are ordinarily resident in Saskatchewan. 

In our opinion that that pins that down and says no, re-incorporation would not occur. If you wanted to 

take it a little bit further, you might add to it and I would be prepared to add to the amendment if the 

Attorney General would indicate that he would otherwise pass the amendment not only a majority of the 

shareholders but a majority of the shares must be owned by residents who are ordinarily resident in the 

province of Saskatchewan and that way you might tie it down even better but our legal advisors say the 

majority of the shareholders is sufficient. But you might go on to say, the majority of the shareholders 

and the majority of the holders of shares or the shares held must be ordinarily resident in Saskatchewan. 

We believe that that would tie down the situation. That’s on the first objection. Our legal advice is that 

that is not correct. If the majority of the shareholders are ordinarily resident in Saskatchewan that that 

would prevent the re-incorporation. 

 

Secondly, in terms of exemptions, I would like to direct the attention of the Attorney General to The 

Income Tax Act as it relates to individuals and corporations in Saskatchewan and in Canada. First of all 

there are a great many individuals who are exempted from the act in terms of income tax. People who 

are below a certain income level, people who are drawing certain kinds of income, such as 

unemployment insurance, people who are in receipt of certain kinds of pensions are exempted from 

income tax legislation, certain kinds. There are a number of exemptions to income taxes in terms of 

individuals. 

 

In terms of corporations, corporations that earn less than a certain level of income are exempted from 

income tax legislation. Corporations who are allowed certain write offs are exempted from income tax 

legislation. There are organizations for example, such as charitable organizations that are exempted from 

income tax legislation. Therefore, exemptions to income tax legislation are quite prevalent and 

precedents are there for the provision of exemptions to any income legislation. There is nothing new in 

exempting people or individuals or corporations from certain aspects of income tax legislation. 

 

Now the Attorney General’s third comment on the colorability of a section that exempts Saskatchewan 

corporations as it relates to trade and commerce and as to the Supreme Court decision I think is probably 

the most serious objection that he raised. The first two I don’t see. The first two I believe we have 

covered totally in this act. 

 

Now there are a great number of people including the present government of Saskatchewan, including 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, including in the last two or three days the Premier of Alberta, who believe 

that the Supreme Court of Canada in that portion of their judgment where they referred to the trade and 

commerce section went too far and went beyond the constitutionality of our country. There are a great 

many constitutional lawyers who believe that and they also believe that any further incursion in that 

trade and commerce section or that that trade and commerce section of that judgment could be used to 

totally castrate provincial governments’ rate of taxation in every field, in every area across our country. 

We do not believe that that was the intent of that judgment nor do we believe that the Supreme Court 

necessarily would rule that way in any other piece of legislation. Certainly if the Attorney General is 

using his trade and commerce section of the CIGOL decision as a means of holding up this particular 

bill, Bill 47, as being totally constitutional, he must realize and his own advisors I am sure have spelled 

out to him that if that trade and commerce section of that judgment is applied to this bill it will be ruled 

unconstitutional as will almost every provincial tax 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1602 

 

legislation across our country. That is how broad and wide that the trade and commerce section of that 

judgment could be interpreted. Therefore, we suggest to the Attorney General that exempting small 

business and exempting Saskatchewan-owned small business no more colors the bill with reference to 

the trade and commerce section of the judgment than does the bill itself. No more colors the bill than the 

bill itself and, therefore, we believe that the three objections that the Attorney General has put forward 

this evening have not taken away the reason that he accepts, and he says the intent is good to make 

Saskatchewan small owned business, small owned oil industry stronger and to give them the capital to 

help develop our resources right here in the province. 

 

We suggest to the Attorney General tonight that those objections of his are not rational in the light (a) of 

the amendment and (b) of the precedents that have been established by other income tax act and in the 

third objection in that colorability as related to the trade and commerce section we don’t feel that this 

amendment adds any more or any less to the present bill than the present bill itself. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I think just a further comment has to be made before we take a vote 

on this. First of all, I want to say and to repeat that the question of the problem of small Saskatchewan 

producers is a problem which we as a government have attempted to be sensitive towards and we have 

attempted to understand these problems as well as we can. It may very well be that under this bill, once 

the regulations are set, something can be done which would deal with all taxpayers of a certain size in an 

equal fashion, not on the basis of provincial boundary residency but on the basis of, perhaps, size or the 

particular problems that a small producer has and I said in my first remarks and we have indicated this 

all throughout the piece that we’re prepared to look at this once we look at the regulations. Having said 

that, I do repeat very quickly the difficulties of this amendment. First of all, the amendment says “a 

majority of the shareholders of the corporation are ordinarily residents in Saskatchewan” and that, 

precisely, is the problem that I speak to. The majority of the shareholders could be located here, the 

majority of the shares could be located elsewhere and you could have a control. Well, this is something 

that you raise that as a cover off. The second point that I raise is the question with respect to exempting 

or to defining taxpayers based on provincial boundary; that simply can’t be done. Look, you have all 

kinds of categories of taxpayers but you don’t base them . . . Interjection . . . Mr. Chairman, my point is 

that a discrimination based on the kind of discrimination which the member for Nipawin here raises is a 

discrimination which in my judgement does attack traditional concept of income tax. Thirdly, I find and 

I say this now, as the last remark with respect to trade and commerce. I find it interesting after all of 

these weeks of debate on Bill 47 the position that we find the trade and coerce provision of CIGOL in. 

For seven or eight weeks it was we’ve lost Bill 42 because of the incompetence of the Attorney General 

and the incompetence of the government. Just a few minutes ago in his last remark, the Leader of the 

Conservative Party says in effect, we lost it because of the exception with the definition of trade and 

commerce that Supreme Court said in the CIGOL decision. And that’s the position we’re in, and I say, 

Mr. Chairman, that those are the kinds of little games that can be played by the Leader of the 

Conservative Party. And I know you’ll say oh, the first indirect situation that was. You know if you look 

at direct and indirect carefully and get good legal advice you’ll see what the impact of CIGOL decision 

there is. Just look at your own counsel in that area. In any event, Mr. Chairman, I don’t think much more 

can be gained by this kind of a situation, I simply say that here the Leader of the Conservative Party has 

provided a loophole for some larger companies who would want to incorporate to take advantage of this 

loophole for them, has provided a 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1603 

 

loophole which if we could allow it even constitutionally, would certainly defeat the purpose of this bill. 

I think, Mr. Chairman, we can’t simply allow that and I urge the members of the committee to defeat the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I would like to make a remark and that is that the Attorney General made one comment 

in which he has just said which is totally without any kind of reason at all. He said that you couldn’t 

recognize provincial boundaries in an income tax and yet here in the province of Saskatchewan we see 

58 per cent of our taxes, our income taxes are resident in Saskatchewan and next door we find an 

Alberta corporation with 26 per cent. We find corporations in Saskatchewan paying a higher percentage 

income tax than we find corporations in the province of Alberta pay and to suggest that you can’t use 

provincial boundaries to delineate income taxes is absolute and utter nonsense. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I ask the minister a couple of questions. I can certainly see as I suppose I’d like to 

vote for this bill, for this provision if I understood it better. I can certainly see what the minister says 

about Imperial Oil, for instance, transferring all its assets to Gary Lane and his partner in trust and Gary 

Lane and his partner own the shares of Imperial Oil and then they’re the only shareholders of Imperial 

Oil and they’ll be the only shareholders and then Imperial Oil would be entitled to the exemption. That’s 

simple enough, but curing that problem is simple enough as well. The minister knows that it can be 

cured in exactly the same way that we cure that problem when we deal with the foreign ownership of 

land. Would you tell me though, whether, and I also understand the colorability argument and I suspect 

that it does make it colorable or arguably so. I ask whether the intention of this is that all Saskatchewan 

companies would be exempt completely from tax, they would pay no tax whatsoever under this if this 

provision came into effect? And if that were the case, as things now stand with companies that are 

legitimate Saskatchewan companies, can you give us an estimate of how much money that would cost, 

40, 50, 80 or 150 million dollars a year, what kind of dollars are we talking about as a direct subsidy to 

these companies? Member for Nipawin says that it would be nice if we got these companies going on an 

active footing. Well, I can assure the member that I’m sure I’ll own a small oil company in 

Saskatchewan from my spot in Ottawa if this kind of an amendment were passed and I wonder if that’s 

. . . interjection . . . well, I’ll be ordinarily resident here. John Diefenbaker gets to be the Chancellor of 

the university and you ordinarily have to be a resident to be a Chancellor of the university, there is a 

special exemption as you may not know that makes you ordinarily resident even though you’re mostly 

out of the province. 

 

Now I ask the minister those two questions, would this be an absolute exemption in clearance, they 

would pay no tax and how much money would be involved? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I want to emphasize I take no credit for the authorship of this 

amendment. My interpretation is that this would be an absolute exemption. that’s exactly what they are 

intending to do here, and that means something so far as I know the small Saskatchewan producers 

always understood would be his role, he would pay some taxes for Saskatchewan, he would not be 

exempt. Secondly, as for the financial side of things, I’m trying to get an estimate from the officials to 

see that kind of a tax break would be for the oil companies. 

 

Mr. Collver: — How much a year? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, it would be about $12 million a year. Something in that neighborhood, $60 

million would be the effect if this amendment went through and 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1604 

 

presumably Saskoil being Saskatchewan based of course would be exempt as well. 

 

Mr. Collver: — The minister has already said, I don’t like to explain it to the member for Regina 

Wascana either but there would not be ‘no tax’ there would be no tax under the oil income tax. There 

would certainly be corporate taxes to pay, there would be individual taxes to pay, there would be income 

taxes normal income taxes to pay after expenses on the business that was involved in Saskatchewan; so 

the Saskatchewan government would not lose $12 million, it would lose $12 million under the oil 

income tax legislation, but would gain whatever profits tax that these organizations, companies or 

individuals would be paying, their share of it on the other side of the coin. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I don’t understand it. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I really think that the Attorney General is for such a small amount, less 

than $12 million certainly because of the recovery of income taxes that the government would make, 

such a small amount that would encourage the small businessman in Saskatchewan and certainly the 

Attorney General’s comments about the majority of the shareholders, certainly if the Attorney General is 

prepared to say yes, we will go along with that. That is the only objection we have. Then put in ‘the 

majority of the share-holders and the majority of the shares’ and if the Attorney General would give us 

that indication we would be happy to adjust our amendment, to readjust it and put in that the 

shareholders and the shares are held in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan residents and give the smaller 

guy a chance, a break, to compete more favorably with the large companies. 

 

Mr. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — A further comment as well to the minister. In addition to the tax or the 

savings to the local Saskatchewan and the small Saskatchewan oil company, I suggest that the 

government say they would not have needed the decap program and the small companies being given 

special consideration under Bill 42. I think if we recall the situation at that time the blanket tax would 

hurt the small independent operators, the small Saskatchewan companies and necessitated secondary 

legislation by the government to turn around then bring in . . . no we are suggesting to you that given the 

past situation under Bill 42, then in fact we suggest to you that perhaps you will be forced to give special 

benefits to the small Saskatchewan operator either through different tax rates under the regulations or do 

it this way. We are faced now Mr. Attorney General with your earlier statement that the principle of this 

you accept. Now I am wondering that you could agree with the principle of helping the local 

Saskatchewan oil companies, that’s the intent and I think the Attorney General will accept that. If that’s 

the case, if the government does accept the principle of helping the small local Saskatchewan oil 

companies, would the minister then give us the assurance that special benefits will be given to the small 

Saskatchewan oil companies, through the rates and regulations to be promulgated. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I have indicated that we have made no decision in respect to the 

rates. We are looking at it, part of the question of the rates will be dealt with once we have dealt and 

talked with the small Saskatchewan based producers as we will with CPA and others. You see, what is 

being proposed here in this amendment is in effect a blanket exemption for Saskatchewan based 

producers and the tab to the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan could be upwards of $60 million 

by this approach based on the estimates that I have given. O.K. less than $60 million, $50 million, that is 

a lot of money and it’s a blanket exemption to some companies that may not even need it. Some 

Saskatchewan, purely because it’s Saskatchewan based doesn’t mean that they all need it. Now if we are 

looking at a form of assistance, if we are looking 



 

January 10, 1978 

 

1605 

 

at the form of assistance for small Saskatchewan based companies, I say we have to look at it a different 

way. We have to look at it a different way than putting in amendments to the Bill, which amendments I 

think are of questionable constitutional, legal and administrative impact for the reasons I have 

articulated. There may have to be some other way in a legal and proper way to give incentives and give 

assistance to Saskatchewan based. I have already said that it is our general objective and our general 

intent. I don’t know what those words mean — a commitment, because I can give you any kind of a 

commitment, the only question is whether or not at this stage in the game not having talked to the 

Saskatchewan producers or the independents or anybody else in the industry, that’s a commitment of 

any meeting. I’m saying that if we want to do what we can to assist the Saskatchewan based oil 

producers, this is not the way to go about it because of the large size of the tab, the administrative, legal 

and constitutional problems that are attached to it. We have to go about it another way, I can give the 

House a commitment that we are looking at that problem and I will give the House a commitment that 

something will be implemented because it’s not foreseeable at this stage. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — We in the Liberal caucus would very much like to see some kind of assistance given 

to the Saskatchewan based companies and the small companies. The problem that I see at first blush 

with this amendment, notwithstanding the colorability in some of the legal problems is that the kind of 

blanket, the lack of subtility that’s involved in the amendment. It would mean that the companies that 

are now getting about 40 per cent of the return a barrel of oil, $12 barrel they would be getting about $5 

when it moves to that price. They would get about $5 then they would get $12, a $7 increase, not just 50 

per cent more but more than doubling. Now the member for Nipawin says well they would pay tax. 

They rag out those depletion allowances in perpetuity. They don’t pay tax in an ordinary way that other 

companies pay tax. If the Saskatchewan taxpayer is to get any share of the money produced by these 

companies, then it has to be through some form of tax here. In the same token Mr. Chairman, I think that 

consideration has to be given to assisting the small Saskatchewan company, and I hope that the 

government will carry through on what I thought was close to a commitment the other day when I was 

asking questions and the indication seemed to come to me that you were going to have a differential tax 

rate with a lower tax rate for the companies earning a smaller amount of money which would encourage 

the juniors and perhaps give some assistance to the Saskatchewan based companies. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I gather that the Conservative caucus at least does not want to stop 

the clock. That’s quite clear. We’ll come back tomorrow. O.K. that’s fine. My understanding was that 

we would finish off the bill tonight, but if that’s the situation that’s fine. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I move that the Committee report progress on the bill. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 o’clock p.m. 


