




















































Hansard: May 10, 1978


2615 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

May 10, 1978 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to have the opportunity this afternoon to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of this Assembly, approximately 24 Grade Four 

students from the Herbert Elementary School. They are accompanied here this afternoon by their 

teachers Mrs. Gitzel and Mrs. Buhr. I understand that they have had a busy morning. It is unfortunate 

that the million dollar rain is following but I am sure all the farmers in the province appreciate it. I look 

forward to meeting with them briefly at 2:30. I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

them to the Chamber this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

SGIO Claim — Buildall Construction 
 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to pursue once again 

with the Attorney General some question related to Buildall Construction. Can you tell me, Mr. 

Minister, the defendant Richard L. Collver has stated that he has sold out his interest in Buildall 

Construction, lock, stock and barrel. Can the minister tell me whether or not the said defendant has ever 

requested of SGIO to be relieved of his bond obligations when he sold Buildall Construction? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, perhaps this question would best be 

directed to the Minister in charge of SGIO because I have no personal knowledge of it. But having just 

consulted with the minister, I am advised that he has no recollection of such a request being made. 

Certainly I have no such recollection of it being made. There is no reason that I should have since I am 

not Minister in charge of SGIO. I think the answer is, No. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Is that not a very strange and curious way to do business? Does the minister 

have any suspicions, or does the government, or does SGIO, are they curious in any way shape or form 

as to whether or not Mr. Collver has or has not completely disposed of all his assets in Buildall? Is this a 

sham transaction? Do they have any suspicions in this regard? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I am not sure that — while that may be important, or may 

not be important — the fact of the matter is that the government bases its claim on the so-called blanket 

indemnity document, the guarantee (one will see what the defences are and how it works out in court) 

but which guarantee should presumably, so the allegation is in the statement of claim attached to the 

defendant’s throughout the piece, whether there is a sale or not a sale, it is on that document and other 

documents, I presume, or other evidence but essentially on that upon which a good deal of the SGIO 

case rests. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2616 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister tell me whether or not SGIO’s 

refusal to grant a bond to Buildall Construction at this time, or any future requests to obtain a bond, is it anyway 

related to the fact that Mr. Kirk Milne, the president of Buildall Construction is unable to provide any personal 

guarantees in relation to that bond? 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Well, I think, Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is 

the obvious. The record of performance would have a great deal to do with it. Certainly, if you had suffered a 

serious loss you would certainly think twice before you provided an additional bond. I think that’s an obvious 

conclusion that would be made by any insurance company that was considering renewing or considering 

allocating a bond. 

 

Miksoo Aviation 
 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of SEDCO. 

It became clear yesterday that there were financial dealings between this government through SEDCO and Mr. 

Si Halyk, independent counsel in that other case, to purchase Miksoo Aviation. Would you now advise this 

Assembly of the details of Mr. Halyk’s experience, if any, in operating an airline which would cause you to 

enter into these financial arrangements? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I want to, if I may, make an answer to this question because the member 

for Saskatoon-Sutherland says that it became clear in this House that one Mr. Si Halyk had business dealings 

with SEDCO. I deny that on behalf of the government. I ask the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland to table 

before this House documentation to back that allegation. 

 

MR. LANE (Sa-Su): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister in charge of SEDCO and this will in 

part, perhaps, answer the question which the Attorney General poses. The press statement in today’s Leader 

Post indicates that Mr. Halyk is taking over SEDCO’s financial interest in Miksoo amounting to over 

$100,000. That’s in the Leader Post, Mr. Attorney General. Mr. Dan Creighton of Saskatoon says he has a 

contract to purchase Miksoo for $250,000. Can you tell this Assembly why preference is being given, Mr. 

Minister, to Halyk by your government for a lower price? 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — For the benefit of the hon. member who is 

making those allegations, I care less where that statement comes from. SEDCO is not involved in any dealings 

whatsoever with this Si Halyk at this particular time . . . (interjection) . . . I care less what he says. Mr. 

Speaker, if I can report I will. SEDCO is involved only to the tune of $100,000 with Miksoo Aviation . . . 

(interjection) . . . That’s right, I said that yesterday and I’ll say it again today. We have no involvement 

whatsoever with anybody else. If the operation is sold by Miksoo to anybody, if it be Si Halyk or whoever it 

may be, we will then decide what we will do and how we will collect our $100,000. 

 

MR. LANE (Sa-Su): — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary on this point. Mr. Creighton has been apparently 

shunted aside in favor of Mr. Halyk and Mr. Creighton has attempted this morning to find out from local 

SEDCO officials what exactly is going on, to discuss the matter. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister this. The local SEDCO officials told him that they had been 

given instructions not to discuss the matter with him at all. Who 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2617 

 

gave those instructions? Was it you or was it a member of cabinet? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder what the hon. member is trying to allege here. What is 

he trying to get at? All dealings with SEDCO or anybody else are 100 per cent above board. We 

have no connections whatsoever with Creighton. He is dealing directly with Miksoo himself. 

SEDCO is not involved. If the hon. member is trying to cover up by making these allegations to 

cover up, there is something else wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question of the Attorney General. The 

Attorney General was asked yesterday in this House about a conversation he apparently had with 

Kirk Milne who I understand is a former employee and political associate of the defendant 

Richard Collver in that action, in which Milne has alleged that he sought to make some 

arrangements with SGIO to settle the claim. I want to know from the Attorney General what that 

conversation was all about and why he did not meet with Kirk Milne. I think he owes a far greater 

explanation to the House today than the one he gave yesterday.  

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday, words to the effect that Mr. Milne called me 

in the first week of October, 1976. This is not now a representation of the exact words but the 

essence of his telephone message to me was that he wanted to have a meeting with SGIO officials 

in order for him to make a submission to them respecting bonding him for some future or some 

prospective project, in order to recover the proceeds from that project, in order to keep Buildall 

afloat as a consequence or as a part of the matter which was the subject’s question for the last few 

days. He wanted to meet with me. I do not know whether I undertook to meet with him or not, I 

cannot recall but the simple fact of the matter is that I undertook to get myself acquainted with the 

officials at SGIO as to the background on the situation. 

 

As a result of conversations that I had with SGIO officials, I endeavored to call Mr. Milne back in 

Calgary to tell him that I did not want to meet with him. I was not able to do so. I contacted him 

Saturday morning in Saskatoon by telephone and told him that I was not prepared to meet with 

him. The basic reason why I was not prepared to meet with him was that it was obvious to me that 

there were difficulties on the Buildall situation as a result of the background information I got 

from SGIO. Quite obviously, being a politician, it does not take very much to realize that in that 

kind of circumstance a politician should make every effort not to inject himself one way or 

another into the situation. That was the reason for the decision. I told him over the telephone and 

urged him to seethe general manager, John Greene. I think it should have been dealt with between 

him and the corporation, and that I think is the essence of the conversation.  

 

MR. CAMERON: — A supplementary. He also is alleged to have said that he sought to meet 

with you because he wasn’t getting a chance to meet with SGIO. Now, can the Attorney General 

indicate what information did he draw from SGIO when in conversation with Mr. Milne, and is it 

in fact that Mr. Milne wasn’t able to meet with SGIO with respect to this thing:? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I recall, Milne’s proposal was to be involved in 

some project in the coalfields of Alberta, a walking crane project or something of that nature. His 

bond had been cancelled or withdrawn by SGIO prior to his telephone call to me. 

 

There was a withdrawal at the bank of credits at Calgary sometime in September with  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2618 

 

respect to Buildall Construction. SGIO felt, knowing that the variety of Buildall projects were 

running into arrears, I don’t know what the figure was at the time, but in arrears at that particular 

time and that there were difficulties in the situation, it was apparent that one in my position in any 

event, should not inject myself directly. The result was, having been told this information, in 

effect I communicated, I didn’t — I don’t think I told this exactly to Mr. Milne — in effect, I 

communicated to Mr. Milne that I had no interest in meeting with him on this matter as he had 

requested. I think he understood that and accepted that. 

 

SGIO Claim — Buildall Construction 
 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. 

Mr. Attorney General, you have gone to great lengths to indicate both to this Assembly and to the 

press and to the public, that SGIO sought outside independent counsel, I believe that was the 

terminology that you used, before the Crown corporation came to the decision to file a statement 

of claim against Buildall Construction. Mr. Attorney General, I think you would have to agree that 

some questions have been raised in the last couple of days, both in the press and in this Assembly. 

Would the minister agree that the fact this morning in Crown Corporations, you apparently refused 

to table a letter or a transmittal from SGIO to one Mr. Halyk, who I understand is  your 

independent counsel in this matter? 

 

In light of what does appear to be some association of Mr. Halyk to your government in one form 

or another, whatever that may be, Mr. Attorney General, are you still going to cling to the 

assertion that Mr. Halyk was an independent counsel, even by your standards? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I say that, and I challenge the hon. member for Thunder 

Creek or anyone of his associates to allege outside of this House, on the basis of what they 

questioned on Miksoo, to allege that Mr. Halyk has acted as not an independent counsel. I 

challenge them to get out there and say just what. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I challenge the press to ask the leader of the PCs or the member for 

Thunder Creek, to ask any one of those members specifically do they allege that Mr. Halyk has 

acted without independence or without freedom. Mr. Halyk was given this file sometime in 

October or November of 1977. By any stretch of the imagination with respect to Miksoo, by any 

stretch of the imagination, he wasn’t even involved in that operation until the last day or so, 

according to the Minister for Industry, the Minister in charge of SEDCO. By any stretch of 

imagination with respect to the Miksoo operation and even that, the $100,000 of which you people 

are trying to make something, is an attempt to mud sling Mr. Halyk, is an attempt to divert a 

matter which should be left where it properly should be left, namely, the courts — on this Buildall 

situation with respect to Mr. Collver. 

 

It is not a political lawsuit, the allegation by the PC leader and continued by your caucus over 

these days that it is, has made it a political issue, when you should have left it to the independence 

and the integrity of the judiciary and the bar. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I was asked a question but I guess I am not allowed to 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2619 

 

answer so I will have to ignore it, much as I would love to answer it.  

 

Mr. Attorney General, if I would be allowed to comment, your voice is r ising. Mr. Attorney 

General, is it true that Sask Potash Corporation has been doing a great deal of legal work with a 

gentleman who was formerly involved with, in fact, the head of the Legal Aid Society in 

Saskatchewan, a one Mr. Albright? And isn’t it true that this Mr. Albright who was doing 

extensive legal aid or legal work for Sask Potash Corporation, just by accident, happens to be a 

very newly acquired partner for one Mr. Halyk? Mr. Attorney General is that a coincidence or is 

this part again of this highly independent outside counsel that SGIO consulted? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what work Mr. Albright has done or is doing for 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I will undertake to find that out and give the answer to 

the hon. member. But I believe that the record will show, if there is a union as between Mr. 

Albright and Mr. Halyk, with respect to law services, that union has only recently come about —

within a matter of weeks, if that. (Inaudible interjection) No. The SGIO file was  October-

November 1977. Mr. Speaker, I say that the members of the PC caucus are into the gutter by this 

kind of an allegation in an unparalleled way. Because by innuendo, not by direct allegation, but by 

innuendo they are saying that Si Halyk is, as counsel, perverting his ethics and his oath to the Law 

Society of the province of Saskatchewan, to aid and abet the political purposes, as they would 

allege, of this government and I flatly deny that. And, furthermore, not only do I flatly deny that, 

but I say that your not putting one piece of paper anywhere, either in this House or outside this 

House to show that; your not having the guts to get outside this Assembly and say it so that Mr. 

Halyk can defend himself, proves that you are in the gutter with this allegation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

SGIO Claim — Buildall 
 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — A question, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. Attorney 

General as chief law enforcement officer. I ask the Attorney General whether, when you were 

discussing the matter with Kirk Milne you discovered that there was a walking crane contract and 

were for some reason afraid to meet with Kirk Milne. Secondly, if you then had knowledge that 

Mr. Collver had done the very curious thing of not seeking to be released from his guarantee; if at 

that time you were suspicious or not, that Mr. Collver still maintained some ownership in Buildall 

and that the apparent transaction of his ownership in Buildall had, in fact, been a sham transaction 

and a sham passage of ownership? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I did not make those kinds of inquiries. To the best of my 

knowledge, I did not know prior to the phone call from Mr. Milne, the status of Mr. Collver in 

Buildall one way or the other. When Mr. Milne called me he may have mentioned that Mr. Collver 

had sold out his 30 per cent interest, or the per cent interest and I am not sure whether I read that 

today or it was said at the time of the conversation, but his interest in Buildall.  

 

When I called SGIO I did it with the purpose of being brief, quickly over the telephone, as to 

whether or not there was anything that I should know, or should I be alerted to, with respect to this 

potential meeting with Mr. Milne. I learned, as a consequence of the conversation, that there were 

some difficulties that Buildall was experiencing on the 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2620 

 

bond, on the construction. I don’t know whether at that time or not there was a mention of Mr. 

Collver’s involvement by the SGIO official. But the sum total of what I learned was enough to 

alert me, as, I think, a prudent and hopefully reasonable responsible politician, not to meet with 

Mr. Milne. Not because I didn’t want to meet with him on a personal basis, or not because as 

MLA he didn’t have the right to phone me up. I don’t allege that at all. I just felt that the situation, 

as a result of that phone call, progressed that political prudence dictated I should not meet with 

him. As it turns out with all of the political questioning involved in this matter, I think that was 

political prudence well taken. I simply called up Mr. Milne and told him that in a short 

conversation. As I say, I don’t think he attached any significance or importance to it; I think I 

made it fairly clear. That was the end of the matter. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister indicates that you knew then 

that the matter was in arrears and you know now that the contract is in a great deal of difficulty. I 

ask the minister this question. When the bonding was given, clearly there must have been enough 

money in the contract to justify the granting of the contract. SGIO must then have been satisfied 

that there was not only enough money to cover the cost but also enough money to make a 

reasonable profit. I ask the hon. Attorney General whether there was some tragedy in the  contract 

that occurred or whether alternatively the government is now suspicious that there was some 

bleeding off of money by Buildall and as a result of the possible bleeding off of the money to 

shareholders or others that is the reason that the contract  is now into the glue for such a large 

amount of money? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, I think the key part of this whole action is there had been bonds 

for a long, long time starting back in 1969 for Buildall. It was when they ran into trouble in 1976 

that we had to take a look at it. Why wouldn’t we? The bank had cut off their credit, which 

indicated clearly that they weren’t responsible, that they weren’t reliable. The people who were 

building for them had run into financial difficulty. Automatically . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Why? 

 

MR. WHELAN: — . . . Well, if a bank cut off their credit, I think it must be obvious why. They 

were operating in an improper fashion; there was something about their whole operation; they 

weren’t . . . well I think in answer to that question that is one of the reasons why it is before the 

courts to ascertain exactly the question that you are asking. We have put our position clearly in a 

statement of claim. The people who are directors of SGIO, I think, would have been open to 

criticism if they had refused to do this. People are saying that it is political; I don’t think it is 

political at all. I think it is their responsibility and they did precisely what they had to do.  

 

MR. MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, the minister indicates that the money has disappeared but 

doesn’t indicate where the money went. I ask the hon. Attorney General, as happened with one of 

the defendants, Collver, in a similar lawsuit, whether you have investigated allegations that assets 

were being squirrelled away? This was one of the allegations in a previous lawsuit, that assets 

were squirrelled away. Have you investigated the admissions made by Mr. Collver in the previous 

lawsuit that substantial sums of money were paid to him and other shareholders and is that where 

the $1.2 million has gone? I am asking you, did the money end up going to shareholders, going 

outside or going to companies that were involved, did the money end up being squirrelled away by 

the defendant Collver or other guarantors? 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2621 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I answered a question similar to this the day before. My 

answer to the hon. member is that SGIO, having engaged an independent counsel, would be 

guided by the advice that that counsel should give to SGIO with respect to all facets of this case. I 

think that is the answer that is involved there. 

 

Answer to question on Mr. Albright and PCS 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question with 

respect to Mr. Albright and Potash Corporation work. I have been advised by the Minister in 

charge of the Potash Corporation that Jerry Albright has done three pieces of work for the Potash 

Corporation. He prepared a brief in January, 1978. He advised on a labor relations case also early 

in the new year, January or February and handled a very small lawsuit. The entire amount of fees 

are probably less than $1,000 to the Potash Corporation. All of the jobs were given and undertaken 

and have been either been completed, are completed prior to joining with Mr. Halyk, which 

apparently is to start on the 1st of June of 1978. Again I say, dispelling any suggestion that there 

is for this, for anything that kind of an imputation on Mr. Halyk.  

 

SEDCO dealings with Miksoo 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Well, in light of the facts just given by the Attorney General, I 

think the Attorney General is well aware of a legal maxim that justice must not only be done but 

seem to be done and I’m sure the Attorney General — we now have potentially a couple of pies. 

Would the Attorney General be prepared to urge and have a judicial inquiry into the SEDCO loan 

or the SEDCO financial dealings with Miksoo Aviation to make sure that the public have the 

satisfaction that things are being done properly? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I don’t know what the press will do with respect to that but I know why the 

member asks that question because he hopes that that will be the headline for the report. But I say 

to the hon. member and I say to the members of this House, on what conceivable basis could or 

should a judicial inquiry be conducted? Is there an allegation of wrong doing that you are making? 

I am asking you if there is an allegation? Is there a piece of paper or any kind of a documentation 

being made in this area? Is Mr. Halyk precluded from dealing with the owners of Miksoo for a 

buy-sell agreement of the airline? Is Mr. Halyk precluded from dealing with SEDCO? Then what 

is the allegation? Why the public inquiry? Now, I say, Mr. Speaker, that justice must be done. 

Justice, not only must be done but it must be respected. It was not we who alleged the very 

moment that the statement of claim was issued that it was political and have pursued this matter in 

the fashion that you have done it. If you believe what you say about justice being done and 

appearing to be done, for goodness sake, tell your leader and tell your caucus to stop this continual 

looking under rocks to try and divert the issue politically to some other area and let the matter be 

determined in the courts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the Attorney General be 

prepared to reinforce his view, of course, that this is not a political vendetta and table the letter of 

transmittal or instructions to Mr. Si Halyk to institute the action on behalf of SGIO.  

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to take notice of that question. I gather the 

minister in charge was asked that question in Crown Corporations today. I don’t  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2622 

 

know what his answer was . . . Fine, if he refused. I still want to take notice and consider the 

reasons why and I want to consider the question. 

 

SGIO — re Buildall 
 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — A question, Mr. Speaker, to the Attorney General or the 

minister responsible for SGIO. 

 

At any time with respect to these matters, respecting Buildall and the statement of claim that has 

now been issued, at anytime during the past or during the present, have you or the minister 

responsible for SGIO, or any other people acting on your behalf, asked that the RCMP be involved 

in an investigation in any way with respect to this matter? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — No. 

 

MR. McMILLAN: — A supplementary question. With respect to the same matter, have you 

investigated the fact that SGIO made payments to Management Associates Western Limited and 

have you checked to see if any of those payments, which were made to Management Associates on 

behalf of Buildall, ever fell into the hands, either directly or indirectly, of the defendant in the 

case, Mr. Richard L. Collver? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — We take advice from counsel and we will take such steps as counsel 

recommends SGIO to take to protect the interest of SGIO in this case, as in others.  

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 70 — An Act to 

amend The Election Act, 1971. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise in relative tranquillity and say a few well chosen 

words on The Election Act. I will move second reading of an act to amend The Election Act, 

1971, at the conclusion of my remarks. 

 

In 1974 I had the privilege to present to this House a series of amendments to The Election Act, 

1971, setting up Saskatchewan’s first controls on election expenses. This system was in place for 

the 1975 provincial general election, and while there were some problems, for the most part, I 

think all parties adhered to the new controls and they worked fairly well. After the election the 

government promised to review the legislation and to bring forward amendments to correct the 

defects. Since that time there has been an extensive review of the election expense legislation. The 

conduct of political parties and candidates in the by-elections in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 

Saskatoon-Sutherland and Pelly by-elections has also revealed parts of the legislation that are in 

need of attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two basic systems of controlling election expenses in Canada that we know 

of today. The first is what I would call the Ontario system. The only controls in this system are on 

the size of contributions to political parties and candidates, and on the amount that can be spent on 

radio and TV advertising. I do not believe that this system is effective in controlling election 

expenses. One need only look at the statistics published by the Ontario Commission on Election 

Expenses to see the wide discrepancies in the amounts spent by candidates. One of the objectives 

of election expense legislation ought to be to put all candidates on an equal footing with  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2623 

 

respect to the amount of money they are permitted to spend. It is then up to the candidate and his 

supporters to determine how this money can best be spent. This is the advantage of the system for 

controlling election expenses we have in Saskatchewan and at the federal level. In this province all 

the election expenses of political parties and candidates must come within the limits imposed by the 

legislation. One only need check the figures from the last provincial election campaign to see that 

there are not wide discrepancies in the amounts spent by the candidates of the three main political 

parties in Saskatchewan. 

 

The effect of these amendments, which I will discuss in detail in a moment, is to strengthen the 

system of controls previously set up in our province and to set up new limits for expenditures.  

 

Mr. Speaker, after the three by-elections last year, this House heard charges of abuse and of the 

failure of some parties and candidates to obey the law. I do not need to recite the story of those 

charges. In particular, members of this House will be familiar with the allegations concerning the 

Pelly by-election. Mr. Speaker, I have again looked at the report of the Chief Electoral Officer and 

the recommendations of the officials in my Department of Justice. I have also looked at the question 

of whether or not a public inquiry should be set up with respect to this matter. I wish to advise the 

House that I will not be setting up a public inquiry to investigate the conduct of parties and 

candidates in the Pelly by-election. I am satisfied with the sufficiency of the report of the chief 

electoral officer and the recommendation of the Director of Criminal Justice. However, I think I 

would not be out of place by saying that all members would agree with me that the publicity 

resulting from the Pelly by-election has done nothing to improve the image of politicians in the eyes 

of the voters. 

 

These amendments represent the commitment of the government to establish a fair system of 

election expense control in Saskatchewan. I believe that once this bill is enacted into law we will 

have one of the best expense control laws in Canada. I trust that members opposite will join me in 

achieving this objective. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a word or two about the bill. Provision is made for a new ballot. In recent 

meetings the chief electoral officers in Canada have had considerable discussions on the way best to 

design a new ballot. The New Brunswick elections office has undertaken extensive research on 

investigation into ballot designs in Canada and the United States. In deciding upon a new ballot for 

Saskatchewan we have had the benefit of the information provided to Canada’s chief electoral 

officers. 

 

The new ballot, which is set out on page 37 of the bill, is black with the instructions to vote, the 

names and other information of candidates and the circular space for marking the ballots in the 

natural color ofthe paper. The surnames of the candidates appear last and will be in block capital 

letters. The main advantage of this ballot is that it should reduce considerably the number of spoiled 

and rejected ballots. 

 

Returning officers will be authorized, if they consider it advisable, to establish central polling 

stations in the constituency comprised of not more than 12 polling divisions. The returning officer 

may also appoint a supervisory deputy returning officer to keep order at these central polling 

stations. This will ensure greater convenience for voters in our cities and larger towns.  

 

Political parties will be permitted to use an abbreviation of the name of the party on election 

documents where: 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2624 

 

(1) the abbreviation has been registered with the chief electoral officer, and 

(2) the leader of the party has signed a document authorizing the use of the abbreviation.  

 

Those voters qualifying for a mail-in ballot will receive the new ballot mentioned earlier. 

 

The period for commencing prosecutions under the election expense provisions of the act will be 

extended from six months to 18 months. I am sure that certain of my friends opposite will no 

doubt be pleased to see this amendment. 

 

The most important changes come in the election expense section. The definition of election 

expenses has been changed to include the commercial value of goods and services donated, except 

for volunteer labor, and the difference between amounts paid for goods and services and their 

commercial value where they are provided at less than their commercial value. Commercial value 

has been defined. 

 

Personal expenses has been defined to include the reasonable expenses of a candidate for 

travelling, accommodation and meals. Personal expenses will not be included as electi on expenses 

but they will have to be listed in the election expense return. 

 

The limitations on election expenses have been changed. It is proposed that parties be permitted to 

spend: 

 

(1) $225,000 (up from $175,000) at a general election, and (2) $15,000 for northern 

constituencies and $12,500 for southern constituencies in the case of by-elections. 

 

The limit for candidates in southern constituencies will be $15,000 or $1 per voter, whichever 

amount is larger. For candidates in northern constituencies the limit will be $20,000 or $2 per 

voter. 

 

One of the newest concepts of the bill is the limitation of advertising expenditures of political 

parties between elections. We have all had an opportunity to observe the spending habits of 

certain political parties and candidates as a federal election approaches, or any election for that 

matter. In many instances pre-election expenditures have a tremendous impact on voters and 

therefore I think a way to avoid the election expense proposals of the bill which become e ffective 

only when the writ is issued. It is proposed therefore, that the radio, TV, and newspaper 

advertising of political parties be limited to $50,000 per year in the period between elections. Only 

in this way will we have effective election expense controls. 

 

Political parties will be required to file two returns with the chief electoral office, a report listing 

contributions and expenses for each fiscal year and a report setting out election expenses when 

they are incurred. The amendments make it clear that bills and proofs of payment must be filed 

with the chief electoral officer at the time an election expense return is submitted. Each return of a 

political party must be accompanied by an auditor’s statement.  

 

Candidates are also required to file an auditor’s statement with their election expense return. A 

subsidy of up to $250 for the auditor’s fee will be provided for candidates.  

 

The requirement for audited returns of parties and candidates will be another means of 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2625 

 

ensuring that the return represents the true expenditures of parties and candidates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all contributions to and payments on behalf of political parties and candidates must be 

handled through registered agents or the business manager. Individuals can make payments on 

behalf of political parties and candidates as long as the aggregate of the payments does not exceed 

$25 and there is no reimbursement. 

 

Candidates in southern constituencies who receive 15 per cent of the votes cast in a constituency 

will be reimbursed the lesser of 50 cents per voter or one half of their election expenses. This is up 

from 15 cents per voter. Candidates in northern constituencies will be reimbursed for one-half of 

their election expenses. 

 

Political parties who receive 15 per cent of the valid votes cast in the election will receive the lesser 

of $75,000 or one-third of their election expenses. The strict provisions respecting government 

advertising in the election period will remain. The Chief Electoral Officer has been given new 

powers of investigation. His or her appointee (she, I hope because we have a very competent Chief 

Electoral Officer) will be given the powers of a commissioner under The Public Inquiries Act. She 

will also be authorized to appoint a commissioner of election expenses to ensure  that the elections 

expense provisions are complied with. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in summary, the new provisions of this legislation are:  

 

1. a new ballot; 

 

2. new requirements for election expenses, 

 

3. a new expanded definition of election expenses which includes donations of goods and 

services; 

 

4. new election expense limits for parties and candidates; 

 

5. limits on the advertising expenditures of parties between elections; 

 

6. an annual fiscal report of receipts and expenditures from parties; 

 

7. appointment of auditors by parties and candidates; 

 

8. some reimbursement of election expenses for parties; 

 

9. new powers of investigation and enforcement for the Chief Electoral Officer.  

 

Many of these amendments have been modeled on provisions of The Canada Elections Act. One of 

the objectives in bringing forward these amendments was to introduce some uniformity for people 

involved in elections at the federal and provincial levels. 

 

As we move to more control over the activities of political parties in elect ion campaigns, I believe 

that it is important to provide uniform rules wherever possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments represent the commitment of the Blakeney government to provide 

effective controls for election expenditures. With the increasing 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2626 

 

reliance on TV and radio advertising it is important to ensure that political parties and candidates 

do not become dependent on special interest groups with large financial resources. Legislation 

such as this makes it possible for political parties to be responsive to ordinary people and still 

compete fairly in the electoral process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would remind members that no matter how expertly drafted or inexpertly drafted or 

rigidly enforced or unrigidly enforced, if there is such a word, elections expense controls are, they 

don’t work unless all of us as politicians want them to work and make them work. If we approach 

the bill with the mechanism of circumventing it, then the entire purpose is defeated.  

 

I know that every member will view it as his or her responsibility to make sure that this bill is 

complied with, both with respect to its precise provisions and its spirit and make sure that the high 

level of confidence, that I think the electorate generally has in the members of this House, is 

maintained. 

 

MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservative Opposition) : — Mr. Speaker, 

in responding to the Attorney General’s introduction of the new Elections Act, I would first of all 

like to paint a little bit of a scenario as to what has transpired here . I hope the Attorney General is 

going to come forward with some House amendments as he suggested to me that he might 

possibly do, before it is necessary for anyone to vote on second reading on this bill.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some time ago I understand that both the Leader of the Liberal Party and 

myself were approached by the Attorney General with reference to The Election Act. I understand 

that the Liberal Party chose not to examine the act. I felt, and I think that the Attorney General 

felt, at the time, that it would be better to agree on something as important as The Elections Act 

rather than to bring it out and flail at it in this Assembly to the extent that you lose the impact, and 

something as important as how people are going to vote in the next elect ion and whether or not it 

is going to be perceived to be a fair vote, should be, if it is at all possible, agreed upon by the 

three major parties in the Assembly before it is raised in this Legislative Assembly.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker I once again ask you to call order in the Assembly, mostly from behind me. If 

you would I would appreciate it. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, accordingly, the Attorney General provided to me on a confidential basis, a 

preliminary copy of an election act that we were to examine and check out, to send to our lawyers 

and to make some suggestions to the Attorney General and to his department and the Attorney 

General would in turn, make his comments back to us and we would understand the position in 

advance and then bring the act into the House, as close, as fair play as could possibly be expected 

in terms of an election act. If there were some differences of opinion in advance then we would 

know and we would differ and we would present our arguments to the people and let the people 

decide on whether an election act is fair. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we presented this, as I said, to our legal advisors and to other advisors and we 

asked them to make comments on about 10 or 12, I believe, different points that were raised in the 

act — such things for example, as the Attorney General mentioned today and it is in the new act, 

as a definition of such things, as for example, a definition of whether you have money or cash 

expenditure or whether you have an 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2627 

 

accrued financial statement. The new act makes a big thing about how the act is going to be 

audited and makes a big thing about how the various associations are going to be audited but 

auditors have a great deal of difficulty in certifying any cash statement or cash expenditure. The 

reason is because they can’t relate expenditures or actual expenses . . . That is right. The member 

for Regina South (Mr. Cameron) has just stipulated exactly the problem. The act was designed and 

drawn up by lawyers. The Attorney General agreed. I suggested to him that he refer the matter to 

the Institute of Chartered Accountants for their comments as to how best to prepare a financial 

statement for each individual constituency and for the province as a whole. Well, the member for 

Regina South asks what I have against lawyers and the answer is absolutely nothing. Individually 

they are absolutely essential but, unfortunately, Mr. Member for Regina South, they don’t know a 

heck of a lot about how to present a set of statements or they don’t understand a heck of a lot 

about financial information and the presentation. Well, you make money or mint it.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is that what we tried to do was to present to the Attorney General our 

suggestions on how to improve his new act. One of them related to that area, another related to the 

area of the auditor’s certificate and the necessary work that an auditor would have to do in making 

the presentation to the Attorney General and many other suggestions.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to have a great deal more to say on this because of the Attorney 

General’s remarks today. It was my understanding, today, that prior to introducing this particular 

act, was going to work out some House amendments with reference to our suggestions. Some of 

them he seemed to agree with and some of them he didn’t and that was fine, but he was going to 

work out some and present them when he was presenting the act. Quite simply, he didn’t do so. He 

did, however, present to us, Mr. Speaker, after our going to the trouble and bother of going 

through the act and having our legal advisors and others make a specific suggestion as to how to 

improve the act and to tighten up on some of the controls that the Attorney General has suggested 

in this new act, we did get from him a statement back stating that every single suggestion 

including the one with reference to the difference between a cash statement and an accrued 

statement, which is infinitely superior to a cash statement, every single suggestion, some of them 

even infinitesimally small in terms of changing the wording and so on, were rejected by the 

Attorney General. So why we went the through that exercise of trying to co-operate with the 

Attorney General . . . I am about to get around if you will wait a second. I was going to say that 

under those circumstances, obviously, the Leader of the Liberal Party was right in refusing to 

accept a copy of the act in advance. The fact is that apparently he has known the Attorney General 

longer than I have and has a better understanding of how these things are going to be worked out 

and I was attempting to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do have a great deal more to say on this matter and I beg leave to adjourn debate.  

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 68 — An Act to 

amend The Statute Law. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, there may be another Statute Law before we prorogue the House, but I 

would like to get this one started in any event. Statute Law are the amendments which are usually 

very technical amendments to clarify clerical errors or 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2628 

 

other errors in other bills. 

 

This is a similar bill which we introduce every year. There are two amendments here. One is to 

section 11 of The Prairie Enforced Fires Act. This amendment is the result of an inconsistency in 

the above mentioned act, discovered in the process of revising the statutes of Saskatchewan. In 

1968 the act was amended, in part, to extend its application to local improvement districts, 

however, section 11 presently refers only to the secretary-treasurer of a rural municipality and 

must be amended to also refer to the Minister of Municipal Affairs acting on behalf of a local 

improvement district. 

 

The second amendment deals with section 28, subsection (4) of The Unified Family Court Act, 

1978. The House amendment to the above mentioned act necessitated renumbering of the 

subsections of section 28. Subsection (2) of that section, in the first reading bill, became 

subsection (3) in the third reading bill. The reference to subsection (2) and subsection (4) of that 

section in the third reading bill was not changed to subsection (3) at the appropriate time and we 

are doing that with this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, therefore, move second reading of An Act to amend The Statute Law.  

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance) moved second reading of Bill 69 — An Act to 

amend The Department of Finance Act (No. 2). 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the government will be providing salary adjustments for all its out -of-scope 

employees. Since changes in the provincial auditor’s salary must be approved by the Legislature, 

it is necessary to amend The Department of Finance Act. The adjustment reflects the market 

situation and other conditions upon which out-of-scope salary adjustments are based. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed salary adjustment to $39,500 per annum effective October 1, 1977, is 

necessary to keep the provincial auditor’s salary in line with salaries of other permanent heads. 

That is the purpose of the amendment to The Finance Act, Mr. Speaker. I move that the bill to 

amend The Department of Finance Act (No. 2) be now read a second time.  

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the need to adjust the 

provincial auditor’s salary, I think, is obvious to anybody who is aware of the unfortunate 

situation in which he finds himself and in which the provincial auditor is in in Saskatchewan. We 

have the lowest paid or second lowest paid provincial auditor of any in Canada. The provincial 

auditor in the province of Newfoundland is paid more than the provincial auditor is in 

Saskatchewan. I think it is also important to note that in the last while at least there have been 

three deputies in the auditor’s department who have all been paid more than the auditor has. An 

extremely unfortunate situation. I can’t argue with the fact that the auditor ought to be paid more 

than what he is being paid but I must say to the minister that I consider it extremely unfortunate 

that even on a temporary basis that the auditor is in a position where people in his department are 

being paid more than he is. I should maybe point out to the minister that one of the 

recommendations that hopefully will becoming from Public Accounts will deal directly with this 

situation. One of the things Public Accounts has done this year is take a look and I know that I am 

not at liberty to divulge what Public Accounts has done in detail until the report is tabled in the 

House but has taken a look at the situation as it affects 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2629 

 

auditors in other parts of Canada. At least some of us are strongly of the view that significant 

changes need to be made in that entire situation. As I say, from the point of view of raising the 

auditor’s salary in Saskatchewan, it is overdue. It is something that ought to have happened some 

time ago and there needs to be some mechanical arrangement set out so that we are not left in a 

situation in which we are in Saskatchewan compared with other jurisdictions and so that we are 

not in a situation, even though temporary, where people under the provincial auditor and people in 

his department are being paid more . 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, we concur fully with the remarks 

made by the member for Saskatoon Eastview. In some respects, Mr. Minister, I wonder if perhaps 

the situation of the provincial auditor is not due for an overhaul. There must be some smoother 

way to deal with this situation rather than having to put a separate bill through the Legislature. I 

am not an expert in this, there may be some reason it has to be this way. Mr. Minister, I would ask 

you to consider at some future point in time some smoothing out legislation to eliminate what I 

think may be to some extent, some degree of an indignity, at the very least. Mr. Speaker, we in the 

Progressive Conservative Party strongly support any measure that strengthens the office of the 

provincial auditor. I know that sounds like motherhood and like lip service but when we are in 

government in about one year, the provincial auditor’s office is going to be greatly increased, 

largely expanded. The provincial auditors will assume a very, very important role over the 

expenditures of this government. He will be expected under a Conservative government to point 

out the mistakes or the inefficiencies as he finds them. In short, under a Conservative government, 

that provincial auditor is going to be calling a spade a spade. It will not be as it is now 

understaffed, under just about everything: relegated to a very, very minor role. I would like to add 

that we in the Conservative Party have a great deal of respect for the present provincial auditor 

and we deplore the very regrettable condition and the very unfortunate disdain which this New 

Democratic government shows for the office of the provincial auditor. I sincerely hope that under 

a new regime in about one year this provincial auditor will be prepared to assume a very vigorous 

and active role that we have in mind for his department. We will support the bill, Mr. Speaker.  

 

MR. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just take a 

moment. I have a few remarks to make on a couple of the comments. I would like to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. 

Bowerman that Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Act, 1974 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — May I ask for leave of the House to 

revert to that particular matter, Mr. Speaker, and read it again. It is our intention to stand the bill.  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked leave to revert to Bill No. 2. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2630 

 

Request denied. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of  the Hon. Mr. Byers 

(Minister of the Environment) that Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Liquor Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — I would like to say a few words on this bill. Do 

I have the floor, Mr. Speaker? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Are you wishing to make a point of order? 

 

MR. MALONE: — Since the bill is in my name if it’s The Liquor Act and I believe it’s The 

Liquor Act that you called. I asked for it to stand. Now my understanding of the rule is that that is 

a motion in effect, sometimes a vote is necessary and sometimes it isn’t.  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That is, in effect, asking it to stand by courtesy of the House but, however, 

the member cannot use ‘stand’ to block another member from debating something. If the other 

member wishes to debate it he can debate it and if one of your members wishes — I sympathize 

with the member for Lakeview in that he can’t hear what I’m saying because some members are 

making a lot of noise and not listening to what I’m saying so I’m going to  have to say it again. 

‘Stand’ is understood to mean that an item, by courtesy of the House, will continue to stand. If 

another member wishes to speak on the issue he can’t be blocked from speaking by someone 

saying ‘stand’. The members can see the end result of that. Now, if the member for Saskatoon 

Centre speaks as he says he is going to, then if a member from somewhere wants to adjourn it 

again, he can adjourn it and it will be on the order paper. 

 

MR. MALONE: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, just for clarification. Am I allowed to speak 

on the bill again? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I’ll just have to look at my listing on that particular one to tell the 

member. Yes, the member will be allowed to pick up the debate later on but he won’t be able to if 

the member for Saskatoon Centre speaks. Someone else will have to adjourn the debate after the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

MR. MALONE: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’m not following you. Am I entitled to speak as a 

result of you recognizing the member for Saskatoon Centre and not recognizing my remark to 

stand? 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, if the member for Regina Lakeview wishes to speak after the member 

for Saskatoon Centre has spoken, but if he doesn’t want to speak today, he can have someone in 

his caucus adjourn it and he can pick up the debate later on. 
 

MR. MALONE: — O.K. Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. I’m not trying to belabor this matter with you 

but what you’re saying now is that if the bill is in somebody’s name, including the Attorney 

General’s name on private member’s day, he says stand and I jump up and start to speak, you will 

recognize me? 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — All the time. 
 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, before I say my few remarks I want to say that I 

certainly didn’t wish to cause any controversy. I believe you have recognized me so I will 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2631 

 

go ahead. 

 

I have a few remarks in regard to this bill which would in essence prohibit the liquor 

advertisements on conventional cable TV and is something that I feel that I must speak on because 

I have had a lot of letters and telephone calls from certain of my constituents in Saskatoon Centre.  

 

First of all I want to say that I think it is a recognized fact that anything to do with liquor is under 

provincial jurisdiction and this has been accepted by the federal government and  the various 

provincial governments for many, many years. Just to drive the nail home a little further, we can 

say that it is utilizing certain hardware which belongs to a provincial Crown corporation, that too 

has traditionally come under the jurisdiction of this provincial government and it comes under the 

jurisdiction of other provincial governments who find themselves in the same situation.  

 

It is alleged by certain people that one conventional cable TV company in Regina has said that it 

will not obey the law relative to this bill should it pass in this Legislative Assembly. I want to say 

that I find that shocking, that a conventional cable TV company, and I am talking about the one 

based in Regina, would come up with a statement like that, in reality, preaching disrespect for the 

law. I say it is not their function to determine whether or not this bill be constitutional; that is a 

function of the courts. If that particular jurisdiction or any individuals want to challenge the 

provincial government, then I say, the path is open to them through proper channels but not to 

publicly state — I would say that they may have had some bad legal advice here, I don’t know — 

that they are not going to obey the law. I find that very, very difficult to believe.  

 

Another conventional cable TV company based in Saskatoon took a different approach. I respect 

them for the approach that they took. They took this approach. They said, look we can do it. We 

don’t think that we should have to do it. We can do it but it is going to  be extremely costly. Well, 

I really don’t buy that argument, Mr. Speaker, because it isn’t going to be extremely costly when 

one figures that conventional cable TV systems pay for themselves in 18 months and after that the 

rest is gravy. They at least had the courtesy and the decency to say that they would obey the law 

but that they would find it extremely distasteful. 

 

Now, I talked to certain constituents; some of them ministers and priests in my constituency.  

 

MR. CAMERON: — Do you always consult with those priests? 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — O.K. I talked to one protestant minister. Do you challenge me on that 

one? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — No, not at all. 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — You don’t? O.K. I wonder if I could table this, the name of this particular 

minister who said, ‘Yes Paul feel free to use my name,’ The Reverend Walter Boldt who is the 

Pastor of the University Drive Alliance Church in Saskatoon. Do you find this a big joke? I see 

you smiling, grinning from ear to ear. I would like to table this. It’s on a small piece of paper but I 

think it is sufficient. I was in contact with him and he said, ‘Certainly, I have certain principles by 

which I stand and I don’t mind my name being used in this House.’ So I would caution you about 

making fun of the remarks that I am going to make relative to what he said. Now The Reverend 

Boldt said that he is in 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2632 

 

complete agreement with the provincial government relative to this bill. He says, it is we, meaning 

church people who have to pick up the pieces particularly in regard to liquor consumption and the 

abuse of it. 

 

Another minister that I talked to was a United Church minister. I didn’t ask him whether I could 

use his name. I said, I will not use your name. But he is a representative, and he cautioned me to 

use the word ‘representative’ as opposed to spokesman. Now he is not a temperance man and he 

has taken the odd drink in his life. But he says, I am not against it. (I hear a big burp over there, 

Mr. Speaker!) He says, I am not against it but I know the devastating effects of alcohol; I  know 

what is going to happen if these liquor ads are going to appear on conventional cable TV, watched 

by adults and particularly the vulnerable children. 

 

I also spoke to one Catholic priest who said exactly the same thing. I also spoke to a spokesman 

for the Mennonite Church in Saskatoon. He said, ‘Paul, I am completely behind the provincial 

government relative to this bill.’ I want that to go on record that this spokesman for the Mennonite 

Church says absolutely no liquor ads. He commends the provincial  government in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that liquor advertising has a bad influence on people, particularly the 

young. I well remember when I was small, young. That is not too many years ago on the prairies 

here . . . Does the member wish to speak? Well, at any rate I can recall being young, say 12 or 13 

and that was the time when the Liberals were in power. There was a Liberal regime. I think the 

hon. member for Thunder Creek mentioned regime. I can recall being young and seeing these beer 

advertisements in the paper. You know the more I saw of them the more I wanted a taste of beer. 

But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was many, many years before beer ever hit my lips and I did taste. I 

said, bad stuff, bad stuff. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you for this or not? 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — Well, I will tell you, we will see how you fellows vote and how you 

speak. Being a teacher, I know how TV advertisements can influence young people. I have spoken 

to many of them. They pick up the actions, the habits that they see on TV. If these ads appear over 

and over again, then these boys and girls gradually say that is the accepted norm. I say we have 

got too much liquor in this province, too much liquor in other provinces and too much liquor in 

the world. Now I do say to those people . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who is selling the liquor Paul? 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY: — I don’t know. If you fellows want to buy liquor, don’t ask me where you 

can buy it. You know where you can buy it. Don’t ask me.  

 

I do want to offer some alternative to those who do not wish to see liquor advertisements on TV. I 

will suggest that they not hook up to the conventional cable TV systems. There is an option and 

that is CPN that has stated time and time again that it will carry no advertising, no liquor 

advertising also. In fact the presentation made to the CRTC by CPN said, ‘We will carry 

absolutely no advertising at all,’ and that includes liquor advertising. Mr. Speaker, I fully endorse 

this bill. I think it is the real thing. I think it is needed and I commend the minister who isn’t here 

at this time, he is away on important business, for introducing this bill. I do have some further 

words to say on the matter and consequently I beg leave to adjourn debate.  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2633 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — On a point of order. Mr. Speaker, 

on this ‘stand’ business which has always been a matter of concern. I have checked your statement 

of April 20, 1977. I draw to your attention one paragraph and if I may I would like to read it, ‘If 

there is disagreement over whether an adjourned item should stand, the matter may be decided 

forthwith by division and without debate. This is based on the principle that an adjourned item 

belongs to the entire House, etc.’ May I with respect, Mr. Speaker, suggest to you that when I 

said, ‘stand,’ and the member opposite rose to speak, that there is obviously a dispute as to what 

should happen. For future reference, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could ask you at this time, if this 

should happen again would it be your intention to, on your own instance, put the matter to a 

division or is it necessary for one of us to rise and ask for a division if this happens again?  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I think we are talking about two different things. The member for 

Saskatoon Centre wanted to speak on the issue. He is not allowed to be blocked by any member 

from speaking on an issue, he has the right to speak on it. I’m not suggesting you were blocking 

him, I am suggesting that you said, ‘stand’ which is quite clear. So he has the right to speak on it. 

He got up and spoke on it, then he adjourned the debate. Now, if the member for Lakeview had 

said, ‘stand’ and the members in the House had said no forcefully enough, I would have taken a 

vote. Had he won the vote, the member for Lakeview, then it would have stood. Had he lost the 

vote, he would have had to rise immediately and speak or lose his chance to re -enter the debate 

later. So there are two different issues here. The member for Lakeview now gets a chance to come 

back into the debate should the item arise again. 

 

MR. MALONE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I did say stand and it’s quite possible you didn’t hear me. 

May I ask you, did you hear me and also see the member rise and then recognize the member?  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Oh, yes. I heard the member for Lakeview say, ‘stand.’ I heard several 

members say ‘stand.’ But you can’t use that to block the member from speaking.  

 

MR. MALONE:— I acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, but I am wondering is, what happens next? 

Do we have to then move for a vote, or is it your job when you see a member standing in his place 

and hearing us say, ‘stand’, I am asking for advice. Is it up to you then to take a vote on division 

or is it necessary for us to make a motion to you to have the vote taken? Quite candidly I ask this, 

because the government from time to time, to use the old phrase, stands things off the order paper. 

I can anticipate as we go into, perhaps, the end of this session we may be wanting to rise to speak 

to something and somebody over there may be saying, ‘stand’. I would just like to clarify it now 

to avoid possible disputes later on in the session. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Perhaps the member would bear with me. I will check my statement that he 

said was made on April 20, 1977 and I will come back later and make a statement to the House if I 

feel it is necessary at that time. 

 

The member for Rosthern has a point of order. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, on that same subject as the Leader of the Liberal Party.  

 

I think if you check the records you will find that the Leader of the Liberal Party has done 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2634 

 

that several times to the Conservatives, when one of our members has called, ‘stand’, and he has 

stood up and said five words and adjourned it. Today, it happened back to him and he should 

realize what the rules are. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I don’t think that is a point of order, it is an interesting comment.  

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I was just wondering how Mr. Speaker, 

could find that the member for Lakeview could again speak after the member, Mr. Mostoway, 

spoke? You will recall that the last time this item was before the House the member for Lakeview 

took it in his name and adjourned it. Now Mr. Speaker recognized the member for Saskatoon, who 

just spoke. How can now the member for Lakeview come back into it? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I have been doing this all along. The members need only to look at Bill 22 

and they will find that members came had back in quite often after the debate been adjourned. So 

it does not prevent the member for Lakeview or the member for Saskatoon Centre from getting 

back into the debate later. They can both come back in. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I suppose what he can’t do again is adjourn it? Is it correct that if Mr. 

Malone comes back in again he cannot adjourn it? That is the only thing tha t he can’t do? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That is correct. If the member for Lakeview enters the debate again he 

cannot adjourn it again. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek 

that Bill No. 46 — An Act to establish a Heritage Fund for Saskatchewan be now read a 

second time. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on 

this bill. I consider the establishment of the Heritage Fund perhaps one of the most significant 

bills that has come before the Assembly and there has been very little discussion on it or very few 

questions. I just want to bring up three or four points. 

 

First of all let’s talk about the Heritage Fund. It is an attempt to provide a fund for the utilization 

of capital accumulated through resource revenue. Now, the question that has been debated, or 

really that is before us, is how can this revenue generated through non-renewable resources that 

will no longer, perhaps, be here in the province of Saskatchewan 15 or 20 years hence, be best 

used for the future generations of the children or for young people of Saskatchewan.  

 

Certainly there are three ways in which we might make a decision in this regard. I think the 

government of Saskatchewan has taken the worst possible way. Let me enumerate what those 

three alternatives are and I want to repeat. The alternatives are, how best to use the revenue from 

non-renewable resources in order to provide for future generations. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the Heritage Fund is the storing of capital. It is the storing of capital and 

I am sure that most people would agree with me, that the only value that capital has is to be 

circulated. Here is what this bill proposes. 

 

This bill proposes, first of all, the taking of a portion of the revenue from non-renewable 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2635 

 

resources and establishing a fund called the Heritage Fund and investing it for use in the future on 

the decision of the government and approved by the Legislature. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, the Fund will not take all the revenue from non-renewable resources and 

the most significant factor is not only that, but that the Fund will not be able to use the interest 

that the Fund will generate, but that the interest will be retained or returned to general revenues 

and spent on a day by day basis. 

 

What, Mr. Speaker, will that result in? Well, let me give you a very simple example and I gave 

this example a few weeks ago when I first spoke on the bill.  

 

In 1978 if the minister takes $100 million and inflation continues at its present rate, in 1988 it will 

only buy $10 million worth of goods and services instead of $100 million. That is a very simple 

analogy. Maybe inflation will be 9 per cent. maybe it will be 8 per cent, it might be 11 or 12 per 

cent, who knows. The past 10 years have not been very optimistic in this regard. But it is a fact 

that there is absolutely no hedge against inflation and the Heritage Fund interest is being used in 

general revenues. So that the value of the dollar, 10 years hence, at a 10 per cent inflation rate, 

means that approximately $10 million is all the value of that $100 million to spend to create jobs 

and for the use of future generations. That, Mr. Speaker, is not good management. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I could go on and talk about that. What is the second alternative then? How are we going 

to utilize this money from non-renewable resources if we do not set it aside in a heritage fund? 

The tragedy is that all the discussions on the heritage fund in both the province of Alberta and the 

province of Saskatchewan today have been how to manage the fund. They have not really sat 

down and discussed whether the idea of a Heritage Fund is good or bad. Now, Mr. Speaker, I say 

it is bad. It is the poorest of three alternatives. 

 

What is the second alternative? The second alternative, of course, is for the government to take the 

revenue as it exists today and invest it in sales in government owned enterprises. Invest it in 

government owned enterprises with the hope that these government owned enterprises ten years 

down the road will grow and expand and provide new jobs for future generations. That is the 

second alternative. The government has utilized this second alternative in the last three or four 

years with the Energy Fund. 

 

Let me give you an example. They took over $350 million or $ 370 million dollars to buy potash 

mines. That was using the second alternative to taking the funds or the revenues from non-

renewable resources, investing them in government owned enterprises. They took portions of the 

Energy Fund and invested in IPSCO to buy shares. They took portions of the Energy Fund and 

used it to buy a percentage of Intercontinental. They used a portion of the non-renewable 

resources revenue to establish Saskoil and to buy existing production.  

 

Now what is the result of this second alternative that has been used by the NDP government in the 

last five years? Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if this is supposed to build future opportunity for future 

generations in Saskatchewan, we have absolutely failed in this regard, by the government using 

the second alternative. In the Potash Corporation, in fact, instead of creating new jobs we may 

have strangled future expansion by five or six mines that were announced in 1971, 1972, and 

1973. All of them had plans for major expansions and there would be more jobs on the street 

today, had it been left in the private sector. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2636 

 

Now the minister says, but we are going to expand a mine now and we will probably be perhaps 

even building a new mine in the future. Yes, but had it been left to pr ivate industry we would 

certainly have all of the mines now expanded or in the course of expansion, or most of them. We 

might have had one or two or three new potash mines. Certainly in between 1964 and 1971 we had 

nine new potash mines. There is no way to suggest that we should not have another three or four, 

particularly when they are taking the money from Saskatchewan that the NDP are giving it and 

they are investing it south of the border looking for new potash sources, and in the province of 

New Brunswick. Yet we have the richest and the biggest and the surest deposit of any province or 

any location in the whole world. 

 

So it would certainly seem that this second alternative of taking the funds from non-renewable 

resources, investing them in Crown corporations or state-owned enterprises that already exist and 

purchasing them so that the government of Saskatchewan can say, we, the people, own them, the 

resources belong to us, has certainly made no contribution or little contribution toward the future 

generations of Saskatchewan. In fact it may have scared out money to invest in potash in 

Saskatchewan to provide jobs for Saskatchewan citizens in the future and transferred that to New 

Brunswick, across the border, and other areas of the world. The very taxpayers’ dollars that came 

from our non-renewable resources may well be creating jobs in New Brunswick, in North Dakota 

and in South Dakota. I say to you, Mr. Minister, that the second alternative of the way you have 

utilized the Energy Fund in the past has in no way contributed to establishing future generations or 

jobs for future generations. 

 

So I say that the first alternative, the establishment of a Heritage Fund with no hedge against 

inflation, where you are taking the interest, putting it into general revenues, spending as much 

money as you want on your own decision, is certainly, in a way, completely devaluating the 

revenues from non-renewable resources for the future of future generations. That is the first point.  

 

The second point or the second alternative of the government of Saskatchewan, using it to create 

state-owned enterprises so that they can say, we own the potash or we own the oil or we own 

IPSCO, or whatever it may be, has in no way contributed to the job creation and expansion of the 

economy of the province of Saskatchewan for future generations. 

 

I say in the first one, also in the Heritage Fund, another reason I am against this is for what it 

does. All of a sudden it creates a fund for the government. We have got to spend this money. We 

have got to buy airlines like Mr. Lougheed; we have got to buy this like some other Premier; we 

have got to buy potash or whatever it may be. I say that when you turn around and give the 

government of Saskatchewan a pool of money that is a disaster.  

 

I also say to you, Mr. Speaker, there is a third alternative and that is the alternative that I believe 

should be used. In that alternative a method should be found to return that $100 million to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan so it will be spent by the consumers and recycled through the economy 

and we do that every year. I hear the minister stand up and say, let’s cut income tax. Why? To 

provide incentive to invest, create new jobs. We hear the federal government say we are cutting 

the sales tax. Why? To create investment, consumer spending, so that we can generate new jobs. It 

is also a fact that if you turn around it is the private sector that has all the success when it comes 

to generating jobs and expansion and growth in Canada. You can turn around and say that the 

private sector invests today $100 million worth of investment and it creates,  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2637 

 

we’ll say, 500 jobs. You can be absolutely certain that 10 years from now, if it’s a viable 

operation, the way Canada is growing at a normal growth rate, that that particular investment will 

have many, many more jobs 10 years down the road. What I am suggesting to the minister is that 

he ought to take this money, because it isn’t his . . . for some strange reason every time a 

government gets money in its hands it is very reluctant to recycle it. The member seem to feel, oh, 

we’ve got an obligation to find a new way to spend it. No government in Canada is worse at this 

than is the NDP. Oh, this — we can spend your money wiser than you can; we have a better way 

of investing that money; we know better than the private sector. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, up 

until now they certainly have not demonstrated that. 

 

I say there is a third alternative and an alternative that the minister should be exploring. We 

should be using perhaps a little out of the example of Mr. Lougheed. All of a sudden he said to 

me, the non-renewable resource is located in Alberta. We are a producing province, therefore, we 

will eliminate the provincial tax. We will not turn around and have a sales tax. You put that 5 per 

cent and generate 5 per cent additional consumer spending and consumer goods and the province 

of Saskatchewan may well — I don’t know what impact it will have — but if all the other 

thoughts that are going on-in the province of Saskatchewan that 2 per cent is going to turn around 

and generate $54 million, if I remember the minister correctly, what is 5 per cent? It’s going to be 

what, $125 million reduced with the gasoline tax or whatever it may be. All I’m saying, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that the private sector, the individual businessman, by expanding consumer 

spending, by giving the profit to the businessman, will use it to expand and develop and create 

new jobs for the future. That’s the best method. I do not believe that the minister is doing t he 

people of Saskatchewan a service by taking $100 million a year, putting it in a vault, leaving it 

there for 20 years and then saying that that $100 million is going to be of any value particularly 

when there is no hedge against inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister should reshape this. I would like to see a real sincere debate 

on the concept of the Heritage Fund. Not how to manage the fund, not whether we should bring it 

in here to the Legislature when we are going to spend the money or not,  not whether the executive 

council should have the decision-making process, not whether or not the government finance 

office should have the responsibility of investing it, we should be discussing the wisdom of ever 

establishing a Heritage Fund in the first place. That’s what we should be debating. We should be 

debating what will be the accurate economic results of that $100 million 20 years down the road. 

We should be asking for economic advice. We should be getting in chartered accountants. We 

should be getting in the business community. We should be getting in economists from all over, 

from the university and sitting down with them and saying, now, is the Heritage Fund a good idea 

or a bad idea; Mr. Speaker, I think it’s a bad idea. 

 

MR. MERCHANT: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Cowley that 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting the Creation of Corporations for Certain Purposes  be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr.  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2638 

 

Tchorzewski that Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Dental Nurses Act, 1973  

be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE — Vote 11 

 

ITEM 3 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Chairman, when we broke for 10:00 o’clock, the 

minister just informed me of how many months they had additional employees for. I would thank 

the minister for when the House adjourned, he informed me to look at page 32 of the Budget 

Speech which indicates that we have approximately 3,092 who are classed as non-permanent 

positions. If I am correct, Mr. Chairman, that is the total number of non-permanent positions in the 

government of Saskatchewan in all departments? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Those are not positions. They are 3,092 man-

years of employment. There may be three times the number of employees during the year , some 

hired for one month, some for maybe even two days or one day. That is the number of man-years 

of employment in the total government structure as set out in the Estimates on non-permanent 

positions. 

 

MR. KATZMAN:— With that in mind, Mr. Minister, I understand from previous ministers whom 

I have asked the same question of, that your department would be able to supply a breakdown of 

that 3,092 by department, not by each vote in department but just by the, for example, this is 

called vote 11 which is all of Finance area. Can you supply that? 
 

MR. SMISHEK: — Yes,. As I indicated to you last night, it will take a while for us to do it 

because I have talked to the officials this morning about breaking it down for you, by departments 

but it will take a few days for us to do it. 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — My understanding is that it does not include Crown corporations.  
 

MR. SMISHEK: — No. We do not deal in the blue estimates of the Crown corporations.  
 

MR. KATZMAN: — And it does not cover hospital people who are being transferred to SHAP 

and so forth. You used to have some hospital staff who were government and now it is all through 

hospitalization. Is that correct.? 
 

MR. SMISHEK: — Not in the current year under review. There were some transfers in a couple 

of hospitals that took place in the last couple of years and they were under separate subvotes of 

the Department of Health but all of them are operated by local boards and are funded through the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, so there are no temporary or permanent positions in those 

that were transferred, any longer. 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — O.K. This is my last question on that line. That would indicate order of 

reduction in civil servants because of these being transferred over. For example, on page 32 you 

show 14,398 total employees and yet today, we show 13,852. I think that would reflect those 

nurses and so forth going off. 
 

MR. SMISHEK: — The answer is, yes. Since 1975-76, I would have to look to see just 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2639 

 

when those transfers took place but I don’t think there are any such transfers this year. 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, you are going a little fast there. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You are too slow. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, there’s a lot of truth in that too. I’m afraid I left it in bed with the 

flu. I’m sorry and I apologize for not being here last night, Mr. Minister. I am just sure that you 

missed me terribly. However, Mr. Minister, could you tell us basically what the comptroller’s 

office does? He has a large number of employees and very generally, without going too deep into 

it, what is his role and what is his function and is he used as a cost control function? Would you 

explain that, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I will be glad to. Mr. Chairman, the purpose of this branch is to design 

financial regulations and procedures to facilitate accountability to the government and to the 

Legislature. The major functions of the branch are: 

 

1. To ensure proper receipt, recording and disposition of public money.  
 

2. To control the account classifications in accordance with which estimates of revenues and 

expenditures are prepared and accounts are maintained. 
 

3. To control disbursements from the Consolidated Fund in accordance with The Department of 

Finance Act. 
 

4. To ensure maintenance of the appropriation accounts and financial accounts relating to the 

operation of the Consolidated Fund. 
 

5. To prepare the Public Accounts and any financial statements and reports that may be required 

by the Minister of Finance or the Treasury Board. 
 

6. To ensure as far as possible, compliance and administrative rules and regulations to Treasury 

Board. 
 

7. To accumulate and record all department receipts, make payments on a basis of audited 

payments or payment vouchers and reconcile bank accounts. 
 

8. To approve and evaluate the design and changes thereto of financial statements which account 

for the receipt, recording and disposition of public money and evaluate on the ongoing system.  
 

9. To review draft legislation for the Legislative Review Committee to ensure adequate financial 

requirements or that financial requirements are provided for. 
 

10. To monitor cost-shared agreements to ensure claims are made in an accurate and timely 

manner. 
 

Those are the functions. 
 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, just very quickly and I can’t find it offhand, maybe you can 

help me. I notice you are budgeted for 130 employees in the comptroller’s office and I’m looking 

for the Provincial Auditor’s Estimates, perhaps you can help me. How many employees does the 

Provincial Auditor have? 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2640 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Fifty eight. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not questioning the number of employees that you 

have in the comptroller’s office. I assume that there is a reason for each and everyone of them. 

Would the minister not agree that on one end, when you are controlling the money going out that 

it is basically, as you have described it, a function of categorizing the cheques into their proper 

category and, of course, seeing that they go out in accordance with the rules of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Basically, it would appear from your description that this function is one of issuing 

and categorizing and keeping a record of paying your bills. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, since the Provincial Auditor I suppose has a function which complements the 

Provincial Auditor, a fact which I think is recognized by your government and some Public 

Accounts both of them play very significant roles, would you agree that it is rather, well to say the 

very least, an inconsistency that you would have 130 employees to the comptroller’s o ffice and 

only 58 to an office that, in many respects, is certainly of equivalent importance as a comptroller, 

that being the Provincial Auditor? Governments generally, not just this provincial government, are 

seeing their expenditures mushroom; your size of government is mushrooming; all governments 

pay lip service to controlling their expenditures, some of them more successfully than others, but 

nonetheless it is a fact that it is happening. The fact that it is happening in the Provincial Auditor’s 

office has become significantly far more important in many places except right here. Now we are 

not dealing with the Provincial Auditor’s office but I would like to ask the minister, is it not a real 

inconsistency that you indicate 130 employees in the comptroller’s office (fine, I’m sure you can 

justify each and everyone of them) but in the Provincial Auditor’s office how do you justify only 

58? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — The answer, Mr. Chairman, is No. We do not believe there is any 

inconsistency. I think if the hon. member was more familiar with each of the roles he would 

appreciate the role of the comptroller’s office is to process all the accounts and that requires a 

great deal of work. The government on a daily basis has a lot of accounts to pay. There is the pre -

auditing before the accounts are paid to make sure that they are checked whereas the auditor does 

the auditing after the fact. There is no inconsistency at all. I think that if he understood the process 

he would appreciate that the volume of work is much greater in the comptroller’s office than it is 

in the Provincial Auditors but we do concede that both offices and both positions are very 

important to ensure that those accounts are properly paid, paid on time and that there be proper 

auditing and accountability to the Legislature on all public expenditures. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll certainly work harder in understanding some of the 

things that you have mentioned. I’m not particularly clear whether or not you understand them, 

however, if you do obviously they can’t be that difficult to comprehend.  

 

Mr. Minister, that is an inconsistency and a complete inconsistency. Are you telling me that the 

Provincial Auditor does not have to go through these items one by one? It is one thing to 

categorize these cheques. But also they have to be audited, the books have to be audited. Are you 

saying that those things are not part and parcel, that he does not virtually have to go over 

everything that the Provincial Auditor puts out? Isn’t it probably true that the reason that you have 

58 employees there is a deliberate strategy on the part of your government; that because you have 

been unable to control the size of your government, because you have been unable to control your 

expenditures, the easiest 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2641 

 

and probably the safest thing to do politically is to keep it internally to yourselves. You won’t 

release this kind of information in committee. The Committees, if I may be allowed to comment, 

are a joke, we can’t get that kind of information. To prevent somebody else from getting that sort 

of information, like the Provincial Auditor, you deliberately and completely understaff him. You 

even put him through the degradation of having to have his salary go through this Legislature as a 

separate bill. That is the only salary, subject to correction, he is the only employee whom I have 

seen, that I recall going through this Assembly for an increase in salary. I would have to say a 

very highly deserved one. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn’t it fair to say and completely fair to say, that you have deliberately, your 

government is deliberately and cold-bloodedly hamstringing the Provincial Auditor. I think in 

common sense, whether it be in business or whether it be at other levels of government, your 

comptroller and your auditor complement each other. In your particular case you simply must 

downgrade that auditor. You use him, at the same time you downgrade him, you hamstring him 

and you set up regulations and red tape so that he is not able to attract the kind of people he needs 

in order to do the job of watching the inefficiencies that have become so obviously apparent 

during your tenure as Minister of Finance. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I completely and totally deny the allegations that the hon. 

member has made. It is regrettable that he chooses to use purple phrases and to try himself to 

degrade the position and office of the Provincial Auditor. He knows full well that it has been the 

practice because of the auditor being responsible to the Legislature that the Legislature decide on 

the salary of the auditor. He chooses to make these kinds of statements so that he might be able to 

catch a headline in the newspaper. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, is it not an inconsistent position to have the Provincial 

Auditor’s salary going through this Legislature when the Provincial Comptroller’s does not? Mr. 

Minister, I want to be very clear, that is not meant as any sort of an aspersion on anybody, because 

they are both very capable people. Their jobs complement each other, they complement 

themselves in the federal government, in most other provincial governments, not all of them but 

most of them, and certainly in business and in the corporate structure. But here they don’t. Mr. 

Minister, I really don’t care to go very much deeper into the Comptroller’s office but there have 

been no aspersions cast on or passed on to anybody. Tell me why the Provincial Auditor has to be 

treated in this fashion? You say that he is responsible to the Legislature, that’s total and complete 

nonsense! You decided what that bill was going to say, whatever the figure was for his salary. 

Those of us over here had no power to write a bill and say, no we don’t think the Provincial 

Auditor should be paid X number of dollars. We think it should be Y number of dollars. We don’ t 

have that right over here, so don’t tell me that he is responsible to the Legislature. He is 

responsible part and parcel to the government with your weight of the majority.  

 

I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, why don’t you treat the Comptroller’s off ice in a similar 

fashion to the Provincial Auditor? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member checked the legislative authority, then I 

think that is explained. First of all, in case of the Comptroller’s office, the Comptroller is an 

employee of the Department of Finance; whereas the Auditor is not an employee of the 

Department of Finance, he merely reports for certain purposes, through the Minister of Finance as 

provided in The Department of Finance Act. It is possible the time has come for us to look at a 

different procedure of setting his salary. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2642 

 

Certainly up until now, there has been no criticism at all in the way that it has been done, that is, 

since the province became a province and I suppose, since the position or office of the Auditor 

was established, that has been the way we have been doing it. Perhaps there is a different way of 

doing it and that is probably worthwhile exploring. The hon. member earlier made reference about 

the level of salary. He knows that we were subject to controls in the last couple of years which did 

create some distortions and we are trying to amend that situation and correct that situation this 

year. 

 

Item 3 agreed. 

 

ITEM 4 
 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— Mr. Chairman, I have a question I would like to 

bring to the attention of the minister with regard to the Budget Bureau. There has been a good deal 

of talk with regard to various systems that are used in order to establish budgets and one of those 

systems that has been recently given a fair amount of attention has been the concept of zero base 

budgeting. I think most people who look at the question of budgeting and look at the business of 

systems will realize that zero base budgeting is an offshoot of other kinds of systems that have 

been used, like management by objectives and others. These kinds of systems, when properly and 

appropriately put into place, can cause an entirely different kind of psychological attitude toward 

budgeting. This attitude is quite different from what I call and others call simply, an  additive 

budgeting approach, where you take last year’s program and you add some money to it in order to 

cover the cost of inflation, maybe build up the empire a little bit, add a little bit so that when 

Treasury Board makes its cuts you still have enough money to continue to build the empire. I 

wonder if the minister would care to react and comment with regard to the kind of budget control 

systems that Budget Bureau uses when the budgets are put together before they are presented to 

the House. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in case of the system, I can tell the hon. member that 

every department, every program, that is administered by the department, is challenged by the 

Budget Bureau. There is the level of staffing, either the department’s proposals to try to enrich the 

programs including the continuation of the program, whether the program should be continued and 

how effective the program is and how well is it delivered and how well is it managed. All of those 

factors are reviewed very carefully by the Budget Bureau and presented to the Treasury Board for 

their critique and their recommendations. In the final analysis, the Treasury Board makes its 

recommendations to Cabinet and Cabinet makes the final decisions when it comes down to the 

programs. We believe we have a very thorough system of examining existing programs, as well as 

any new programs that are introduced. It is a system that I commend really to other jurisdictions. 

In fact, it is safe to say that the way our Budget Bureau functions is in many ways the envy of 

many other jurisdictions. May I tell the hon. member as well, that we have reviewed the concept 

of zero base budgeting and other systems. Our people in the Budget Bureau and in the Department 

of Finance are very keen and very concerned and very interested in what is going on in other 

jurisdictions at all times to ensure that there is the most effective and efficient way of controlling 

government expenditures. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose it is a matter of opinion how effective a 

particular system is, insofar as controlling spending is concerned. As I pointed out last night, in 

this province we have increased spending by $1 billion in five years, with the same static kind of 

population in Saskatchewan. I think that it would be reasonable to 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2643 

 

say that a number of people in Saskatchewan would say that is not a particularly effective means 

of controlling spending. I am interested in the comments you made about the challenges that are 

issued by Budget Bureau to programs that are put forward by departments. What factors does the 

Budget Bureau use, what kinds of indicators does Budget Bureau use, when examining a program, 

to determine whether it should continue or whether it should not continue? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, first of all Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is saying that the 

population has remained static and on the way the budget has increased. It is true that budgets, our 

expenditures have increased in the last five years quite dramatically, but so have many programs 

been enriched and more money has been provided to local governments. May I bring to the 

attention of the hon. member that 45 per cent of the Budget is delivered to local governments, 

local authorities, like, for example, the school boards. I invite him to take a look  at the grants that 

are provided to school boards now to what was provided five years ago. I invite him to look at 

SHSP another very large program which is operated by local union hospital boards or city boards. 

Those are programs that are administered, as he is aware, by local governments. 

 

Let us take a look at municipal governments and what has happened there in the large amounts of 

additional money that has been provided. The 45 per cent of the Budget, and which in this area I 

might point out, has grown much more rapidly than government expenditures directly. So that is 

one of the main reasons for growth. In terms of the factors that are used, for example, the factor of 

increasing the Property Improvement Grants. How do we assess that? 

 

First of all, we determine whether there is a need for the program to help the average citizen keep 

down his mill rate. I am sure that he is as concerned as I am that property taxes be kept down as 

low as they possibly can. We determine whether that program is still valid and whether it is 

needed. That is a government decision. Then the question of whether we can provide additional 

money is, in many ways, a political decision. Then the Budget Bureau does the work as to 

examining of how effectively we are administering the program. That is just one sort of 

comparison. Many of these decisions are made at the governmental level.  

 

We made a decision, many years ago, to establish the Hospital Services Plan. We think that that 

program is as valid today as it was in 1947. That there is a need for it. We made a decision in 1961 

and 1962 to establish a Medical Care Plan. We believe that that program is as valid and as needed 

by the people as it was in 1962. It was a social decision that was made to help the people out, to 

provide medical services whenever they need them and in whatever form they may need them.  

 

We do not start off with a base that the Hospital Services Plan should start at zero. We know that 

the cost of that Hospital Plan was $225 million or $250 million last year. We know that we have to 

provide additional money. We made a decision, this year, the Hospital Services Plan in order to 

deliver the same kind of programs they did a year ago, needed an enrichment. Then there were 

some additional (b) Budget items added to improve the program. Those are the judgments that are 

made, because we do not start off at the base of saying, every program grows and every year we 

are going to somehow start all over again. That would be an exercise in futility. That would be a 

waste of public money. We know what programs we want to carry. As a government we make 

certain commitments to the people of this province, what programs that we think the people 

welcome and need. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2644 

 

We think there is a need to improve our highway system and we think that  this year we can afford 

$100 million in capital construction. And those are the criteria that are used to build better roads 

and provide better services to the people in rural communities as well throughout the province.  

 

MR. PENNER: — What the minister is really saying is what I have been saying all along, in 

effect, that there are a number of programs that really do not receive very much review at all, 

because they are out of the hands of the Budget Bureau to make decisions about, and there are 

political decisions made that really go quite beyond any kind of scrutiny in terms of the value for 

the dollar that that program is providing to the people of Saskatchewan. That is what I heard the 

minister say, Mr. Chairman, and if that is the case, all right, that is the situation. 

 

A great amount of the money that is expended by the Minister of Finance, that is scrutinized by 

the Budget Bureau, then is really quite beyond any kind of in-depth scrutiny because it is a 

foregone conclusion that that program is going regardless. 

 

I offer, as an example, one that has been used many times with regard to drug care. The fact that 

we have the kind of program we’ve got means that the majority of the people in Saskatchewan, 

today, who are the heads of households of four, pay more money for the universal drug plan 

through their tax dollars than they would if they went out and bought the drugs themselves.  

 

All one needs to do is to take a look at the total cost of the drug plan, divide it by the number of 

people in Saskatchewan, compare it to what the average person uses in the way of drugs, and that 

is evident. I am going to put it this way to the minister. I would be fair for me to assume that the 

overall political goal of a universal drug plan has taken precedence over any consideration of an 

alternative to help those who need it without it costing the majority of people in Saskatchewan 

more of their tax dollar to have the drug plan than it would if they did not have it at all. Would 

that be a fair assessment? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Certainly not. You have a biased assessment and a wrong assessment. First of 

all, you say. I think with reference to the Hospital Services Plan, that there are really no reviews 

being made by the Budget Bureau, that there are those commitments. I beg to di ffer with the hon. 

member. 

 

In case of the Hospital Services Plan. the staff at the Department of Health do a very thorough 

analysis in case of the SHSP. Every hospital, every budget of the hospital is reviewed. There are 

those hospitals with 50 beds and more, that are on the global budget system and the global budgets 

are reviewed every three years. They have to be gone through very carefully but hospitals have the 

freedom then to function within that global budget that is set. In the case of hospitals under 50 

beds they have the option of whether they want to go on a global system or on a line-by-line 

system. If they are on a line-by-line system by their choice, every year there is a very careful 

analysis on what they are spending their money for before money is provided for the following 

year. 

 

In the case of the drug plan, Mr. Chairman, I think that the Legislature has had a good chance to 

discuss the drug plan by way of resolution during the Throne Speech and Budget Speech as well 

as in Committee of Finance. I do not know whether I can persuade the member now if he has not 

been persuaded before, that the drug plan that we are operating is by far a fairer plan than that of 

Manitoba. There are controls on the quality of drugs; there are none in other jurisd ictions, or very 

few. The program is universal. That we concede and that is our concept to provide high -quality 

drugs to all 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2645 

 

people, at reasonable cost. The Hon. Minister of Health has provided statistical information setting 

out the detail to him. In terms of the principles of the plan, I think those have been debated. 

 

From the standpoint of the Budget Bureau, indeed the Budget Bureau does review the existing 

drug plan and makes comparison with Manitoba. You know that they have made the analysis. We 

believe that the concept that we have introduced, and its effectiveness, is much superior to what 

the citizens of Manitoba are receiving. 

 

MR. PENNER: — Well, I take it from what the minister is saying, and he has sort of implied it 

twice, Mr. Chairman, that where there is local government spending (school boards, hospital 

boards, municipal people and so on) the government undertakes to scrutinize those expenditures 

pretty carefully but that there are really not too many kinds of scrutinies that are being used with 

regard to the provincial money that is being spent by provincial departments.  

 

Now, if that is not a correct observation on my part, then I invite the minister to go back to the 

question that I asked a few minutes ago and give us some indication of the kinds of indicators that 

are used. 

 

When do you get to the point? What kinds of indicators do you use to determine whether or not a 

program has served its usefulness and ought to go down the drain? Are there programs that in 

effect are, if you like, sunset programs where, before they are ever begun there is a known 

termination date for those programs? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in terms of whether it is delivering funds or transfer of 

funds to various — grants to local governments, a thorough review is made there. But I can assure 

the hon. member that a much more rigorous analysis is made of the programs that are operated and 

administered directly by government departments. 

 

This year, if he examines the grant programs that have been provided such as to municipal 

governments or to libraries, he will by now have realized that, in terms of percentages, more funds 

are provided to programs being run by local governments to help them keep down their taxes, than 

the percentage amounts that have been provided in government directly operated programs. There 

is indeed, a very thorough analysis made of every program that is run and administered by the 

various departments. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I just have one question on the zero-base budgeting. A couple 

of years ago, your present deputy, when he was the head of the Budget Bureau, was definitely 

against zero-base budgeting. Has he changed his opinion in any way on that? 

 

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Order. I don’t know if that is really a proper question to  ask the 

opinion of the Deputy Minister. I suppose you ask the opinion of the government . . . 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Would the minister be prepared to indicate the . . . 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, in the case of the zero-base budgeting, we have indeed 

examined the whole concept and there are certain good features to the concept and those good 

features that are in it, we are in fact implementing or have implemented, because there is some 

pliability and flexibility under the zero-base budgeting concept. In fact I can tell the hon. member 

that we have met with people who 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2646 

 

are strong proponents, so that we have the information as well as we have read the literature that is 

available. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, would you mind outlining very briefly what the official 

function of the Budget Bureau is? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the Budget Bureau Program Evaluation Unit is responsible for 

activities related to the following areas of the government: 

 

1. The preparation of the Budget, an annual financial plan for government programs. 

 

2. The Budget Bureau assists the Treasury Board to determine the manner in which Budget 

proposals will be presented for review. 

 

3. Assists in the analysis and assessment of the departmental programs to ensure that the Budget 

documents reflect the program emphasis which the government wishes to pursue, and 

 

4. The Budget Bureau compiles the final Budget documents, the printed Estimates.  

 

Secondly, the establishment, and in part, the execution of certain central Budget control 

techniques designed to identify departments from the approved Budget.  

 

For the most part, the Budget Bureau itself does not exercise control, but rather, refers to the 

Treasury Board for direction on problems which have been identified.  

 

Thirdly, assistance on an ad hoc basis or a continuing basis, to the Cabinet, Treasury Board and 

departments and agencies on a variety of problems. Such assistance is provided by consultation, 

participation on committee and special studies. 

 

The specific Budget function for which the Bureau Program Evaluation Program Unit is 

responsible for are, first to act as staff to the management committee for the review of program 

proposals and development of the Budget; evaluation of the Budget or program proposals in terms 

of stated program objectives and to provide alternative approaches for the achievement of these 

objectives. The evaluation should be directed to the least cost or maximum benefit alternatives. 

Also to evaluate the implications of proposed deviations from the approved Budget or program 

plan; to provide control of departmental expenditures; to revise the format of the budgetary 

expenditures and advise on the development of new reporting systems. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister, . . . I suppose he just 

outlined to me the steps of the Budget and who is responsible for the numbers so I guess we are on 

the right category. Obviously, Mr. Minister, some changes have happened in the Budget since you 

brought it down and one in particular is in the field of the E&H tax. 

 

Last year, in 1977-78, your department or your Budget Bureau budgeted $187 million. In the 

Budget that you brought down for 1978-79, you shifted this up to $204 million. If my memory 

serves me correctly, when the sales tax was reduced to 3 per cent and when the balance and 

deficits incoming from Ottawa and what you would lose, that it reduced the total amount $18 

million. I am subject to correction there. I believe that was the comment that you made.  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2647 

 

So my question, Mr. Minister, what has this done to our deficit? What has this situation done to 

our deficit? I think we were looking at a $40 million to $45 million deficit. What do you think we 

are looking at now? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated the other day to the hon.  member when 

we had second reading of The Education and Health Tax reduction bill that, indeed, the federal 

request and proposal does create some problems because we had already our Budget in place. We 

had already announced our tax cuts. In the interest of the national economy to try to spur it on, as 

well as in the interest of national unity, we went along with the government of Canada to reduce 

our E&H tax, which is going to put $54 million of money into the pockets of Saskatchewan 

citizens. We are hoping that as a result of this additional money that people will have and with 

spurring on our economy, that the $18 million reduction of revenue is not going to amount to that 

much. We hope that it will be something considerably less but if it ends up being $18 million then 

the projected deficit of $44 million that I announced in the Budget Speech, will increase by the 

additional $18 million. There is reason to believe that it is not going to amount to that $18 million; 

it will be something substantially less. To predict the figure at this stage is very difficult. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, you have indicated that some things are indicating that it is 

not going to be in that league. Perhaps you would care to tell us what those things are. Why do 

you make that statement? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will try again. Maybe the hon. member doesn’t listen 

or maybe he was not here or maybe he wants to indulge in gamesmanship, which is probably his 

style. But the facts are that as a result of providing more money for the consumers, who will be 

spending that money we hope on consumer goods, that that will generate additional revenues for 

the province and as a result the amount of $18 million will be reduced. I don’t know whether the 

hon. member comprehends those kinds of economics. We do hear, the odd time from the 

Conservatives that it is a good thing to provide more money to the consumer through tax 

reductions. The consumers will spend it and this will generate more money to the government 

treasury. 

 

Certainly the economics have proven that that very often is the case. We believe there is reason 

for optimism; the additional money that we are providing to the consumers will generate more 

money for the provincial treasury and, therefore, the deficit will not be the $18 million but will be 

something less. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, that is the minister whom we have all come to revere and admire in 

this Assembly. At least he is starting to get back to his traditional self.  

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you why do you base it on that? Why do you say it is going to be 

considerably less than that? I expected something more than the usual political rhetoric from you. 

I thought you were going to say that actual revenues for a specified period were so much higher 

than they were last year. I thought you were going to say the payments from Ottawa were running 

ahead of schedule or we are taking more in from income tax than what we expected for a 

designated period of time. I thought you might have some remote — something resembling facts 

to base some of this on but as per usual we got the same rhetoric from you that has led us from 

one deficit to another and is now leading us to what appears to be a $60 million plus deficit. If we 

can add your usual level of confidence on it I am sure that you can even top that one on it. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2648 

 

Mr. Minister, let’s move into another area in regard to your Budget Bureau. Your Budget Bureau 

has predicted and again, I would like you to tell us how you have arrived at these figures. I have 

asked you this question before and I never received an answer from you. It is not a new one but I 

suggest your officials maybe they can help. Last year, in 1977-78, you budgeted for personal 

income tax to bring you in almost $311 million. That was on a 58.5 per cent tax rate . Now in your 

Budget as you well know, you reduced your income tax rate to 53 per cent and I think we gave 

you your mark on the wall for that one. An interesting mark on the wall too saying that, when it 

was suggested to you some months earlier there, you spent the best part of a press release through 

Information Saskatchewan or whatever you call that unbiased medium, taking a strip off me for 

daring to suggest something as outlandish as that. Anyway Mr. Minister, in this year’s Budget, 

you took a lot of pride in telling us about the 22,000 taxpayers that were going to come off the tax 

rolls. Now with just 22,000 less tax payers, paying about 9 percent less tax, . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I wonder if the hon. member could maybe just wait for those 

questions until item 7, Taxation and Fiscal Policy Branch? I think they would probably be better if 

they were put there. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, Mr. Minister, — the Budget Bureau 

are the people who are making these decisions that put them in together and that is why I waited to 

ask them right here. I felt this was the appropriate time and I don’t care to dwell on that all that 

quickly, Mr. Chairman. Frankly, it is my objective (I can’t speak for my colleague here), I would 

like to be through these Estimates at five o’clock and I will do my best — unless the minister 

provokes something, so . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, yes. I have a kind of rule that it comes under . . . It doesn’t really 

matter, I suppose you can ask the same questions anyway so maybe we could just do this the way 

the rules tell us to do it and we will be right there in a sec, anyway. Will that be O.K.?  

 

MR. THATCHER: — I am not trying to hold anything up today, Mr. Minister. It is seeding time. 

Now that we have established we are in a very important time of year. I have been through it with 

you. Now, 22,000 less taxpayers paying a 53 per cent tax rate and yet Mr. Minister, you are 

budgeting or your Budget Bureau says it is going to bring in $324 million. Respectful ly, I am 

curious as to what the logic is here. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I wonder if you could just save your answer on that, Mr. Minister, 

out of respect for the Chair, until item 7 . Do you have any other questions on item 4?  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Just a moment, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I think you are creating 

problems here and I really don’t want to hold things up here but regrettably, Mr. Chairman, I mean 

this very sincerely that I hope to be done at five o’clock but I was not here for item 1 last night 

because of illness and I have some questions I have to get off and yet I want to be done at five 

o’clock, if at all possible. Now, Mr. Chairman, I ask leave for you to just allow me to proceed and 

I think it will work out for everyone. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — You are asking leave to ask these questions. Do you want to revert to item 

1? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — No, Mr. Chairman, I am not. I am asking a legitimate question in regard to 

the Budget Bureau. Now the minister listed the duties of the Budget Bureau 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2649 

 

and I believe the question I asked comes well within the duties of the Budget Bureau. I don’t think 

I am out of line at all on that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Are we agreed to leave to ask him those questions? Agreed? 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Agreed. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, as I understood the question because of the 

interruptions was, how do we calculate the amount of personal income tax revenue that we 

proposed to derive. Mr. Chairman, the estimate of personal income tax receipts was prepared, 

using an estimate of total 1978 basic federal tax, which is $19.5 billion. It’s provided to us by the 

federal government. The total basic tax is then allocated to Saskatchewan according to an estimate 

of our 1977 year, which was 3.34 per cent of basic federal tax. Both the total 1978 basic tax and 

our share are subject to change throughout the course of the fiscal year as new information 

becomes available. In order to determine our gross collections for 1978 tax year, we then apply 

the personal income tax rate, that is, 53 per cent, to the allocated basic tax. Once we know the 

gross calculations, today $345.5 million, we then make two adjustments. First we have to convert 

the collection for the tax year to a fiscal year and the adjustment there is $2.2 million. Second, we 

must reduce the collection by the net amount of the tax cut and the surtax, which is minus $24.2 

million. The 1978 Budget estimates, a receipt is therefore calculated by taking the gross 

collections of $345.5 million plus $2.2 million to place it on the fiscal year basis, less the tax 

changes of $24.2 million, brings a total of $323.5 million. Does that explain the system? Mr. 

Chairman, I would be glad to provide the member with the calculation because that is the basis of 

how we calculate our receipts. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I would appreciate it if you could instruct your 

department to forward that to me. I suppose what my question amounts to is that it is a very, very 

complex procedure and I am sure your people understand it, but is it realistic? Is it just a computer 

figure or is it just a number that is in there to justify the end result? In other words, is it really a 

realistic figure because, again Mr. Minister, 22,000 less people at the bottom who are paying in 

are going to pay $14 million more. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think our rate of inflation and our rate of salary increases during this current 

year are not running at that level. I think, roughly speaking in the ball park, to arrive at that figure 

with the balance of people who are going to be paying taxes, their salary increases or salary 

adjustments for the current year would have to be running well into the 14 to 16 per cent. I do not 

think they are running that high. Some are running higher than others but it appears that at least at 

this point in time salary adjustments appear to be certainly not in that kind of a way. My question, 

Mr. Minister is, is it a computer figure or is it a figure that your financial minds have sat down and 

worked out or is it something that somebody just pushed some keys on a computer and that is 

what it punched out at the other end? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, maybe the hon. member may have some doubt about the idea 

but first of all may I inform the hon. member that there is a projection of 11 per cent growth in the 

incomes of the people. That is the first assumption that has to be made and there is reason to 

believe that that is going to be realized. Remember that that also takes the inflation into account.  

 

Now, I invite the member to take a piece of paper and pencil, and this is a fairly easy calculation 

— Last year the projection was $322.1 million. Multiply that by 11 per cent  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2650 

 

growth which is estimated and you get $357.5 million. Then we have provided the tax cuts of $40 

million less the surtax of $4.6 million plus change in the tax cut of 10.7 and you come up with 

$323.5 million. Now it is based on the assumption that the growth will be 11 per cent. Incomes are 

rising as I am sure he will appreciate. It is not just a computer print -out. I think there is every 

reason to believe that that kind of revenue from personal income tax will be realized.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, from your comment just now do I understand you to say, or 

may I interpret from your comments that you, as Minister of Finance, are saying on behalf of your 

government that the acceptable figure for incomes to rise, or I suppose to some extent for wage 

settlements to be negotiated, is 11 per cent? Can I assume that from your comment?  

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the 11 per cent is personal income and this is the national 

figure. I think that there is every reason to believe that that is going to be realized.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, that really was not my question. My question was, are 

you saying by building in what you say is an 11 per cent factor — Are you in effect putting the 

stamp of approval of your government on negotiated — so what if they negotiate it or any other 

cash settlement. Are you saying that 11 per cent is the acceptable figure for incomes to rise in  this 

province? Never mind about the national average. Has 11 per cent got the stamp of approval of 

your government? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, it is economic gross that is the 11 percent, economic gross. 

Remember it is wage economic growth. Remember it’s wage increases or income increases or 

increases in professional fees, increases by the business people as well whose incomes are going 

to rise, it’s the gross interest plus, more people working. That’s the area that we’re talking about. 

It’s not a wage increase of 11 per cent. It is the total income that is going to increase by 11 per 

cent as distinguished from a wage increase. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’ve made reference to me in a lot of categories in 

the past and I’m sure I can look forward to many more in the future but I was under the impression 

that we were talking about individual income tax. Obviously if the income tax rate is going to rise 

or the revenue derived from income tax, then certainly the income before you start taxing it h as 

had to rise. Now the 11 per cent figure was yours, I didn’t invent it. Your expenditures in this 

entire Budget rose 12 per cent and, Mr. Minister, I don’t think the rate of inflation in this country, 

while it is certainly at a very unacceptable level, a highly unacceptable level, it is not at 11 per 

cent. Now, Mr. Minister, there is a lot of controversy as to what the wage settlement should be 

right now. I don’t think the negotiated settlements that you have made with your own employees 

in a variety of categories approached 11 per cent for this year and yet you are budgeting in your 

individual income tax category for an increase at this level. Now, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that 

they have been rising. All right, we’ll find out about that. Certainly they  have been rising but not 

that much, not 11 per cent. So what I am asking you again, for the third time, Mr. Minister . . . for 

instance, we have a construction strike, the possibility of a construction strike next week and we 

all hope that it will be averted. Are you, in effect, saying to the construction people, 11 per cent is 

our figure. Are you saying to the people who may or may not go on strike, are you saying to them, 

11 per cent is our figure? Eleven per cent has got our stamp of approval. If you send in a 

conciliator is 11 per cent what you say? When the Minister of Labour spent all those hours with 

the dairy workers, was 11 per cent the figure that he was 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2651 

 

attempting to negotiate for them? Again, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you, is 11 per cent the magic  

figure? Now don’t tell us about real income, etc., and go into all these things. The fact is we are 

talking about individual income tax and nothing else. We are not talking about the business 

because we’ve got another category for that and we’ll get to it , corporation income tax. Mr. 

Minister, I’m not trying to hold things up, give me a fast answer that I can accept or else confess, 

one or the other and let’s move on and let’s finish by 5:00 o’clock.  

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I have explained the matter. I’m sorry the hon. 

member does not accept my explanation because I did not say at anytime that the salaries or wages 

are going to increase by 11 per cent. We are talking about the global income of all the people, 

which means also an expanded labor force and, in case of small business, they pay personal 

income tax as well, as the hon. member knows. I have made the explanation, I think that the media 

people understand it. I am sorry that the hon. member doesn’t understand it. Maybe we can get  

together after if he is interested in getting through in the next 25 minutes. Maybe I can take a few 

minutes with him after and explain it to him. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, it really isn’t necessary since I am one of your 22,000.  

 

Mr. Minister, the corporation income tax, your budgeting will increase from $82 million to $94.9 

million. Could the minister tell us what the actual figure, what the actual revenue derived from 

corporation income tax for the year 1977-78 was and is this figure of $95 million, is it realistic? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the estimate of last year as the hon. member has got the 

figure, was $82 million, the projection for this year is just about $95 million. The increase is 18.9 

percent over ‘77-’78. This is on data that is provided to us, again by the federal government. Last 

year, 1977-78 has not been finalized but there is every reason to believe that that amount will be 

realized. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, when you say that, you sort of say that in a halting voice 

there. Now when you say, ‘it may be realized,’ are you saying that there is some doubt that those 

numbers of dollars from last year will be realized? Are you saying that $82 million . . . You must 

have an estimated figure there from your people? Do I interpret you correctly to say they’re 

estimating that you were right on target? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the final results will not be known for another two or three 

months but based on the current information that we have, there is every reason to believe that we 

will be awfully close to it. It might be a little over. It might be a little under.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, we are into exactly the same situation here as we were 

on individual income tax. I believe you reduced your corporation tax rate from 12 to 11 and yet 

you are budgeting to bring in an additional 18 per cent in revenue. Mr. Minister, does that make 

sense to you? Would you explain how you are arriving at those figures? What factors are you 

building into them? If there is some doubt — I’m not suggesting there is, if your people say $82 

million is what they are going to get this year, I’ll accept that. But if there is the slightest doubt 

that last year’s figures were accurate at your 12 per cent rate, then, Mr. Minister, in the ligh t of 

today’s economy which is not exactly zinging by any stretch of the imagination — as a matter of 

fact when you get into the business sector, their costs have risen sharply, much higher than  



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2652 

 

certainly in the retail trade and certainly in some of your small to medium size businesses. Their 

incomes in all probability, baring a very sharp turn around in the fall, which may very well happen 

but if we are to go on the first few months, probably they are going to be down. Again, I will ask 

you, Mr. Minister, is this $95 million realistic? And if so, how did you come up with it?  

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is, yes. First of all, the hon. member makes 

reference to the overall national economy and we agree that there are some soft spots and some 

problems but as he is also aware the economy of the province is pretty healthy and so is the 

business community in Saskatchewan in a healthy state. 

 

The 1978-79 Estimate is an estimate of the cash flow from Ottawa and may not be the actual 

payments of income taxes to Saskatchewan by the corporations but it is a cash flow. 

 

The federal estimate of total Canadian corporation taxable income in 1978 is 15.2 per cent higher 

than the 1977 estimate. The 1976 data will be used to calculate the 1978 corporation taxable 

income. Saskatchewan’s 1976 share of the taxable income is approximately 3.7 per cent of the 

national. This is considerably higher than the modified 1974 share used by the federal 

government, than 1977-78 of 3.06. The substitution of the 1976 data for 1974, which will be used 

to allocate corporation taxable incomes, combined with the federal estimate of 1978 taxable 

income, accounts for the increase in the 1978-79 corporation income tax. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we believe, based on the information provided from the government of Canada (the 

information is becoming much more refined, much more sophisticated) that in current years the 

estimates have been much more accurate than they have in the past and there is reason to believe 

that that amount of money will be realized. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, my memory is fading right now and I am going to give you a 

chance to slap me one. 

 

As I recall going back to 1976 figures, was your corporate income tax 14 per cent in those days?  

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Yes, that is what it was in all business. Last year we had a reduction for 

small business and this year we have a further reduction for small business.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Very well then, Mr. Minister. You have indicated that the 1976 figures 

played a very large role in formulating this $95 million for 1978-79. At that time in 1976, we were 

looking at a 14 per cent tax rate. But, also, Mr. Minister, I think you indicated in 1976 there was a 

general increase from the year previously in actual figures of about almost 16 per cent in corporate 

income tax in this country and perhaps in this province, as you say.  

 

At the same time, Mr. Minister, in 1976, and I cannot recall specifically what the inflation factors 

were back in 1976 except to say, despite the protestations of Mr. Trudeau that  inflation was 

licked, such was not the case and we were still very close to double-digit inflation or round about, 

certainly into that category. Therefore, Mr. Minister, I really again have to ask you, going back to 

1976, I suppose I should as a critic (I am sure you people have done this) — Did you take into 

consideration that those figures were based on a 14 per cent rate? I am sure you did but I have to 

ask you anyway. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2653 

 

Secondly, would you not agree that the factors that were employed for 1976 are certa inly not 

employed for the year 1978. For instance, there were not a million unemployed at that time and we 

were not facing the highest unemployment that this province has seen in many years, and I do not 

want to get into an argument about unemployment with you but we all know that we have more 

unemployment in this province than what we are used to. Let’s stay off that one but nonetheless, 

Mr. Minister, what I am asking you is, are the factors of 1976 — have to make the assessment a 

little bit borderline, would you agree? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is aware that it is for small business that we 

reduced the corporation from 14 per cent which was to apply in 1976, to the current 11 per cent. 

The important thing that he needs to remember is that, particularly in the resource industry, 

incomes have been growing very rapidly . . . (Interjection — inaudible) . . . Mr. Chairman, I am 

trying to answer the question so that he does not come back again. You know, he at times asks 

questions and listens to his questions but does not listen to the answers . . . (Interjection — 

inaudible) . . . Mr. Chairman, I do not think I have been using up very much time. The fact of the 

situation is that in the resource industries their profits and their incomes have r isen very 

substantially since 1976. Remember that they remain — big business remains at 14 per cent. That 

accounts for the substantial increase in the corporate income tax revenues.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, we’ve got to get rolling pretty quickly, Mr. Minister. There is no two 

ways about it, when you miss item 1 it sure does take the steam out of you, it’s hard to get rolling 

again as I am sure you know from your time as a critic. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you very briefly tell me before we start going through these items the kind of 

people that you have in the Budget Bureau. I am interested in, not so much names, as I am 

university background, the types of degrees that they have, like their youth, are they Queen’s 

types or Harvard business types or PhDs, etc. Very briefly without going into specifics of names, 

just tell me what kind of people you have and their academic background? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, we have a variety. We have people with MAs, PhDs. We have 

people with Bachelor of Commerce degrees, Bachelor of Economics; we have Masters degrees. 

These are highly educated people generally. We also have people who have had general 

government experience or elsewhere experience, including in business, at universities and so on.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, those two Bachelors there suit me. When we are dealing 

with the kind of million dollars that we are right now, when you are hiring someone for the 

Budget Bureau, which in many respects, I suppose, is one of your more integral portions of the 

Department of Finance, do you concentrate do you show preference for Saskatchewan graduates 

or when your Budget Bureau is recruiting do you try to balance out the background of your 

people, say from Harvard Business School, which is certainly world-wide acclaimed or McGill or, 

in the case of your government’s philosophy, the London School of Economics? In other words do 

the people out of Saskatchewan have a preference or is there a definite recruitment policy 

followed by some of your people to balance out the mix that you’ve got in order to prevent the 

possibility of becoming so tightly and completely inbred as far as academic philosophy, which can 

very definitely happen when you concentrate on one school? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, while we have preference for Saskatchewan 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2654 

 

graduates we do recruit on a national basis. Just to give the hon. member an example, last year we 

had one, two, three from Saskatchewan, three from Queen’s and one from Western.  

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, just because I see two faces there that I can put a name on 

and I mean nothing by this, I would like you to just tell me academically the background of Mr. 

Wallace, your Deputy, his degrees and where he went to school and Mr. Douglas — and that is 

just simply because I recognize the faces and I can put a name to them. There is no significance 

there but I am just curious. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, with respect to Mr. Wallace, he has a Bachelor of Commerce degree, 

he is a native of Regina, awarded a Chartered Accountant with distinction in 1969, a CA,  and 

worked for two years as a provincial auditor, one year analyst in the Budget Bureau, four years 

Director of the Budget Bureau and also worked in the Faculty of Administration in Accounting at 

the University of Regina. Mr. Douglas is honors BA, yes, he’s got also Master of Science from the 

London School of Economics. Incidentally, I could announce that I deeply regret that Mr. 

Douglas, who has been the Assistant Deputy, is leaving us at the end of the month. He is going to 

work in Ottawa. Our loss is going to be their enrichment and their find. I do wish Mr. Douglas 

well in Ottawa and that we will miss him very much in Finance. 

 

SOME MON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I would also like to add not only the best wishes on behalf of 

everyone on this side to Mr. Douglas, but also my personal wishes for success in Ottawa. I know 

he is a very capable individual. I don’t have to wish him success because I know he will have it. 

He has always been very very open with the opposition; he’d answer questions that he could and if 

he couldn’t, he would tell us so and we could ask for no more than that. Mr. Minister, believe it or 

not, I have finished so just as quickly as the Chairman can read them off there, he got off awfully 

easy this year. 

 

Item 4 agreed. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — It has been recommended that I take the items by numbers. Now is that 

agreed by everyone? 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Agreed. 

 

Items 5, 6, 7, 8, agreed. 
 

Items 9 to 25 agreed to. 
 

Department of Finance — Vote II agreed to. 
 

INTEREST ON PUBLIC DEBT — VOTE 12 
 

Item 1 agreed. 
 

Supplementaries agreed. 
 

FINANCE — VOTE 58 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed. 



 

May 10, 1978 

 

2655 

 

DEBT REDEMPTION, SINKING FUND AND INTEREST PAYMENTS  
 

VOTE 55 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

VOTE 56 
 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

VOTE 57 
 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 o’clock p.m. 


