
























































Hansard: April 26, 1978


 
1981 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

April 26, 1978 
 
The Assembly met at 2:00 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon Nutana): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of 47 
interchange students on Canadian studies from across Canada. They are also accompanied by some 
students from various collegiates in Saskatoon. They are in the Speaker’s Gallery, some 47 in number, 
and I believe another 78 will arrive a bit later. They are accompanied by Mr. Cox and Mr. Wensley. 
 
I am sure that all the members in this Assembly would want me to extend a warm welcome to the 
Canadian interchange students. We hope they enjoy the proceedings in the Legislature this afternoon. I 
am not completely familiar with their total routine and where else they might be touring, but we will be 
meeting them in Room 267 after the question period if they want to ask us questions with respect to the 
proceedings in the Assembly . I hope all members will give these students a warm welcome. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana in welcoming these students to the Assembly this afternoon. My understanding of the project 
that these students have undertaken indicates that it is a study of problems that relate to Canada and is an 
opportunity for young people from across the nation to expound their views with regard to the situation 
that Canada finds itself in today and some of the solutions that they may see to some of the problems. 
 
I have noted from the press that the meetings that you have held in Saskatoon have been very good kinds 
of meetings with excellent topics under discussion. I want to, as I say, join in welcoming you to the 
Assembly, particularly to note old colleagues of mine, Mr. Cox and Mr. Wensley and I look forward to 
seeing you later this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre):— Mr. Speaker, I would also like to add a few words to 
the introductions already made, relative to the group of students from Saskatoon and all other areas of 
Canada. 
 
I would like to point out that the interchange, as far as I can determine, is going along very well. I want 
to also mention to all members of this House that this is a tremendous example of co-operation between 
the federal and provincial governments and also the two local fiscal school boards in Saskatoon, the 
federal government contributing 40 per cent of the cost, the provincial government 40 per cent, and the 
two school boards 20 per cent. I understand they visited the Museum of Natural History and I am sure 
you found that interesting, and will be visiting the RCMP Depot a little later on in the day. I just want to 
also say hello to our daughter Lynn, “Hi Lynn” and hope that you have an interesting day in Regina and 
a pleasant and safe journey home. 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1982 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to welcome a large number 
of students in the west gallery from the St Augustine School There are 100 in number and it is pleasing 
to see that so many of them came out at once. I shall meet with them later on. St. Augustine School is 
one of the larger schools within the Catholic school system in our city and is one of the older ones and 
does a great job in that neighborhood in our community. So I am pleased to welcome them this 
afternoon for their contribution to the city, what that school has done in the past. I hope they will have a 
fruitful stay this afternoon. They are accompanied by their teachers, Allen Schmidt, Jim Frolick, Denise 
Jestadt, Teresa Benesh. I welcome the Grade 7 and 8 students to this Assembly through you and the 
members here. A hearty welcome. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Unemployment Situation 
 
MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — A question to the Premier. According to your monthly 
statistical review, which was published showing figures to March 31, 1978, the unemployment rate in 
Saskatchewan was 7.1 per cent, an increase of about 144 per cent in the eighteen month period back to 
December, 1976. The number of full-time jobs in Saskatchewan was down from 1,800 in December, 
1976, to 900 at the time that this particular bulletin was issued. I wonder how the government intends to 
come through, in view of that with its slogan, “Jobs today, energy tomorrow.” Would you not agree that 
it is really just a slogan that you have enunciated and that your statistics show nothing is really being 
done with regard to jobs at all? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina Elphinstone): — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree. First may I say that 
any comparisons of March figures with eighteen months before, comparing winter figures with summer 
figures, is palpable misuse of statistics. We know that lies, damn lies, and statistics have been the 
manner in which statistics have been used. I think one knows that is not an accurate measure. I ask the 
hon. member, if he asks a supplementary question, to state the number of jobs at each time, to state, 
therefore, whether or not there has not been a significant increase in the number of people working in 
Saskatchewan measure by any 12 month period since our government took office in 1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PENNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, supplementary question. It hardly seems to me that it is fair to 
say that March figures are summer figures. At least in Saskatchewan, I have never known March to be a 
summer month. The fact still remains that the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan today is the highest 
it’s been, probably since the depression at 7.1 per cent. It is also a fact that the number of full time jobs 
available today is half what it was within the past year. We are down to 900 full time jobs available 
according to the statistics that are published by your government. Now I would ask . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Member for Souris-Cannington. 
 

Cancer Care Program — Medical Staffing 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1983 
 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. I 
have here a copy of a letter from the staff of Allan Blair Memorial Clinic to the Executive Director of 
the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission, wherein the staff indicates that its activities are greatly restricted 
due to a lack of medical manpower. Is the government aware of the concerns expressed by the staff, 
which concerns were completely contrary to the assurances given by the Premier to this Assembly last 
Monday? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of that particular 
letter. I have not seen the letter. As I have said before, the standard of cancer treatment in the clinics 
both at Saskatoon and Regina is being maintained, I believe, at a high level. There is reason from some 
concern because of statements made in this House and because of statements that have been made 
publicly, and that is why I have engaged Dr. Watson from London, Ontario, the director of the cancer 
clinic there, to come and do a study and assessment for us. We will await the results of his assessment, 
consider carefully the recommendations and make sure that the standard of cancer treatment that we 
have had is maintained and indeed improved, in areas where it is thought it needs improvement. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, the letter indicates that a copy was sent to the Minister of Health. 
Can the Minister of Health tell this Assembly what actions he took upon receipt of this letter to deal with 
what the staff considers to be a crisis situation? I will send a copy of the letter over to the minister. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, a member displays the problem with reading questions 
prepared for him by someone else. Had he not depended so greatly on the script in his hand, he would 
have heard my answer to his first question which indicated that I have yet not seen the letter. It has yet 
no arrived in my office. I am looking at the copy he sent to me and indeed it does say copy to myself. 
When it gets there, I will consider it. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the minister has said, the government has announced that Dr. Watson has been appointed to 
investigate the matter and report back. As I understand it, Dr. Watson’s terms of reference have been 
restricted to allow him to examine only the clinics. Will the minister consider expanding the terms of 
reference to include an investigation of the activities and administration of the Cancer Commission, with 
reference to the operation of cancer care in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, the scope of Dr. Watson’s Inquiry will to a large extent be 
determined by himself when he gets here. I have asked him to carry out the general review and an 
assessment and to make recommendations. I’m reading from the letter here on the organization and the 
management of the two cancer clinics administered by the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. Indeed 
Dr. Watson, while he is looking at the two specific clinics, will also obviously be having to look at the 
total operation of cancer treatment and so on. That is what he is coming for and he will do it. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question which I gave, I find it kind of curious that the letter 
which the staff wrote to the executive director is marked personal and 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1984 
 

confidential and that the member passes it over even though he did not get sent a copy of it. 
 
MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana): — I would like to ask the minister whether it is the 
intention to give directions to Dr. Watson to have this inquiry held in public, in the open, so that people 
may make submissions to it or whether it will be closed in camera, more or less private affair? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that there is a need for a public kind of an 
inquiry. Dr. Watson will be speaking to all of the parties concerned, including the medical staff, 
including commission members, including all others concerned with the delivery of cancer treatment in 
the province. That is going to be, I think, a pretty adequate job that this gentleman, who has got a very 
good reputation, will be doing of us. 
 

Unemployment Situation 
 
MR. PENNER: — A question to the Premier. In light of the fact that the unemployment figures for 
Saskatchewan March 31, 1978 are the highest that they have been; in light of the fact that you have in 
your Budget document presented this spring indicated that you have this slogan, “Jobs today Energy 
tomorrow”, would the Premier indicate to me and to the House what steps he intends to take to provide 
jobs so that those who are unemployment in Saskatchewan will in fact have work? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, I think that the Budget outlined in some detail the measures taken in order 
to provide employment. One has to understand that there is a limit to the number of jobs that can be 
provided in Saskatchewan as people pour into this province from other parts of Canada. I advise the hon. 
member that in the last 12 months the number of people in the labor force in Saskatchewan has moved 
up from 404,000 to 420,000, an increase of 16,000 in the labor force. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The great bulk of those we have provided jobs for because of the burgeoning 
economy which we continue to have in this province notwithstanding the decline in activity in the 
agriculture sector. We are hopeful now that the agriculture sector is giving some evidence of a 
turnaround and that there will be an even greater number of jobs available and the measures outlined in 
the Budget, we believe, will make a major contribution to providing those additional jobs. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Since the unemployment rate is 7.1 per cent, the highest that it has been, and since 
the Premier indicates that some new jobs are going to be made available but recognizes that a good 
number of unemployed are going to remain in the province, would the Premier not agree that any 
increase in jobs for people in Saskatchewan is going to be the skilled areas and that by and large, these 
are going to come from people attracted from outside of the province? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I do not agree. I think that there will be jobs in many sectors. We have 
attempted to schedule our building programs so that there are jobs in the construction industry. We are 
building, as hon. members will know, far more government buildings than we built three of four years 
ago when there was a general availability of jobs in the private sector. That is no longer true and 
government buildings are coming on stream and they provide jobs not only for skilled workers but 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1985 
 

for unskilled workers as well. 
 
We intend to promote housing and we believe that that will provide jobs and we intend also, to give the 
tax relief and other measures which were outlined in the Budget so that the private sector will be 
encouraged to expand its job-creating activities. 
 
We reply primarily as you know, on private sector as we all do and we look forward let us say, to an 
expansion at IPSCO which will provide a significant number of jobs in the private sector. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Would the minister not agree with the fact that the 
highest rate of employment in the construction industry in Saskatchewan in the last two decades was in 
the years 1968-69 when there was a Liberal government? Would the minister not agree that even with 
the increase in the construction industry employment, you fall well below the figures as they existed in 
1968-69 and would the minister not also agree that if he is going to develop jobs in the mining resource 
sector, that those are skilled jobs which are not there in the Saskatchewan sector of our economy and 
that, in fact people will be brought in from outside of the province in order to fill those? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of comments. First, I do not deny that people may well 
come in from outside of a province to seek employment. We know that is happening. We know people 
for example, are getting paving contracts from companies coming in from Manitoba and in some cases 
they bring employees with them and there is really nothing effective that the government of 
Saskatchewan can do to stop a community, a town in this province for example, from engaging a 
contractor who comes from Manitoba and brings some employees with him. 
 
We believe that this will continue. We very much believe that the construction industry provides jobs, 
not only for skilled peoples some of whom will be from our province and some from outside, but for 
unskilled people, and we believe that is true in the resource sector as well. We do not accept the 
proposition that those who are employed in the resource sector must necessarily come in from outside 
the province. That has not been our experience in the past and we not expect it to be our experience in 
the future. 
 

Pipeline Delay 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservative Opposition: — The Premier will 
undoubtedly be aware that yesterday there was an announcement in Alberta, that there was some 
concern by the Alberta government about the proceeding with the pipeline due to a delay in American 
law, that there might be a year delay. For that reason I am sure the Premier is aware that any expansion 
of IPSCO might be delayed as result of the delay in the pipeline. Therefore, jobs are not going to be 
created today. Would the Premier not agree that the 7.1 per cent unemployment rate in the province of 
Saskatchewan today is serious, first of all. And secondly, it therefore requires dramatic measures by the 
government of Saskatchewan to improve the climate of confidence in the private sector in order that, in 
order that jobs and opportunities can be crated in the private sector, to materially affect this dramatic 
increase in the rise of unemployment in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I agree that the matter is serious. I agree that steps need to be 
taken, and we believe that the Budget outlines those steps which need to be taken. If, in fact, some 
dramatic measures are necessary in Saskatchewan, I think they 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1986 
 

are more necessary in the province of British Columbia which has a higher rate; in the province of 
Manitoba which as a significantly higher rate; in the province of Ontario which as a much higher rate; in 
the province of Quebec which has double our rate; in the province of Nova Scotia which has at least 50 
per cent higher than our . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I will take the next question. The member for Lakeview. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Unemployment Situation in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 
The fact remains, Mr. Premier, that as of March 31 of this year, there were 30,000 people out of work in 
Saskatchewan. Your budget, as presented by the Minister of Finance a few weeks ago, said that there 
would be approximately 5,800 new jobs of a permanent or temporary nature created, which will leave 
approximately 24,000 people out of work some time for the rest of the year. Now this of course will be 
balanced by the summer situation, but that again will be balanced by students looking for work. My 
question to you, Mr. Premier, is what plans, if any, does the government have at this time to create 
employment for those 24,000 people that are not covered by your Budget? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member is proceeding on the assumption that all of 
the jobs in this province are created by governmental action, and I would be the first one to dispute that 
proposition. There are, in fact, a significant number of unemployed in Saskatchewan as there frequently 
are in March. It is a very high month and I instance that it was fairly high last year. It was 6.5; is now 
7.1. I acknowledge that to be a change for the worse but not a significant change. I point out that we can 
reasonably anticipate a substantial increase in employment as the summer comes on from activities in 
the private sector. Accordingly, I expect that unless we have the continued depressed effect on our 
economy of the Liberal government in Ottawa, which is not taking proper steps, we can look forward to 
a better and brighter summer of employment. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I would like to deal with this in a non-political way because it is a serious problem 
as the Premier has pointed out. Would the Premier not agree that the tax relief afforded in the Smishek 
Budget and the make-work program of the NDP government will not come on stream for some months 
and indeed the tax relief will not come on stream for many, many months. There is going to be period of 
time between now and, say, next October where the government programs are not going to be ready to 
be proceeded with and for that interim period of time our unemployment situation is going to remain 
unacceptably high. Maybe not 7.1 per cent but perhaps 6 per cent which the Minister of Finance in 1975, 
Mr. Robbins, called unacceptable to the people of Canada. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Certainly almost any level of unemployment must be deemed to be unacceptable 
from a policy point of view because we would very much like to think that unemployment could be 
reduced to 2 or 3 per cent, those number of people who are moving from job to job, and that everybody 
else was gainfully employed. So that in that sense of the word I agree with the hon. member that any 
level of unemployment is unacceptable. I do not agree with the hon. member when he says suggests that 
our tax measures will not take effect until October. The income tax cuts will show up on 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1987 
 

cheques at the end of July, commencing for the month of July, and they will be very significant tax cuts 
and this, I suggest, may well encourage spending. The sales tax cuts as a result of the federal budget are 
now in effect and they may have some impact on spending. There are indications that, let us say farm 
machinery sales are increasing, that there is some renewal of confidence in the private sector of the 
private farm sector. For all of these reasons I expect a very considerable increase in employment in a 
very short number of weeks. 
 

Quality of Air Service by Air Canada 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I 
think it has been a matter of concern for the past two to three years as the quality of air service by Air 
Canada has been steadily deteriorating and it is spoken rather freely by people who travel out of a 
variety of points and where Air Canada must compete with CP Air, that it is a much superior airline. Mr. 
Premier, my question is, in light of a policy which was announced late last week by CP Air, which was a 
new low-fare passenger service starting May, 1, between Vancouver, Calgary, Winnipeg and Toronto at 
a round trip cost of a one-way flight plus $1, would the Premier agree that perhaps it is time for the 
province of Saskatchewan to ask the Department of Transport to consider allowing CP Air to land in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I will ask the Minister in charge of the Transportation Agency to reply. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, we have not requested the 
Minister of Transport to request CP Air to provide service into Saskatchewan. I think the hon. member 
will well know that there is an application before CTC for a regional carrier service in to Saskatchewan 
from PWA which has implications both for Air Canada and for air service in the province. Until the 
decision is made by CTC, I don’t think any action should be taken by the provincial government, 
therefore, we should take a wait and see approach with respect to what the future holds for air service in 
the province. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, would you agree that in 
light of what is, I think, vastly superior service offered by CP Air where it does compete directly and 
because of excellent programs such as this one which I think, Mr. Minister, anyone would have to agree 
is an excellent one where you fly at off-peak hours and come back for $1, you have to stay six days. Mr. 
Minister, would you not agree that the people of Saskatchewan, like cable television, that they have been 
deprived of services like this for far too long, would the minister not agree that it would highly 
appropriate in that the Minister of Transport is from Saskatchewan, that he seriously consider and that 
your government asks him to reconsider this inequity to this province? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, I am sorry, I am not like the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, and have had an 
opportunity to fly CP Air. So I don’t know the quality of service that that airline provides. I do fly with 
Air Canada and for my part I have been pretty pleased with the quality of service that Air Canada has 
provided. It is provided to Saskatchewan both on a national basis and on a regional basis. It is true that 
we have been pressuring both Air Canada and the Minister of Transport with respect to international 
service. We have made some gains with respect to the city of Saskatoon and we will be continuing the 
pressure in terms of providing improvement for international service for the city of Regina. 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1988 
 

Unemployment Situation 
 
MISS L.B. CLIFFORD (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. In 
light of the high unemployment figures that we have been discussing this afternoon there undoubtedly 
will be additional strain on the Department of Social Services. What steps is your department taking to 
meet the problems of this increased unemployment? 
 
HON. H. H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I think the budget 
indicates that we have in the Department of Social Services tremendously or significantly increased the 
funds allotted for ESP (Employment Support Program) which I have indicated in the past has been very 
successful, that is the Employment Support Program. I believe I am not certain but I think there is $3.8 
million in the present budget and I would hope that many of the people who because of the changes 
made in the Unemployment Insurance Act which have significantly increased our SAP roles . . . I would 
think with the increase of unemployment rate that many of these we will be able to accommodate under 
the SA Program, at least I hope we will be able to do that. 
 
MISS CLIFFORD: — Mr. Minister, do I understand from your answer that you were projecting these 
increased unemployment figures then at the time that our budget was laid down and in that case how 
many additional employees were you planning in order to look after this additional paper work that 
would be required by more recipients? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the member’s first question is, No, we had not 
anticipated the increase of unemployment. We increased the budget for two reasons. First, we knew that 
in our discussions with the federal minister that they were going to put restrictions on people being 
eligible for unemployment insurance and we knew our discussion with other provincial ministers that 
this would have an effect on our roles and that is one of the reasons why we increased it. Secondly, we 
increased the amounts of money in our budget because we were so successful under the ESP. I indicated 
to this House before that 80 per cent of the people who have gone through our Employment Support 
Program are no longer on public assistance and that’s why were able to convince the Treasury Board 
and this government to increase the allocations for funds in that particular program. 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Unemployment among native 
people is reported to be running between 70 and 80 per cent. Is it not a fact that the unemployment 
numbers among the native people are not included in the unemployed numbers in this publication and if 
they were, is it not a fact that the unemployment in the province would be nearer 10 per cent that the 7.1 
per cent? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Certainly not. All native people except those on reserves are included in the 
figures and the number of native people who are on reserves is a progressively smaller part of the total 
number of native people. As we all know the movement of people off reserves has been significant, and 
not withstanding this movement off reserves, the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan has only moved 
up very modestly and I think that is a matter for a very considerable congratulation on the part of us all. 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1989 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Remarks by member for Regina Wascana 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yesterday, the member for Regina Wascana in debating item 19 under Public Bills 
and Orders, Adjourned Debates, made a statement which I determined at that time was critical of the 
actions of the Chair. I have had an opportunity to examine the record on page 1934. The following 
statement is recorded: 
 

I notice that you, Mr. Speaker, were in no great rush to spring to your feet to correct that. 
 

The statement and the context in which was given was similar to others occurring about the same time 
which were withdrawn. I find that the citation that I gave at that time, citation 72 in Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms was appropriate for that time. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I want to raise a point of order on procedure in question period. The tradition 
has been, Mr. Speaker, that you have been alternating questions from the two opposition parties. I 
realize that the Chair has been under some embarrassment the last few days and perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 
has not been quite as conscientious on alternating as he has traditionally been, and I would like to direct 
Mr. Speaker’s attention to the procedure that has existed that we have noticed, perhaps through 
inadvertence, has slipped the last couple of weeks. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I want to take this opportunity to assure the member for Qu’Appelle that I stand 
before you, unembarrassed, and I want to say to the member for Qu’Appelle and I apologize to the 
Conservative caucus, that I made an error and I should have taken one of the members of their caucus 
and I’m sorry — inadvertently. 
 
MR. MALONE: — A point of order? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Today in question period you allowed me two 
questions and cut me off when I was seeking information from the Premier on what he referred to and 
which the Leader of the Conservative Party referred to as a very serious problem — unemployment. 
 
We were dealing with unemployment of 7.1 pre cent involving 30,000 people, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
The member wants to know why he was cut off. It is not an opportunity to re-debate the issue and bring 
in all the figures. He wants to know why he was cut off. Quite simply, I cut the member for Lakeview 
off because I thought the question and the answer were getting into debate and I didn’t want to proceed 
along that line. It was getting away from a question and answer period and it was becoming a debate. I 
felt that I should move on to something else in order to get both members on both sides of the House an 
opportunity to get away from the debate and get back to questions and answers. 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1990 
 

MR. CAMERON: — Can I . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No. The member can’t speak to that point. Oh, a new point of order? Yes. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — Well my point of order generally is the way in which Mr. Speaker, for the past 
several weeks now has been conducting the question periods. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The member can deal with a point of order with regard to today. He cannot 
go back several weeks. Order! A member can deal with a point of order that occurred today, and this is 
not new. This was the practice of the House ever since the question period started. He cannot go back 
and recall events that occurred in the past. They were supposed to be settled at that time. I will take a 
point of order if it is with regard to today’s question, and I want to know what the point of order is. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — My point of order is, with reference to the question asked by my seatmate, the 
member for Saskatoon Eastview, Mr. Speaker, on the same topic, unemployment. I thought that Mr. 
Speaker didn’t give him nearly the latitude Mr. Speaker ought to have given him and I was going to 
point Mr. Speaker to an example drawn from the record of the House of Commons on a similar matter 
quite . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! I think I have the member’s point of order. He wants to know why 
the member for Saskatoon Eastview was cut off on his question, which was the first question of the day. 
The member for Saskatoon Eastview received a question and a supplementary and I became aware of 
the fact that they were out of order at that point and I refer the member to the rules which govern 
question period. 
 

Questions must be stated without preamble or speech or be in the nature of a debate; and D (E) 
Questions must seek and not offer information to be Assembly. 

 
And that is why I cut the member off. The member will be aware of the fact that I allowed him to rise 
later and I thought he put his question adequately without debate. 
 
MR. PENNER: — Can I. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No, the member may not speak to the point of order. The member for Nipawin. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, on a new point of order I wonder if it might be possible for . . . and 
this is a general point of order, I am sorry, pertaining to question period, but it may help. I wonder if it 
might be possible for you and your staff, since it is causing considerable confusion in the opposition 
benches, pertaining to decisions made as to whether or not a party or an individual will get one 
supplementary or two supplementaries, whether you and your staff might review the question period 
entirely and work out whether or not it might be more satisfaction for this Assembly to call together the 
committee again to recommend perhaps a question and two supplementaries that are definite and 
definitive so that everyone knows precisely where they stand, instead of being this way. Every single 
day we seem to have a point of order period as well as a question period. Would it be possible for your 
office to do that? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes, I think I have the intent of the member’s comments with regard to a general 
point of order about the question period. I would say at the beginning that I 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1991 
 

am not prepared to dedicate my staff to the task the member puts forward. However, it is up to the 
members, they are free to refer to the rules committee at any time they wish, and if they wish to discuss 
the possibility of changes to the question period, then there is nothing to prevent them from bringing that 
forward to the rules committee and it could be dealt with at that time. Perhaps the committee could make 
a recommendation to the House with regard to a change in the question period. I don’t believe that the 
staff should be the people who dictate that to the member’s of the Assembly. That is something that 
should be decided by the members of the Assembly. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — But since the committee is at the call of the Chair, and since you are the chairman 
of that committee, might I ask you today to call that committee, the Rules Committee into session with 
reference to the question period to perhaps establish a new set of ground rules for question period, that 
will alleviate the confusion that exists in the opposition benches with reference to some of Mr. Speaker’s 
decisions in the past. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well I was planning on calling the Rules Committee back into session at least in 
the not too distant future, and I will look forward to sour member on the committee raising that subject 
on the agenda at that time, Member for Lakeview. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I wonder if you could explain, Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, your decision to 
cut off questions, because questions and answers become argumentative. You have cut me off, 
presumably after hearing the Premier’s answer. That to me, was the argumentative part, but you didn’t 
allow a third question. I wonder if you could just explain that to me. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well I think . . . Order, order, order! I think the members will have to rely on the 
record. They can go back and check the record of the question that the member for Lakeview asked, and 
I will go back and check it too, and the answer of the Premier again. I don’t think that the Premier’s 
answer was more argumentative than the question that was given. I think they were both getting into the 
area of dealing the issue, rather than question and answers. I seem to recall that I cut the Premier off on 
that question before he completed his answer. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — AGRICULTURE — VOTE 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I believe when you adjourned yesterday evening, we had a motion before us and 
the motion was prepared and presented by the member for Morse. Is the Committee ready for the 
question? 
 
ITEM 1 (con’t) 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Just a few more brief comments in regard to that particular motion which 
we had before us. Let me say initially that I was rather pleased with the high level of debate which took 
place in regard to this particular motion. There was some disagreement as to the level of severity in the 
concerns expressed in the motion but on the whole, I felt it was good because it did allow us an 
opportunity to debate the issue and to talk about it. I thought the level of debate was good except for the 
last half hour of committee last night. I think it was a very unfortunate display by the member for 
Nipawin, in the rather light and political way in which he treated a very serious and important question. I 
feel that the level of debate was lowered dramatically by the diatribe of the member for Nipawin last 
night, and I do not wish to waste the precious time of this Assembly by lowering myself to his level, or 
other members of this House to 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1992 
 

that level, by answering some of the ridiculous comments which he made last night. 
 
Mr. Chairman. In regard to this particular motion which we have before us, comments were made by all 
members of the House and by the press as well, that the motion which I raised was a “mother love: 
issue. What definition does one attach to that particular word? Does it mean, one is in agreement with an 
issue such as that? Or, does one say that the importance of that motion is not that great? I would hope 
that the latter definition would not, in turn, be the one that applies, because I believe the motion 
represents the very serious situation which the province of Saskatchewan agricultural now finds itself in, 
and that is, the serious situation which is developing at the College of Agriculture in regard to research, 
teaching and education of agriculture facilities. 
 
The minister, in some of his comments last night, listed some of the grants and programs that his 
department has made available and compared them to what took place in 1971 and so on, which is fair 
game. Yet one looks at the percentage of the budget for agriculture in 1971 and it ranked just as low as 
this percentage of budget does today — between 3.4 per cent and 3.8 per cent in 1971, and this one this 
year runs around 3.1 per cent. It has been a result of successive governments and successive budgets that 
have not put a great enough priority on agriculture to allow our college to slip to the position which it is 
today, and I think that the issue is serious enough because the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, 
in it brief to the government, which represents the views of the majority of our agricultural organizations 
of the province, themselves felt that it was a serious situation and let me just read excerpts from the brief 
which they presented to Cabinet yesterday, and it reads: 
 

SFA is also patiently waiting for the College, the University of Saskatchewan Commission and 
the provincial government to come to grips with the future financing of the College of 
Agriculture. As we all know the college is grossly understaffed and has very limited space in 
relation to other agricultural colleges in Canada. Without increased finances to improve space 
requirements and increase staff numbers, the College of Agriculture’s teaching and research 
efforts will continue to suffer. 

 
The fact that the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture has realized the problem, I think, endorses or 
emphasizes the resolution which I have presented and placed before you. I made comment, last night, 
about comparing our college in this province to other colleges in Canada. The minister, in his reply, tried 
to refute that claim. I stand by that claim that I made last night that our college has sunk badly in 
comparison to other colleges in Canada. I would just like to quote some figures which were presented to 
the government of Saskatchewan, the Cabinet of the government of Saskatchewan, by the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Agrologists in regard to the College of Agriculture, University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me just use some of the statistics which they used in that brief. I might say that the statistics, I 
understand, were prepared by Mr. John R. Peters and Mr. Herb R. Clarke, who is the president of the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists at the university. 
 
They go on to say — full time academic staff by colleges of agriculture in Canada, today. In 1965-66 
Saskatchewan had 38 staff members; Alberta has 42; Manitoba, 51 and Ontario, 197. This shows the 
low level of staff which our college has in comparison to other colleges. 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1993 
 

Let’s go on to have a look at the total number of students by the colleges of agriculture in 1976-77 
Guelph, Ontario, 2,464 students; Manitoba, 1,089 students; Alberta, 1,121 students; Saskatchewan, 861 
students. 
 
Let’s go on to what, I think, is a rather interesting figure. Let’s look at the amount of dollars which this 
province provides to agriculture in comparison to the gross national product of what agriculture 
produces in Saskatchewan, the relationship between farm cash receipts and the number of agricultural 
faculty positions by selected provinces. Saskatchewan, total farms receipts other than Ontario is second 
highest. Saskatchewan, total farm cash receipts is $1,942,000,000. Staff per billion of farm cash receipts 
in a ratio is 25.8. Compare that to Quebec who has a total farm cash receipt of $1,000,107,000, 
considerably less than ours. Theirs is 127.4 staff members per $1 billion of farm cash receipts. 
 
Let’s look at Manitoba whose total farm cash receipts are $820,000, half of what our total farm cash 
receipts are in the province of Saskatchewan. Their staff ratio per $1 billion of farm cash receipts is 104, 
four times as great as ours. So in effect the level of contribution by Manitoba in comparison to the 
dollars which are produced in Saskatchewan in regard to agriculture is four times as great. 
 
One goes on to Alberta, which is slightly less than ours in total cash receipts but they are way above us 
in terms of staff that is provided. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that these are very concrete figures. I am sure that the minister still has a copy of 
this particular brief that certainly demonstrates the fact that we are not upholding our share of 
agricultural research and education in Saskatchewan in comparison to what other provinces are doing 
throughout the Dominion of Canada. 
 
It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that this particular motion does not specify any amount of dollars that 
are needed. What the motion does is recommend that the government does consider an increase in 
grants. I think it is a resolution or a motion that all of us should support. I think it is a motion that 
government members on that side of the House can support without really putting their particular 
government or their agricultural department or agricultural budget in too great a jeopardy. It will show 
to the agricultural sectors of Saskatchewan and it will show to the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Agriculture as well, which does represent the views of many farm organizations in Saskatchewan, that 
we are concerned about the problem and that we are prepared to do something about it. I would urge all 
members to support the motion. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, just a few words in reply. I would like to have gone back over 
some of the figures that I quoted last night to indicate the rapidly escalating level of support which had 
been forthcoming from this government with regard to the research capacity. 
 
I would like to say that there are ongoing discussions at the present time between the College of 
Agriculture, the University Commission and the Department of Agriculture with regard to getting a 
better priority in the funding for College of Agriculture in Saskatoon. We are hopeful that those 
discussions will result in some upgrading of the capacity there to provide additional student capacity. 
However, I want to indicate to the member and to the House that the School of Agriculture has been able 
to accommodate all of the applications which have been made this year and, therefore, there isn’t a 
backlog of students who are not being accommodated at the school. You 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1994 
 

might consider that because of our lower population in Saskatchewan that there wouldn’t be as many 
students normally as there would be in Ontario or in Alberta. I think that you would expect that our 
student enrolment would be somewhat lower. 
 
I think another thing which should be considered is that figures in terms of dollars and cents and 
numbers of students aren’t always comparable. I don’t think they always indicate the measure of need 
that there is in a province. I think you would recognize that in Saskatchewan our agricultural industry is 
a little less diversified than it is in most other provinces to the extend that most other provinces are 
dealing in fruit products, vegetables products to a much greater degree than we are. We are more or less 
in a grain growing and a livestock growing area, so that there isn’t quite the need for the diversity here 
that there is in other provinces. 
 
With regard to his comments on the brief by the Institute of Agrologists, I read the brief and, of course, 
read the criticism that was there about the fact that they though we should be providing more services 
and more facilities. I would suggest if he would look at the briefs that they have written to almost any 
provincial government across this country that they would have had the same criticism. I was looking at 
the Canadian Institute of Agrologists brief not very long ago and I recall a fairly strong criticism of the 
federal government for not providing enough research capacity. As I said last night, I believe that would 
go on whether we had $50 million or $5 million in the research sector. I simply want to point out to the 
members that although I appreciate the intent of the resolution, I think that we should also recognize that 
this government has put substantial emphasis on research and, therefore, I would recommend that we 
defeat the resolution. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am just wondering with regard to some of the debate 
which took place in the House on Monday last, regarding the Farm Fuel Cost Reduction Program which 
was in effect in the province, I believe the last year it operated was 1976, I am just wondering for that 
particular year, for the last year of operation, if the minister could give me — it is my understanding that 
in the applications that were sent in for the grant that the farmer had to list the total amount of gallons of 
diesel fuel, purpose gas and so on that he used on his farm — the figures of the total gallons of gasoline 
used by farmers in the last year of the that particular program as indicated on the applications that were 
received, not the total amount that was paid on but the total amount that was actually used. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the figure I am given is about 185 million gallons of purple fuel, 
that’s gas and diesel fuel for farm use — 195 million, I’m sorry. 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): — Just a short question, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask the 
minister, he is well aware of the kind of drainage problems that we’ve had in Saskatchewan with respect 
to agricultural land and the problems, I’ve brought them up to him before. I have brought them up to the 
Minister of Environment before. Nobody seems to be prepared to do anything about it immediately. I 
would like to ask the minister, however, if he is aware of any experiments being done at OAVC (Olds 
Agriculture and Vocational College) with respect to burying a perforated pipe to drain sloughs in 
Saskatchewan which potentially could eliminate the surface drainage problems and the problems of 
right-of-way and downstream damage? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I am told that the cost of that particular method is very 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1995 
 

high and is not considered as being economically viable to use that method. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Mr. Chairman, I am not aware that any conclusive research has been done on it 
to this date and my request was simply to the minister if he will undertake his department to check with 
those people who have been involved in the research of the use of perforated pipe to find out exactly 
what the costs are that are associated with it. Obviously we can’t assume that it is going to cost the same 
as a nine inch plastic pipe, solid pipe, that’s being used to drain sloughs but then again we have to 
consider that in the long run it might be a lot cheaper than civil litigation, one neighbor against the next 
in Saskatchewan. I would hope only that you could give me the assurance that your department will 
undertake to do a thorough study of that option and its potential to alleviate some of the surface drainage 
problems we have had in Saskatchewan in the past few years. It appears that it will continue because of 
the lack of action from the provincial government. All I am looking for is the assurance. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can advise the member that there are at the present time 
some experimental projects going on at the Outlook Irrigation Project and they are looking at the whole 
aspect of whether it’s economically feasible and what the mechanical problems would be with that kind 
of program. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Minister, when one looks at the total overall 
picture of agriculture in terms of the overall provincial picture which is budgetary cash outflows and the 
amount that is going to be spent on agriculture, I think it is a pretty astonishing figure here in this 
Budget and in too many of the budgets that have been brought down by your government and that is the 
amount that is actually spent on agriculture. Mr. Minister, I think it is a pretty shocking indictment of 
your government and you, as the minister, when we are dealing in a Budget of $1,700,000,000 or 
$1,695,000,000 if you want to be specific. About the best that you can come out of this about $54 
million. Mr. Minister, that’s about 3.1. . . (interjection) . . . No, as a matter of fact I wasn’t, I wasn’t out 
helping your opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my friends to the right tell me that you made a speech last night but maybe you 
wouldn’t mind very briefly paraphrasing it and tell me why, out of a budget of $1.7 billion that you can 
only find 3.1 or $53 million to spend in agriculture? Seeing you are well oiled on that speech I am sure 
you can cut it a little shorter this afternoon. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to accommodate the member. I’m sorry he 
wasn’t around last night. However, the argument about the numbers of dollars spent in agriculture, I 
think the important issue that you want to look at is whether you want dollars spent on supplementing 
income or whether you want dollars spent on programs. We tend to want to put our money into 
programming, support programming for the agricultural community in Saskatchewan and we think that 
the level of funding we have here does a pretty effective job of that. We are providing, what I think, is a 
very adequate regional service out in the country in terms of extension personnel. The research work is 
done at the university although some people may criticize it as being inadequate, I think that people will 
have to recognize that there has been a substantial improvement in that area in terms of direct available 
capacity in the offices in and around the administration are. It seems to me that we are doing a very 
commendable job in taking care of the immediate problems of every area which would require some 
kind of assistance. The question I suppose is whether you use dollars out of the Consolidated Fund to 
provide income for the farm community. I know that the member opposite would not suggest that we do 
that. I know that he has always been 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1996 
 

opposed to subsidization and I am sure he continues to be that way. So I don’t think that he would ask 
that we should have some income transfer programs in our budget. I would like to have him point out to 
me an area where he thinks that we are not providing adequate service. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. G.N. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Chairman, thank you and I thank members of the 
House for allowing me to interrupt. I would like to introduce a group of some 78 or 80 students in the 
gallery who are here today on this Options Canada Interchange on Canadian studies. They are the 
second portion of the group that were introduced to the House a little earlier. I want to apologize to you 
for the fact that I wasn’t here when you entered. But I do want on behalf of the House to welcome you 
here and hope that you will find that the time that you spending the House will be very worthwhile. I 
would like to recognize the teachers who are with the group, Glen Grieves, Gerry Jean, Albert Sullivan 
and Glen Reeves. We are glad that you are able to be here in the company of the Saskatoon students and 
also those from across the nation. I look forward to the opportunity to meet with you a little later this 
afternoon. 
 
HON. H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Buena Vista): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to join with the member 
for Eastview in welcoming the students from Interchange on Canadian Studies. We spend some time 
with them last Sunday night at the banquet and the enthusiasm that they displayed at that time certainly 
put a lot of us to shame. I think maybe they have expended much of their energy and are resting a little 
bit today. We do hope that they have a very worthwhile experience in Saskatchewan and in Saskatoon, 
my home city. On behalf of all the other Saskatoon MLAs on this side, I would like to wish you a very 
pleasant experience in Saskatchewan. I hope you have a very successful day here and that you have a 
very pleasant trip back to your own province. I would also like to at this particular time give a personal 
invitation and welcome to Albert Sullivan and Gerry Jean who are personal friends of mine and former 
colleagues. I do hope that you have a worthwhile day here. We will be meeting with you very shortly. 
Thank you very kindly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — AGRICULTURE — VOTE 1 
 
ITEM 1 (continued) 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you tell me how 
much, if any funds are transferred from the Department of Agriculture to the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, or is that a separate fund? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the Research Council is refunded out of Industry and Commerce 
Budget. We do have them do some work for us on a contract basis. But the funding of the Research 
Council is through Industry and Commerce. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you say that you have them do some work for you. 
Is that on a pay for service basis or is it just a service that they provide for you? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, it is done on a contract basis. 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1997 
 

MR. BIRKBECK: — How are the rates set on a contract basis? Could you elaborate a little bit on that. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — They are usually negotiated on the basis of the kind of project that you are doing, 
depending on whether it is staff time or mechanical or whatever. It is negotiated on the basis of each 
project. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I see by the Saskatchewan Research Council report that they do a 
lot of research which pertains to agriculture. I see that they have been doing work in terms of farm 
products, economic uses, strong defeating value of crop residues from unusual crops, micro-organism 
treatment o improve the feeding value of low quality forage. There are number of things here which I 
feel are very worthy projects which are going to enhance agriculture, maybe not immediately but surely 
sometime down the road. 
 
What I would like to know is, is the Saskatchewan Research Council report, on your behalf, or is your 
department, doing any studies whatsoever in the province of Saskatchewan, on the bio-mass theory? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, I think we have no direct funding going into that particular area at the present 
time. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you intend to direct any of your attention to that area, 
either through your department or by contract with the Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — These kinds of projects are handled through Industry and Commerce and we 
haven’t got any direct involvement with it. Industry and Commerce and the Energy people would be 
involved in those kinds of projects. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, I suppose, Mr. Minister, it would be inappropriate for me to ask you what 
studies the Department of Industry and Commerce is doing on behalf of your department, indirectly, but 
the fact remains that the bio-mass theory, the theory of processing animal waste into various 
components, namely, methane gas and high protein products which can be used in turn to feed cattle. 
Now, I would like to know if you are placing any effort on any department to do such studies. That is 
primarily what I am asking you. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, we have a limited contract with the Research Council for energy research this 
year. There is a certain amount of work being done in Manitoba in this regard and we tend to split up 
some of our research projects between different provinces so that we aren’t duplicating research in three 
or four different provinces. In terms of this kind of research, most of that is being done in Manitoba. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, this is now the third department of government which we have 
found confessing to the fact that they are not doing research in certain areas in the province which would 
be in the interests of Saskatchewan people; they are relying on research being done on the same topics in 
other pars of the country or possibly in the United States. Now, Mr. Minister, I am not altogether too 
sure that that is necessarily the most effective way to do research on projects which we feel can very 
quickly and within 10 years I think is quickly in terms of the bio-mass area, bringing it on stream where 
it can be on economic value to agriculture, and in turn, to the economy 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

1998 
 

of the province. That is not necessarily the route to go. 
 
Obviously, since you have no pilot projects that are in operation in the province, and there are no 
measures by which you provide assistance to individuals who may want to attempt this process, surely 
the information which you are relying on is not adequate enough to place your own department in a 
position where it can announce a program of information and possibly assistance for those who want to 
experiment on that basis. Now, Mr. Minister, would you not agree that that is the case? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, as I indicated before there is a kind of co-operative arrangement between 
provinces whereby certain kinds of research is carried on in Manitoba, some is done in Saskatchewan as 
I indicated last night. We have the research capacity here in the veterinary field in terms of livestock 
disease and so on. That has been given to Saskatchewan as a kind of an area where we do all of the 
research, at least the major party of the research, and the other provinces draw from that. In this 
particular case, in the energy field that you are talking about, most of that research is carried on in 
Manitoba and we try to draw from that. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Minister, it is my opinion that with the information that has been available 
from various sources throughout North America on this topic of bio-mass processing of animal waste, 
that we are far behind and in fact, should be the province should be the vocation in the North American 
content that is leading the way in this regard. We are going to have to take some measures as soon as 
possible, to place ourselves in a number one position, to place that as a priority. Surely now, as you have 
suggested, with the energy shortage and agriculture being asked to bite the bullet, and the energy 
shortage as it pertains to agriculture and the industry itself having to face possible gas rationing if the 
federal government brings in its contingency plans, that surely this is one direction you could be moving 
into and moving into it more quickly than you are. If we can look at it in terms of an example, of a 
farmer who has a large hog operation or livestock operation or any description, we could see where he 
was draining off methane gas from those animal wastes, using them to power his machinery, his tractors, 
or for that matter, depending on legislation and regulations permitting, allow him to power his half ton 
truck which he uses in his operation. Also, on a larger scale, where we have concentrations of cattle in 
feedlot operations, whether they be a co-operative organization, or numbers of farmers getting together 
and feeding their cattle out in a feedlot operation, this could be applied in those instances as well, and 
very effectively, in terms of the production of protein. It would be far more economical to reprocess 
these animal wastes to use them in the form of protein, rather than the use that we are now making of 
animal wastes, and that being, fertilizer. If you compare the figures, and I have them (I don’t have them 
with me unfortunately), but it is a great difference in the economic return, the dollar value return, per ton 
of animal waste if it is processed into a protein form, rather than being used in its raw form, for 
fertilizer. 
 
So all I am saying, Mr. Minister, is that I see the day (not too long now, as I said, maybe 10 years) when 
these practices are going to be in place. I also see the day, with the present direction that our government 
is going and in particular, through your department, that we are not going to be able to look back and 
say, well, we took the initiative in that area; we started this; we got this project off the ground. What we 
are going to be doing is looking back and say, somebody else did the research; somebody else put the 
money in, and now it is starting to pick up here in Saskatchewan. Why do we have to be a 
“Johnny-come-lately” type on these types of things? 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

1999 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think that is a very important area in which your department could be placing some 
strong emphasis. Obviously because of your budget, you are unable to do that. And that seems to be at 
the heart of the whole problem, that you don’t have the money. I think if your department had the funds 
it could put more funds into those kinds of things, which in the long term, (which is getting back to what 
I suggested to you repeatedly) long term policies to look after the future needs of the farm industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you not agree then, and would you not accept my suggestion, that you should look 
very seriously at this and, hopefully, in the next budget, we would like to see a substantial increase (at 
least in the neighborhood of 15 per cent increase) in the Department of Agriculture Estimates for 
funding, in order that you might direct some more financial assistance in those areas of research? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I recall sitting here last night and hearing a tirade from the member 
for Nipawin about how research money gets wasted. And one of the reason why we are not involved in 
this kind of project is because it has been decided, co-operatively between governments, that certain 
governments should do certain projects, and do research in certain areas, and I would suggest that to 
suggest otherwise would be totally ridiculous. There is a need for us across Canada to concentrate our 
dollars in the areas of research where each area has a special benefit to be derived from it. In this case, 
research in Manitoba is being federally funded to a large extent. They have provided funds for a pilot 
project there, and they are trying to develop the technology and apparently has not yet developed to the 
stage where they are prepared to suggest to the other provinces that they are at a point where they say it 
is practical. I think that this is a worthwhile kind of co-operative effort to go into. I think we should 
consider what it would cost each province, if each province was going to set up, for itself, all of these 
little experimental research projects. It couldn’t be handled in terms of dollars and cents. In this case, we 
are prepared to let Manitoba do that kind of research. We are prepared to say that we want to let them 
have the forefront in that particular area. We are doing it in research in animal disease and Alberta will 
have other areas that they are dealing with. It might be interesting for you to know that last year and the 
year before we have been involved in a special project with straw ammoniation and you may have heard 
that through the winter, that we were dealing with experimental projects on straw ammoniation which 
does tend to province a higher level of protein out of a very clean roughage and one which we think has 
real potential in Saskatchewan for winter feed for livestock and we spent something the neighborhood of 
$12,000 last year just showing farmers how to use this new technology. That is the kind of thing that is 
coming out of this research. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am sorry I wasn’t able to quote catch what the 
Minister was saying, I didn’t understand what he was saying with regard to Minister of Environment has 
got his buttons undone again. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, again I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you couldn’t 
just explain to me a little bit more in detail, you mention $12,000, is this in terms of straw, what did you 
say? What was your terminology there? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — The straw ammoniation project where ammonia is injected into a pile of straw, it is 
covered, and then ammonia is injected into that and as a result of that process there is higher protein 
capacity and it makes a much better feed than the straight straw alone much protein. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, a much better feed than what? 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2000 
 

MR. KAEDING: — Than straight straw, by itself. It improves the quality of the straw and brings a 
better conversion. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, earlier on your were commenting with regard to 
research that Manitoba was doing, in terms of this bio-mass process. Now what you are saying is that 
Manitoba is telling you at this point in time it is their opinion it is not economically viable and therefore, 
you are not promoting it here in Saskatchewan. Is that true? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, certainly we are prepared to accept their research which they are undertaking 
in Manitoba in this particular field, as they are accepting our research in other areas and I think that is 
the most reasonable way to attack the research problem. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am sorry that I had delayed for a moment after 
you had asked me that question and I have forgotten what it was, it must have been a real winner, so if 
you don’t mind I’ll continue asking you one or two. Mr. Minister, as I recall you replied that you were 
justifying a sum of $54 million dollars which was such a magnanimous sum and that the Department of 
Agriculture was on strings so far, that you were doing so many marvellous things for people in rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, very respectfully, I would like to suggest to you that the Department of 
Agriculture hasn’t had an original idea since the member for Kelsey-Tisdale was taken out of that 
portfolio. I didn’t very often agree with the philosophy that that particular member took to the portfolio 
but during his tenure there, agriculture was where the action was, things were happening and granted I 
was on the opposite side philosophically, agriculture is where the action was. Very respectfully, Mr. 
Minister, again I would like to say that agriculture, since you became a Minister has declined quite 
sharply insofar as a priority of your government. I’ll base that very simply by saying that your estimates, 
the amount that you have been allocated by the Budget are 7.3 per cent. Everybody in this Assembly 
knows full well that budgetary expenditures across the board are up 12 per cent. Therefore, Mr. 
Minister, when it comes to the tough battle within the Treasury Board, when the various departments 
and various ministers apply for funds, you have got the hell beat out of you, to put it very bluntly. You 
lost 4.7 per cent, Mr. Minister, so Mr. Minister before we move on, I will let you respond to that that one 
and then we will just get on. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, first of all I would like to respond to the extent that I suggest that he look 
across the border to his neighbor in Manitoba and see what agriculture got out of the budget in 
Manitoba. I note from the figures that I have here that the agricultural budget is not 3.7 per cent of the 
total budget, but 1.8 per cent of the total budget. That is the new Tory government in Manitoba. Now 
you are quoting a figure of 7.4 per cent which you say that we have got out of this budget and on the 
blue book figure that is probably the figure you would get. However, I think you said when you were 
comparing the budget, I think you said that consider that last year we had a large non-returning item, the 
item of $1.7 million into the agribition building which is not in the budget his year nor will it be an item 
in the budget in the future. There are other small non-recurring items of something like $1 million which 
are not in this year’s budget which were in last year’s. If you take those two out you will see that we 
have actually this year an additional $5 million, approximately $5 million in new programming in the 
new budget and which really brings our budget up to 15 per cent over last year’s, if you take out those 
non-recurring items. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, frankly, I’m not particularly interested in what 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2001 
 

they are doing in Alberta or in Manitoba because I don’t live in Manitoba. I happen to live in 
Saskatchewan although I must say at times I sure wish it was Alberta. Mr. Minister, that’s interesting 
about the expenditures that you have mentioned of $1 million here and a $1 million there. You could 
find the agribition building doesn’t amount to much — a $1 million here and $1 million there that he 
doesn’t define. Nonetheless the figure is still 7.3 per cent. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, I just took one of your subvotes at random and I took item 1 under 
Administrative Service. Last year you had 34 employees. This year you’ve got 36. Mr. Minister, I note, 
just talking this one at random, the first one that was there. I noticed you saw fit to jack the salaries up 
the full 12 per cent, the full 12 per cent that the overall provincial Budget went up. You sure jacked the 
salaries there and yet your total overall budget when you take in the capital and everything else, comes 
out at 7.3. Perhaps, Mr. Minister, you have a $1 million here or $1 million there that you care to take off 
that particular item. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that you will recognize that there are two new 
positions there in that particular area. They are not particularly new positions in the department. They 
are simply changes of positions from another department into the administration and because of that it 
does create an increase in administration in that particular subvote. However, I think you would 
recognize that our departments, every other department, has to meet the salary commitments which are 
made by the Public Service Commission and that’s reflected in that particular subvote. It is no more or 
no less. The extra two positions are simply two positions which are transferred from other areas of the 
department. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s a very interesting analogy because while I was 
waiting for you I took another one at random, on that’s a little nearer and dearer to my heart known as 
the Animal Industry Branch. The Animal Industry Branch has got some pretty capable people in it, Mr. 
Minister. Some of them I really don’t know why are sticking around here. Nonetheless you are fortunate 
to have them. So I took their permanent positions and I quickly ran that one through. You’ve declined 
from 61 down to 60. It was very interesting, Mr. Minister in this very key subvote, the Animal Industry 
Branch, a very key department, you only went up 6.7 per cent salary. Now, can the minister kindly tell 
me what is so special about Administrative Services that you would go up 11.6 but the Animal Industry 
Branch which I think is a very vital department to the province of Saskatchewan, certainly to the 
livestock industry and which has some very top quality people, they get 6.7? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, that position out of Animal Industry was simply transferred again to another 
section to the Vet Lab which is related to that particular area so that person is not lost to the industry. 
Again, the member likes to juggle figures because he was taking a comparison between an item of 
subvote which lost one person and comparing it to a subvote where two people were added. Again, these 
are interdepartmental switches not new people and it’s some real mathematical gymnastics when you try 
to make those kinds of comparisons with 6 per cent here and 11 per cent there and I think the member 
knows that. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Come on, Mr. Minister, now you can do better than that. At least let’s surely to 
goodness hope you can do better than that. The way I did item 1, I simply took 36 people, divided it into 
715,000 and you get 19,887. Conversely I took 34 people into 605 etc., and got the average salary, 
punched it through and you get 11.6. Now go over to item 20 and take 60 people, divide it into 97,590, 
do the same in the 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2002 
 

next subvote and you get 6.7. Now give us an answer and don’t be so ridiculous. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I think again the member because he doesn’t know what happens in 
these subvotes is trying to confuse the issue. Under Administration, as you know, all of our executive 
director positions come under Administration and these are, of course, the high paid position 
Department of Agriculture or any department, the executive directors, most of the people who are sitting 
here. Their salaries are covered under item 1, administration. They are higher salaries than you would 
have in the regular civil service. So you would have a higher percentage in that area. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Oh, now just a minute, Mr. Minister, we are not talking about absolute salaries 
and nobody is disputing that particular aspect. We are talking about percentage increase. Now we have 
just taken these at random. Now if you want to take a little time, I suppose I could punch another one 
through, but absolute salaries. No question about it they are the people who are with you. They are our 
top quality people and they are the ones, I assume, when there is a crucial decision to be made, that they 
are the ones that you call in. And disputably if to keep your top quality people, you must be competitive 
with other governments the federal, or the provincial, or the private sector. But the Animal Industry 
Branch also happens to be a very important department. 
 
Again, I will ask you, since you have had a little consultation, take your time. Why would you only give 
Animal Industry employees 6.7 per cent versus the administrative services of 11.6 or 12 per cent? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — There is an item in the Administration Budget which provides for salary which 
was not paid out of Administration last year, an item of $30,000, a top executive position, which was in 
a different subvote last year and is in here now. And that makes the difference in that particular area. 
 
I think the regular increase rates . . . Mr. Chairman, there is a little difficulty comparing numbers as well 
because of the fact that in these figures is not only regular time, but overtime is also calculated in these 
figures. So it is difficult to identify from department to department exactly at the percentage of increase 
would be in terms of salaries and so on, depending on how much overtime these people had to do and so 
on. So it is very difficult to compare every department on a percentage basis. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, this is not exactly a momentous issue that I suppose the 
government should fall on. But I suppose what is amusing, Mr. Minister, is your contortions trying to go 
around this because obviously, you don’t know the answer and the people you have with you don’t 
know the answer. 
 
First off there was an item taken off, now we are talking about overtime. Mr. Minister, we are not 
talking about actual figures; we are talking about budgeted figures and I am sure every year your 
accountants or treasury board has a constant factor for overtime, which they insert into your budgetary 
figures. Now, Mr. Minister, let’s get moving on to something else. Give us an answer to a very basic and 
simple question that makes sense. I am only asking the same question that any adequate financial critic 
from your side would ask were he over here. 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2003 
 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, again, I have to indicate that it is very hard to make comparisons 
because when you are transferring personnel you are not always transferring people in the same salary 
range. In the particular, he was pointing to Animal Industry, and in that particular are the people who 
transferred out of there were low salaried people; the people who were transferred into Administration 
were in senior levels. That would make some differences in the percentages. It is very difficult for us to 
compute here just how those percentage do compare, but certainly, there are no areas in either one of 
those budgets which indicate any padding of dollars or anything like that. There certainly is none of that. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — No, Mr. Minister, I was not suggesting there was any padding of dollars. I just 
would point out to you that if they transferred into animal industry at a lower level, lower salary level, 
the percentage increase would be much higher and administration much lower, the reverse of what you 
just said. But since obviously the budgetary considerations are beyond you, let us move on to something 
else. 
 
Mr. Minister, there have been questions raised within the livestock industry, as to the value of some of 
your stockyard inspections, that the inspections that are conducted at both stockyards and auction marts, 
that perhaps . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
That’s right. As my colleague for Shaunavon points out, the one where an inspector determines whether 
the animal is alive or dead. Now, it really is not quite that bad but I think he does allude to some 
questions that are raised. Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you, what does this total program cost? When 
you get into the overall thing of the stockyard inspection, the brand inspection, breaking it down, what is 
your budgetary cost on this? Or what are you budgeting specifically for this area? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — The total number of dollars for livestock inspection, $616,000. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — What about brand inspection, Mr. Minister? Does that include brand inspection 
also? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes that includes brand inspection. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Pardon me? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — That is, brand inspection and stockyard inspection, right? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — yes, I think that includes all the livestock inspection. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, would you comment on the success of the program. Do you really 
think that by tossing in some of this bureaucracy into normal movement of cattle health inspection, 
would you tell us what exactly your objectives are, what your department’s objectives are? And do you 
really think that you have been successful? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, I think there are a number of valuable items performed by these inspectors. I 
think you will recognize that one of the major things that is involved is protection of the livestock 
industry; to make sure that there is not any rustling going on by the brand inspection, that sort of thing. 
This guarantees that at least we can find animals, if they are rustled. The other important area of course, 
is the health area where you want to make sure that animals are not getting on the market which are not 
suitable 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2004 
 

for human consumption, that sort of thing. We have to make sure that those sorts of things don’t happen. 
I would imagine that those two would be the major areas; make sure that the health is protected, and 
identification of animals. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, what kind of people do the inspection or do your health measures 
inspections, and what procedures do they use? What qualifications do they have? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — The inspectors generally get an in-service training course and they must qualify in 
this in-service training course before they can be appointed as inspectors. They are taught there, I 
presume, the inspection procedures that they have to go through and the health checks that they have to 
make. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, for the number of people that you have got working on this 
program, between brand inspection and your health inspection, I respectfully ask you, is $616,000 all 
that program is costing? What are you showing that as. Is that $616,000 strictly salaries or what is 
involved in that? With all due respect, that does seem rather low. Are we isolating something out there 
in error? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I think that covers salaries and travelling expenses. There really isn’t very much 
else to go into inspection, except the salary of the inspectors and the travelling time from one auction 
mart to another. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — How many people are employed? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — There are about 30 permanent inspectors and about 75 who do part-time work, 
people who to go to individual auction marts and maybe do two or three in a week. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I note under capital expenditures that the increase is not very 
substantial, about $6,000,063 to about $6,000, 154. Mr. Minister , that is really not very much 
capitalizing into agriculture. Now, before you spring up and tell me about all the capitalization that is 
going into the Land Bank and buying land, let us not stretch a point and call that the purchase of capital. 
 
Mr. Minister, any province where so much of its income, where so much of the budgetary inflows into 
this budget that we are talking about, comes directly from agriculture and such a small percentage of 
budgetary outflow goes back to agriculture, would the minister not agree that he has been, let us say, a 
trifle remiss, or his government has been a trifle remiss is not getting that figure of capital expenditures 
into agriculture expanded? Mr. Minister, I apologize for going into a situation in my constituency; I will 
be very brief about it but there is an irrigation group that has been down to see your government every 
year for about seven to eight years. All they wanted, I think from the outset, started out at maybe 
$50,000. I think the cost of the project now is maybe up to $65,000. It is again land irrigation thing and 
they have been down every year. I have made appointments with them for your people. They have even 
been to see your deputy minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, a project like that up in grain land, making use of a — well, I suppose it was a 
dream some years ago that really never materialized, meaning the Diefenbaker Dam; the dreams were 
there but the results from it I guess for some reason have just never been materialized. Maybe it just was 
not there to being with but, Mr. Minister, 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2005 
 

$65,000 is not all that much for that many people. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you why year after year (what I think on the surface is a pretty good 
project, what I think on the surface your officials think is a reasonably good project) can you not find 
$65,000? 
 
Now I am sure you are going to say, well there are people from 61 constituencies who come up and 
want $65,000, and that is probably a valid concern. Mr. Minister, where are your priorities on capital 
expenditure? That is really what my question is. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, when you are looking at a capital expenditures you have to look at 
the cost benefit rations and in that particular project, although it looks like it is the kind of project that 
could be developed, our estimate cost per acres there runs well over $400 per acre. It is a question I 
suppose of priorities, of whether you spend $400 an acre for a benefit there as opposed to spending 
dollars on smaller irrigation projects across the province. This particular project is still under discussion 
and is one which has not been rejected but in this year’s budget it was decided that it was not a top 
priority because of the cost benefit ratios and we though we could do better with our dollars in other 
places. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I thank the minister for his answer. That is the same answer they have been 
getting for a good many years, but Mr. Minister, in true style I am sure that we will be back to see you 
again. Perhaps we should try you personally instead of your officials. 
 
Moving to another area, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you a little bit about your Lands Branch. Your 
Lands Branch has moved into a policy which I suppose is rejecting a former practice that was held and 
that was the assignment of leases. In other words, over a period of years, some deeded land in 
conjunction with some leased land came to form an economic unit and then for one reason or the other 
there was the transfer from father to son or the sale or retirement of the individual and for some reason 
this policy has now been dropped. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think the way the policy worked in the past was that if the deeded land of this 
economic unit was to be sold, it was possible for both parties to come down and have a discussion with 
the Department of Agriculture, and the Department of Agriculture officials would take a look at the 
situation and they could then judge whether that land should be posted, or whether without posting, it 
should go to the buyer, whether that buyer be outside or within the family. 
 
Mr. Minister, very respectfully, the job of allocating land leases in the provincial Lands Branch has to be 
one of the sorriest, pardon me, the easiest way to get an unpopular name in Saskatchewan. I have always 
had a great deal of sympathy for Mr. Taylor who must sign all of these lease form letters — for a long 
time it was Mr. Rice. They are two names that are very well known out in the country and I do feel sorry 
of them because every time there are ten applications, only one can get it and nine are automatically 
mad, and I have always felt sorry for those two gentlemen who have had tossing form letters going one 
way or the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think basically these people did a reasonably good job of coming to the right decision as 
to whether that lease should be assigned or whether it should be posted. Mr. Minister, it is my 
understanding that you have now moved your department to a policy where automatically assignments 
are not possible without posting. Now, 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2006 
 

Mr. Minister, I am sure that you have had these problems recited to you many times but I will go 
through them again very briefly. 
 
A situation occurs where somebody wants to sell out. The lease part is an integral part of the unit to 
make it economic. He is faced with the situation of first, having to drop his lease. He cannot simply sell 
it subject to assignment by you; it has to be posted. Mr. Minister, respectfully, I think there has been a 
regrettable situation. I think this program has been in for about a year now. You have had an opportunity 
to assess it. I know I have encountered problems with it in my small local capacity. Could the minister 
tell us if his department is considering a re-evaluation of what is now a very hard and fast policy? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the member has spoken truly when he says that the allocation 
process is a tough process and one which is not an easy one to deal with. The assignment of lease policy 
as we now have it was put in there for a number of reasons. You will know and you indicated that all 
assignments have to be posted. That is not true. The father and son transfers are still being handled on an 
assignment basis and in most cases, those are the kinds of transfers that are taking place. There are a few 
non father-son situations and some of them have come to my attention. I went down to Maple Creek and 
one of the reasons that I went down there was to discuss with the farmers there, and to hear their 
problems with regard to assignments and land transfers and so on. I can tell you there are those people 
who don’t like the policy. There are also people who do like the new policy. 
 
It seems to me that when a lease is granted to a farmer, it is granted to him on the basis of his particular 
need and he develops his packages around that lease. When he has used the lease for the length of time 
that he intends to use, then that lease is no longer his, at least it shouldn’t be, in my opinion There is no 
reason that he should be able to expect, that because that lease was his while he needed it, it should 
automatically go to the next person who comes along. We know and we have a great deal of evidence to 
show that because some of these leases were being assigned with the value of the land, that the owner 
was in actual fact, capitalizing on the fact that he had the lease to transfer with it, the assignments of 
lease. 
 
When I was in Maple Creek I asked some of the farmers down there what they were paying for land and 
the average price that was quoted to me on that day was something like 30 times the assessed value. 
Partly, that is because some of them thought they could assign leased land with it. Anyone knows that in 
that area you can’t pay 30 times the assessed value for land and make it worthwhile. 
 
Now, it seems to me that when a farmer has used a lease for his lifetime or as long as he is prepared to 
be on that land, that then he has derived the benefit which he should be entitled to and at that time there 
are other farmers around in that areas who should have the option when the land comes up for 
disposition. There are other farmers in that area who should have an equal right to apply for that land as 
a new prospective owner coming in. Now I know that in some ways that will disadvantage existing 
adequate units. It may also have the effect of making an inadequate unit in an area completely adequate 
and viable so that you are really not changing the fact that they are viable units. You are changing the 
people who have those viable units and it seems to me that the people who are in that area would have 
the first right or the first opportunity make their units viable as opposed to someone coming in from 
wherever. And that is not to say that the person coming in and having made application for that 
particular piece of land may not get the allocation. But I certainly don’t think that we should be 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2007 
 

under any obligations to ensure that he will. I simply think that there is a good reason why the other 
local people in that are should be able to also have an opportunity to bid on that piece of land. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I don’t dispute what you say and those situations that you describe 
are very true What I am questioning is the inflexibility of your new proposal because well, what you 
described I don’t think that has happened. What I am suggesting to you, Mr. Minister, is that if the 
circumstances are there, if there is a young fellow coming in that is going to buy out an existing unit and 
the lease has become an integral part to make that operation tick, that before that young fellow borrows 
that money, puts his neck on the line, on the assumption that he is going to get that land, that lease, and 
should he not get it he has suddenly got himself an uneconomic unit in his hands. I am saying that that 
guy should be able to come down to your department and present his case, in which case your 
departmental officials whom, goodness sakes, Mr. Taylor and the likes of that, they’ve been there for 
years, they know this Land Bank backwards and I don’t pretend to, but surely the people, some of those 
people who have been running that Lands Branch are certainly capable of making a decision as to 
whether this person has a valid situation or not, in which case they would then have the authority, of 
course with your approval or with some sort of approval, to send this lease with the deeded land. On the 
other hand, if he hasn’t got a legitimate case then very definitely they would say, No, it’s going the 
regular way, it has got to be posted. All I am saying, Mr. Minister, is that would it be so terrible to 
increase the degree of flexibility that you have got in that Land Branch right now? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I think again you have to consider the kind of proposition you are 
putting. If our Lands Branch people were in a position of flexibility as you indicate and I have some feel 
for that I like to see a little flexibility in some of those operations, but if you are going to put your field 
staff in that flexibility position then what do they really say to the guy when he’s coming. Now they 
have a policy which they know they can identify and they say this is the way it is if you put them in a 
flexible position and if they give that particular person a concession, then of course someone will come 
along immediately, and accuse them and say, well, look, why did you do that? And if you can’t give a 
lot of good reasons you are in trouble and you are in hot water right way in the community. You can 
argue that. A person can come in and make a very good case and say, well look, I should have that lease 
because I need it to go with my parcel. But how are we to know that there isn’t someone else in that 
same community that doesn’t have exactly the same problem in needing additional land to make their 
unit viable. Why should we say to the guy coming in, you get it but the guy that’s sitting there next to 
you we’re not going to give him a chance, we’re not going to give him an opportunity to bid. This is a 
real tough problem. 
 
When we met in the southwest and we talked to some of the farmers down there, we came back and we 
looked at our policies. We feel there is a problem in the whole area of leasing land and I have asked the 
department to do a thorough review of the whole issue of land leases and how it should be done and 
whether there is a better way to do it. I am not sure that we are going to come up with anything different 
that we have but we are going to be making a major effort this summer to see whether there is some way 
that we can accommodate some of those situations. I might add that I have already directed the 
department to look favourably on transfers, parcel transfers. We know of a fair number of units where a 
farm where a man will have three or four pieces of deeded land into one area so we have a block and 
will you consent to the transfer. I have asked the department to look at those 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2008 
 

favourably wherever we can as long as we don’t lose any money in the operation and as long as it 
doesn’t disadvantage the department to any great degree. I suggested that we should be flexible in that 
particular area and I think that would help quite a bit. There are numbers of situation where farmers 
maybe have an adequate block but it’s scattered around and certainly in this particular area we are 
interested in providing some assistance. 
 
MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek): — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
minister for saying at least they are looking into the problem in that area. Secondly, of course, I’m 
familiar with one of the problems that we had in that area last year in relation to this consolidation of 
land. But I certainly wouldn’t want the minister to leave the impression here that the people in Maple 
Creek were satisfied with the present policy. Now I agree that probably you did meet some individuals 
as you travelled through and visited various locations. The few days you were down there were happy, 
probably the people who did receive some land from existing units, say, under the existing lease 
program. Certainly the meeting that you had in Maple Creek, the night you were there, which from what 
my understanding is, was a rather controversial type meeting in which you were, sort of, on the hot seat 
for a couple or three hours that night. The indications and the feeling at that meeting were that the 
present policy regarding leased land, and the distribution was not satisfactory. There was a feeling from 
what I understand, and I live with these people day in and day out, that they would like some possible 
arrangement where they are selling a unit, that they could make some arrangements to transfer this land 
with it. 
 
I believe, if I am correct and you can correct me if I am not, that under your previous lease policy you 
did have the right to refuse transfer of lease land if you thought that too much land was going to any one 
individual. You did have that right. I can’t understand why you don’t exercise that right, rather than right 
now having a damaging effect from the very fact that the property being sold, you can’t guarantee that 
the land is going to go with it; this has a detrimental effect on the price. As I said, I hope the minister 
will certainly consider this. The feeling in the Maple Creek area, I can assure you is, that they would like 
a change, or change made in this present lease policy. I don’t know where you got the figure of 30 times 
assessed value. Or did that happen to be a quarter of land with a lot of buildings on it, a ranch, house, or 
whatever it may be that wasn’t accounted in the assessed value? 
 
I happen to have a little bit of land in that area and certainly would sell it for an awful lot less than 30 
times the assessed value. I just find it very, very difficult to believe. And, certainly, from my 
information, this is not a general pattern of what is happening down in the Maple creek area. 
 
While I am on my feet there is another area that I have some concern about and that there is some 
concern in our area about, and that is this whole matter of Indian land claim settlements. Now, I 
understand and, again, the minister can comment on this, that there might be a possibility when it comes 
to settling Indian land claims that the whole point system of awarding lease land might be abolished. In 
other words that you might take an existing ranch unit and there is a possibility that the deeded land may 
be sold as part of Indian land claims and then the entire block of lease land will be transferred en bloc to 
whatever band happens to purchase 
 
Now again, I don’t know whether this is fact, but certainly it is rumor in our area, that this might be one 
instance where the existing lease land policy might not be followed. I 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2009 
 

would like the minister to comment on that. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t outline for you the policy under which we are expecting to 
settle Indian land claims, but I do know that we have made it very plain to the federal government and in 
our negotiations, that we would not be making any transfers without having the consent of the owners. It 
would have to make a satisfactory settlement with the people who are now on the land and who are now 
using the land. That is one of the criteria which we have put in any of negotiations that we are 
undertaking with the federal government. I can assure you that that will be honored. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Just to comment further. I realize that is your position, that the owner of the 
existing property will be satisfied, but this doesn’t’ necessarily mean that all other people in the area will 
be satisfied with regard to the transfer. The question was, are you going to abide by your existing lease 
land policy when it comes to distribution of the lease land? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well again, I indicated that we have made it quite plain that in order for any leases 
to be changed or abandoned, there has to be consent on the part of the people who are using the existing 
property. We have made that quite plain in any of our negotiations with the federal government, that it 
must satisfy the person who now has the control of that land, whether it be lessee or owner. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — I recognize that fact, but the minister is missing the question that I am asking 
and that is this, if a large block of land is sold the deeded land, naturally, will transfer, but then there is 
the question of the lease land. Are you going to advertise that lease land? Is it going to be posted so that 
all people in the area will have an opportunity at that time to be awarded that lease under the point 
system, or will the lease land be transferred en bloc as part of a sale? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — You are assuming that a block of deeded land would be purchased and then there 
would be surplus land. Yes, if that was not part of the package, if that was not part of the package which 
was being negotiated, then all of that land would, again, be allocated out on a point system, but again, 
depending on what kind of arrangement was made in a land entitlement claim. If the entitlement took in 
some of the lease land as well. Then that lease land would be excluded from any future allocation. You 
understand that? 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Yes, I think so. Would the minister give me some assurance then, that in the case 
of any land claims settlements, that all lease land will be awarded under the point system, if it is in effect 
at that time? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, I think we can give that assurance. That if any land which is not involved in 
the claim and which becomes, let us say orphaned, because of some land entitlement, under those 
circumstances that land would then be put up for, would be posted, and would be eligible for anyone 
else in the area who would want to use it. It would be allocated on the present point system. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — One final comment. Your expression that is “involved in the claim’ bothers me. 
It seems then you could taken the lease land and put it within the claim and therefore it would be 
excluded from the point system. What I am simply asking is this, as in all land transactions in the area 
presently, lease land must be put up for allocation for the point system. Would that not also be the case 
of any other land that is purchased by any other body? 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2010 
 

MR. KAEDING: — No. If it becomes a part of the Indian Land Entitlement, then you would have to 
deal with the Indian Band involved. As I understand it, in many cases where they have been talking 
about purchasing or obtaining land, that they are not particularly interested in keeping land for 
themselves. They would be prepared to lease it out, but they would have to do that on their own. We 
would not be involved in that allocation. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — In summary then, the rules for the ball game will be different. If Indian land 
claims are involved and there is a purchase of a ranch with attached lease land, then it would be, if 
another individual came in and purchased that same land, deeded land with the attached lease land. It 
would be different ball game and different rules. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well again, as I say, to the extend that if the owners were then the Indian Band, if 
the owners were the Indian Band, then of course they would have the right to dispose of their holdings in 
any way they see fit. They would be able to lease that holding to other people. We would not have any 
part of that. Am I still not on your wavelength? 
 
MR. STODALKA: — What I am asking . . . you know, we are just on different wavelengths here. 
There is no communication I don’t think with what I am asking . . . 
 
MR. KAEDING: — In the case where Crown land would become vacant, and there was an Indian land 
claim in that area, then I think we would have to determine whether that would fall within the purview 
of what the Indian land claim was. You know, if land became vacant before it was actually taken up 
under the entitlement, but we were reasonably sure that this was an area they were going to acquire, then 
we may not put that out on lease. We may just put it out on a temporary lease until that decisions was 
made. I think that would be reasonable. Because if here was a reasonable assurance that there was going 
to be an Indian land claim in that area, we wouldn’t . . . you see we wouldn’t be disadvantaging anybody 
except that you would not be giving them a long-term lease, until the decision was made whether it was 
going to be turned over to the Indian Band or not. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — There is a possibility then that some of the present Crown land that is leased to 
people in our area, will be transferred over under any Indian land claim without going under the point 
system for allocation to anybody else? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — If it becomes vacant in the meantime. 
 
MR. STODALKA: — Yes, becomes vacant by purchasing the deeded land? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, again I say, at this point in time we have not identified any areas like that, 
and I would think, you know we have said that when a claim is made, everything that is there has to be 
honored, in terms of existing leases and so on. We would require that that would be honored. And until 
such a time as we have identified exactly what the Indian claim would be, we would probably go on 
leasing in our normal way, and until it was very definitely identified. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Chairman, the member for Thunder Creek had . . . I would like to go back to the 
issue which he raised, in regard to the posting of land requirement in regard to the individual selling his 
land and that land then being posted. As the minister remembers, we had quite a lengthy debate on that 
policy change last year in estimates 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2011 
 

and I think all of us on this side of the House were unhappy with the final decision that was brought 
down but we were prepared to see the new policy go into effect for a year and see the reaction to it and 
whether there were any problem encountered by . . . 
 
I think the suggestion of a change to flexibility in this is an excellent one and I wish the department 
would consider it. I have a few cases in my constituency where problems have occurred because of this 
The minister will recall my discussions with him on one of these just recently, in which a young lad of 
22-24 purchased a piece of land. He competed for the lease and was not granted the lease and he is in the 
process now of appealing that decision. The outcome, if he should not be successful in the appeal, is 
going to make his operation and the money which he has invested in that operation a very bad 
economical situation because, while the point system is there to choose, maybe the person who was 
awarded the farm may have scored more points or the point structure may have been relatively close. 
But by using the criterion of that point system only, this young farmer, who did have the need, as a 
result has lost it and it puts his new operation now in jeopardy. We will not know the outcome of it until 
of course the appeal board has a change to hear the appeal and make its ruling on it. 
 
I would think that in a case such as this one which we have discussed with you, possibly the department 
should be in a position to be able to assess the value of the individual who did purchase the deeded land 
and that possibly some extra system could be worked in, some extra points or something, that would 
apply to that individual, that young farmer, because of the fact that he did purchase that land. Take close 
look at all the deeded land or the lease land that is involved. It could be possible that the young farmer 
who made the purchase might not require all the lease and that part of that lease could be transferred to 
him and the other part of the lease be open for normal competition. 
 
I think these are areas where I would certainly like to see your department in their review of the leasing 
policy that you mentioned is going to take place this summer. I hope that they will take a very serious 
look at these suggestions and make some allowance, especially in the case of young men such as this 
who are under the age of 30 and who have invested a considerable amount of money in operations such 
as this. 
 
Now, while I am on my feet as well, it is my understanding that there is a possibility of further changes 
in regard to lease allocation for present leaseholders. It is my understanding that that decision has not 
been made and I would hope that they take a very, very serious look at it before they do make any 
changes in that decision. I am talking about individual ranchers, who presently hold leases. When their 
leases come up for renewal it is my understanding that there might be some consideration being given to 
having that particular land posted so that they, in effect, though they may have had the leases for 10, 15, 
or 20 years, will have to compete again with their neighbors for particular leases. 
 
I hope that your department will look very, very seriously at not making any changes in this regard 
because it would have quite an effect on present leaseholders within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, there is no real change in our policy at the present time with regard 
to that. What we are looking at is a 10-year review. We give him a long-term lease but subject to review 
every 10 years so that if circumstances change substantially in those 10 years, if he acquired a huge 
property in the meantime or had some major 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2012 
 

shift in his production base, we could then review it at the end of each 10-year period and identify 
whether his requirements were still those which he had at the beginning, or reasonably close. I think you 
would recognize that as being a reasonable proposition. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — O.K. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, yes I can certainly agree with that concept, if the 
individual, when he does renew his lease or sign his lease is of the understanding that in 10 years hence 
that lease will be renewed. 
 
The question I have now which leads from that is that, say, for example, you decide to adopt this policy, 
say for 1979. An individual’s lease comes up, will he automatically be granted the renewal of that lease 
with the provision being put in the renewal at that time, that 10 years hence it will be renewed or will it 
be renewed at the time that lease expires next year? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, our intent is to have an automatic renewal unless there was a circumstance at 
the end of the 10 year period; unless there was a circumstance such as him having disperse of most of 
his livestock and he doesn’t need the land base anymore, or having acquired another huge land base. 
Those kinds of things could take it away from him but under ordinary circumstances it would be an 
automatic renewal unless there were those kinds of circumstances. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Now, just a minute. Would that apply then, for example, say you put this policy into 
effect for 1979, it is not in effect for this year. I understand that the normal procedure now is that if a 
lease comes up for renewal, there is some investigation of the lease but about 99 per cent of the time it is 
automatically just extended for a further period of time. 
 
If you put that policy in this year to go into effect next year and if someone’s lease comes up for renewal 
next year, are you going to say, O.K. your lease is coming up for renewal? We are going to apply the 
same policy as we did the year before, which is normal, but we are going to put a rider in your new lease 
now that there is going to be a review of that lease periodically from that point in time on. The point that 
I am trying to make is that the individual who presently does have a lease, does not know that this 
stipulation is there and has not governed himself accordingly, whereas it is going to give him an 
opportunity to govern himself according if he knows that in future years that stipulation is in his lease. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Really what we are looking at is a longer term lease with a review. We are not 
saying, renewal. He may not have to renew it at all. It will just be review at the end of 10 years to see 
that his circumstances still remain reasonably the same. So he would not have to renew every 10 years 
but simply review. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — I go along with that and I agree with that 100 per cent, but . . . 
 
MR. KAEDING: — The policy hasn’t been announced yet but it will take effect on any renewals after 
that announcement is made. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Now, just as second. O.K. any renewals that take place after that announcement date. 
Will that policy affect the individual renewal that someone has had, say for the last 20 years? Say, for 
example, that I have leased land that comes up for renewal in 1979 and I have had it for a 20 year lease. 
When that comes up for renewal are you going to use the criteria of the new policy in determining that 
lease or will you automatically grant me renewal of that lease under present conditions with the 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2013 
 

stipulations written in that lease that there will be that periodic review? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, existing leases will not b affected until they come up for renewal. And when 
they come up for renewal, then the new lease which there will get at that point in time will have that 
clause in it, the review clause in it. I think that is what you are getting at it. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — That’s good then. So in effect then, if my lease came up next year and I had four 
quarters of lease, I would not have to worry about that lease being posted and competing for it? I would 
be granted a renewal of that lease, but then say, for example, I find in my contract with my renewal that 
I have to be careful in regard to expanding my operations because it could be subject to review later on. 
Now, that aspect of it, I agree. I think that to initiate the policy — the policy is good as long as the 
individual knows that he will be subject to renewal. That part of it I accept and I hope that renewal, the 
stringent rules of the renewal, will not take effect when someone comes up for renewal for the second 
time at this point in time. He is going to have the opportunity for the renewal and then the new 
guidelines will apply for the next lease which he signs. Is that my understanding of it? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Of course every time there is renewal, and you are talking now about existing 
leases, every time there is a renewal there is a review anyway. That always takes place before another 
renewal is granted. In this case now, they will be given longer term leases and then just be subject to 
review at 10-year intervals. 
 
So the existing policies will come up for renewal. They will be looked at when they run out, but when 
they sign the new renewal agreement then they will be automatically reviewed. It is not any different 
than it is right now. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, could you tell us in your budgetary projections or in budgeted 
expenditures for this year, what grants are contained in them for farm organizations? I don’t mean every 
trifling little grant that you may make, but what basic farm organizations do you support in terms of 
grants like Stockgrowers or Western Canada Cow-Calf or you know . . . Would you just briefly tell us 
what farm organizations you support financially or with grants and how much money you provide them 
with? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — In terms of direct farm organizations, we are not funding any direct farm 
organizations. We are funding things like Livestock Association and Poultry Councils and those sorts of 
things. We are supporting, for instance, certain funding for projects for other organizations and so on but 
direct funding to organizations — none, in terms of actual organizations. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, you are saying that there is no such thing as say, an outright grant 
to Palliser or an outright grant in any form to say, the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers and organizations 
like that. I don’t specifically mean them, but you do none of that? Do I understand you correctly? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, that is right. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, would you tell us the funding that you do indirectly, your larger ones? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — There is $30,000 to 4H Clubs for competitions or completion of projects, etc., 
$1,500 for the provincial 4H Council, $1,000 for the Royal Fair, 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2014 
 

$18,000 for Canadian Western Agribition, $1,000 for Poultry Council, $18,000 for Livestock 
Association, Furbreeders Association . . . 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Which livestock association was that, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — The Saskatchewan Livestock Association, $18,000, the Furbreeders’ Association, 
$1,000, the Horticultural Society’s Association, $1,000, Agricultural Society’s Association, $1,000, the 
Manitoba Provincial Exhibition Livestock Show, $5,500 (and that is a kind of reciprocal arrangement 
we have between Manitoba and Saskatchewan with regard to Agribition), and a $30,000 grant to the 
National Farmers’ Union for a leadership training program which they have undertaken. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — That would just happen to be at the bottom of the list. Mr. Minister, would you 
tell us, in such laudable projects as 4H, 4H Council, Royal Winter Fair, Agribition, Saskatchewan 
Livestock Association, would you tell us what laudable program the National Farmers’ Union is up to in 
the leadership - -what did you call it? Leadership . . . never mind, spare me. Just tell me what it is. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — They identified a project under which they are undertaking a project of leadership 
of young people to be able to handle meetings and that kind of training program that they have. It is well 
documented and we have a report from the previous one which they undertook and it is a 
well-documented program and I think, a fairly well run program. It does help to develop leadership in 
the community and anyone is eligible to enter those kinds of leadership programs. 
 
(inaudible interjection) 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Yes, I think I have about four in my constituency in total. I think we have — 
what, about 100 in the whole province? 
 
Mr. Minister, now . . . all right, $30,000 to the National Farmers’ Union. You are a member of the 
Farmers’ Union and you make no secret about it — fine and dandy — fair enough, but what has the 
NFU got in their particular field that Saskatchewan Stockgrowers don’t have? What have they got that 
the Palliser Wheat Growers don’t have? Why the National Farmers’ Union? For goodness sakes, we 
have farm organizations all over Saskatchewan. Some of them are very, very good and some of them are 
— well, let’s say they have a different philosophy. Obviously I have my biases and my prejudices and 
the ones that I like the best and I think are doing the best job — you have obviously got yours, but tell 
me, the NFU is singled out over Palliser, over Saskatchewan Stockgrowers, over so many other worthy 
farm organizations for $30,000. Now, Mr. Minister, how in goodness sakes can you justify an outright 
grant under the guise of a phoney thing like leadership or whatever you call the blasted thing? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, this grant is based on a well-documented program which they have 
outlined to us and we are expecting to hold to that program. It is not available to them for espousing 
their philosophies or whatever; it is definitely designed for a particular leadership training program and 
if they don’t hold to that certainly they won’t get another grant. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, will you table the results, will you table the details of the 
programs, will you table whatever documents, over the past two years in this Assembly, of your 
relationship with the National Farmers’ Union and this $30,000 grant? 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2015 
 

MR. KAEDING: — This is not an ongoing grant. This is on an individual project a base and, yes, we 
can table it for you, the proposal which was put to the department on that . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . .Yes, I think we can do that. I think, if I recall, I’ve got a complete report of what they undertook the 
year before. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, can we expect the tabling of this report before the end of the 
Agriculture Estimates? Obviously, we are not going to get through all of the items by 5:00 o’clock, can 
we expect tabling before your estimates receive passing of this Assembly. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, I think we can give you that before the end of the estimates. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now, Mr. Minister, first we have centred on the 
National Farmers’ Union for a $30,000 grant for leadership, would the minister agree that we have some 
other worthwhile organizations in this province? Let’s just take one at random, let’s say the Palliser 
Wheat Growers, a group of grain farmers that have a particular purpose in mind, a particular objective in 
mind, a group of independent farmers who, with no government assistance whatsoever, have probably 
done more accurate studies of problems at the West Coast, more precise documentation of problems of 
grain-handling and grain transportation going to the West Coast than any government agency, any 
railroad and probably any other organization. Mr. Minister, this is an organization that — certainly they 
have their far-out people — but they are an organization, Mr. Minister, that probably more precisely 
defined the bottlenecks, the horror stories, that our grain must go through as it leaves the prairie 
provinces for its ultimate destination to the terminals at the West Cost, they are probably an organization 
that finally wakened many people in this province up, to some of the mythology that was being fed to 
the farmers in western Canada by the railways, by the Department of Transportation. 
 
Mr. Minister, whether or not you agree entirely with the philosophy of Palliser is immaterial. But 
nonetheless, Mr. Minister, I think you would concede that they have very borrowed point of view, which 
represents a good deal of grain farmers in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how are they differentiated from the National Farmers’ Union? The National 
Farmers’ Union gets $30,000, what does the Palliser get? Or why doesn’t Palliser get a comparable 
grant? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I am sure that you are going to tell me that you paid for a banquet, maybe; that you 
picked up the tab for a banquet somewhere, so spare us that one. But what differentiates one from the 
other? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I am kind of glad you asked that question, because the evidence is 
here. In 1975 we provided $10,000 to Palliser Wheat Growers for our utility wheat research and they 
applied for that on a reasonable basis. They put their case and it was granted. So they got for that 
particular project and we also have the results of that program. We have that and we can table that as 
well. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I am very interested in the Minister’s comments to the question 
from the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Would the minister agree, that all farm organizations offering to give a leadership program to is 
members in a similar kind of fashion as that of the National Farmers’ 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2016 
 

Union would be granted a similar grant from the government of Saskatchewan immediately upon their 
application to you? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Every request would have to be judged on its own merits and, certainly, we 
wouldn’t agree that we would fund anybody just because they were putting in a project. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t quite obviously make my point to the minister. 
Would the minister agree, today, that if an identical program of leadership training was sent in by any 
other farm organization, that the farm organization would get the same grant as the National Farmers’ 
Union. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I point out, again, that what we need to do is have a proposition. 
You can’t really deal on hypothetical cases. We want to have a proposition. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the facts are that the minister’s so-called leadership training 
program is nothing more than an arrangement to bail out the farm organization that is dying for lack of 
funds, for lack of members. They have raised their membership fees to $100. They are travelling around 
the province of Saskatchewan to a very great extent, some members of the executive are travelling 
around the province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, the comments coming across 
the floor now are certainly extremely intelligent. The fact is that the NFU for the last three years have 
submitted so-called leadership training programs to the government of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and have been authorized grants this year for $30,000. My question to the minister is quite simply this. 
The leadership training for the limited membership of the National Farmers Union could conceivably be 
carried on by other farm organizations. The Flax Growers Association, the Rape Seed Growers 
Association, all of these organizations could carry on leadership training programs. And if the minister 
is saying that the leadership training program of National Farmers’ Union is a terrific program, and is an 
obviously continuing kind of program for the government, because it has been carrying on for some 
years, would the minister not accept the fact that other farm organizations should be encouraged to apply 
to the government of Saskatchewan for a grant for the same kind of leadership training program? In 
other words, should not the minister today, state to all the farm organizations, in order that the 
government of Saskatchewan appear to be fair, if you will (other farm organizations) submit an 
application to the Department of Agriculture for a leadership training program, the same NFU, you will 
get the grant? Don’t you think that that is the way to make other farm organizations believe that your 
government is not backing one organization over another? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, we are not encouraging people to apply for 
these kinds of programs, but if they come forward with a reasonable proposal, we will review it. I put it 
as simply as that. We don’t commit, in any case, funds. We have not committed to the National farmers 
Union ongoing funds, on this kind of a program. I might point out to the member that the Farmers’ 
Union (as far as I am aware), don’t restrict people coming into their leadership training program, to 
National Farmers Union members. It is an open kind of training program and they are, I am sure, 
welcoming anyone who that wants to come into it. 
 
We have identified here a fair number of additional programs which we have provided funds for. We 
have, for instance, in 1975 a grant to Palliser Wheat Growers for a Korean trade mission. We have one 
here, flax seed growers’ tour, flax processing plants, $1.7 thousand beef breeding mission to Korea by 
the Saskatchewan Aberdeen Angus 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2017 
 

Association, $1.7 thousand — There are kinds of these kinds of programs which we have funded to try 
to develop ongoing program for some of these companies or groups. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — But none of them were for leadership training. They were all for specific things 
like sending beef cattle for Korea or that kind of program. My question now is then, on what date did the 
National Farmers’ Union apply for the grant for this forthcoming budget year in 1978 and 1979 and 
what date was this grant application received by your government? Will you table a copy of the grant 
application? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — We do not have a request at the present time for another program. The program 
which is funded here is one which they undertook last year and we are running through this season. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Oh, Mr. Chairman, so what you are saying is that the National Farmers’ Union 
applied a year and a half ago, approximately, for a one-year grant program? Then the grant authorized in 
this budget, they would not have applied for last year. They would have applied for it two or three 
months ago to be included in the forthcoming budget, because this budget is for 1978-1979. Am I not 
correct there, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — This budget contains no funding for the National Farmers’ Union. This report 
which I gave you was . . . 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Oh, and you are saying that there is no allocation or authorization budgeted for 
this year, 1978-1979, for the National Farmers Union. Is that correct? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — We have no commitment to the National Farmers’ Union for an ongoing program 
this year. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Do you have any requests for money from the National Farmers’ Union for grants 
of one kind or another for the fiscal year of 1978-79? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, we do not have a request at the present time. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Minister, do you have any grants requested from the Department of 
Agriculture for the current 1978-1979 fiscal year that have been allowed for in this budget, or 
conversely, have you got any moneys allowed for in this budget, out of which you would make grants 
such as the grants for the cattle to go to Korea, the grant to the National Farmers’ Union and so on. If so, 
how much have you got allowed for in this budget for that kind of grant? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, we have a figure of $30,000 which is available for funding of miscellaneous 
organizations and requests. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — So the minister is saying he has a $30,000 budget in this total Agriculture Budget 
for miscellaneous requests and that the National Farmers’ Union might be one of them and might not, 
but he doesn’t presently have an application on his desk or in the department from the National Farmers’ 
Union for any funds for 1978-79 and only $30,000 is being allocated in this budget? 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Just go on to a different field. I would like to spend a few moments on a 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2018 
 

question which I raised during question period yesterday with the Minister of Agriculture regarding a 
recommendation which SFA made to Cabinet in regard to a problem which could occur to producers of 
livestock products within Saskatchewan as a result of a dispute arising between labour and management. 
I am referring to the request made by SFA that the government establish a broadly representative 
committee to look into the whole question of strikes in what they consider essential services. I would 
like to rather limit that to essential services within the agricultural sector and we can use the recent dairy 
strike as an example. As I said earlier, as a rule the innocent third party, who in this case were the dairy 
producers, were really left out in the cold with no bargaining power, no say whatsoever in regard to that 
particular dispute. What I would like to suggest to the minister is that he take a very serious look at the 
request made by SFA and does go ahead and establish such a committee, a committee which could 
consider of, I would recommend, members from government, members from labour as well as members 
from some of the agricultural organizations throughout the province of Saskatchewan as well as some 
representatives from management as well. A committee to make recommendations that would not be 
binding on the government of Saskatchewan but a committee that could study the situation with 
recommendations as to possible guidelines that the government could use in the event that a situation 
does occur again such as what happened in regard to that particular dairy strike. 
 
I think it is something that we are going to have to look at ; we are going to have to face quite sincerely. 
I think it is a sincere recommendation made by SFA and it is one that, I think, does not jeopardize your 
government’s position in regard to relationship between labor and management with the province of 
Saskatchewan. All that they are asking and we are asking is that you set up a committee, comprised of 
labor and these other areas to just take a look at the situation to see if there is a better way. 
 
As I mentioned in my debate in regard to the Dairy Producers’ strike, this Legislature and the 
government is basically the only support, or the only individuals, or groups that the Dairy Producers in 
that case could turn to. They did not have an organization that was present at the bargaining table to 
fight or debate on their behalf. So in turn they had to appeal to us and it is going to be the government or 
the Legislature that is going to have to deal with the situations if they arise again in the future. I think it 
is a concrete recommendation made by SFA. It is one that, as I said earlier, we are going to have to take 
a serious look at. 
 
I was very interested in some of the comments made by yourself, yesterday, on televisions in regard to 
the brief. You indicated, at that time, that you did not feel that there could be anything gained by 
adopting the suggestion made by SFA. I think we have a lot to gain by adopting that suggestion. We 
could set up a committee that could look into this, that in no way would jeopardize the position of your 
government. You never know, by setting up that particular committee, with labor involved in the 
committee, with management involved, with government members involved (not government MLAs, as 
such but members from within the civil service,) as well as members from farm organizations, you never 
know we could come up with a solution that none of us have thought of as yet. It could be a solution that 
could be acceptable to labor; it could be acceptable to management and could be acceptable to all the 
other groups concerned. 
 
I think that under those kind of guidelines which I have suggested, I would certainly hope that the 
minister would reconsider the position which he took yesterday and take a serious look at the 
recommendations which I have presented. I would like to 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2019 
 

emphasize the point, Mr. Minister, move a resolution by myself, and seconded by Mr. Nelson, the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 
 

That this Committee recommend to the government, acceptance of the SFA proposal to establish 
a broadly representative committee, in the interest of better public relations between Labour, 
Industry, Producers and Government, to investigate and recommend on workable guidelines, to 
provide settlements in essential and perishable product industries. 

 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to downplay the seriousness of the motion which is 
before us, but I think that in our discussions with the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, we 
looked at this when we talked about it, and there is no doubt there are innocent third parties involved in 
many of these strike situations and we need to look back to the situation which happened at the West 
Coast a couple of years ago but they did agree with us that, generally speaking, this needs to be 
approached at a wider level than just at a provincial level. We suggested to them that they should be 
looking at and trying to get some kind of co-ordination of labor-management relations in all fields on a 
national level and there was some agreement the part of the Federation of Agriculture that that is the 
level at which they should be working. That is not to say that there may not be areas on the provincial 
level which we could be looking at but I do believe that, in the main, the problems are on a wider than 
provincial level and I think we should allow the SFA — in fact, they will be taking that position I 
believe in going to a more national effort in this regard — to try to develop a capacity on the national 
level to deal with labor-management relations. I think again that when you go back to what actually 
happened in this particular strike, although there were some real tense moments and there were a few 
people who lost a few dollars, that the efforts that were made and the kind of co-operation that we all got 
around was very good. Had we gone to some kind of a compulsory resolution of that issue even if it had 
been simply to have a cooling off period or whatever, that really the only other mechanism I could see 
that could have happened, then we would have had bad feelings all around. This way we’ve got the thing 
settled, I think very body is reasonably happy and no one has been hurt very much. So I suggest that at 
the present time the way it is operating it is probably as effective as anything we can do. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a resolution that is an excellent resolution. The 
Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture when they met with our caucus did not indicate to us in anyway 
that there should be a broader body to study the problem. They were very pleased with the resolution 
that they had in their brief and they said to us that they hoped that we would support such a resolution. I 
want to say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister and to the Attorney General, we do support the 
resolution. There are some other people who support the resolution as well, Mr. Chairman. I think the 
Attorney General should know who those people are. Those people who belong to the Saskatchewan 
Milk Producers’ Association support that resolution, Saskatchewan Swinebreeders’ Association, the 
Saskatchewan Chicken Marketing Board, the Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers’ Marketing 
Board, the Saskatchewan Turkey Producers’ Marketing Board, Dairy Producers’ Co-operative Ltd., the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the United Grain Growers Ltd., Co-op Hail, Federated Co-operatives 
Limited, SARM, Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Association, Saskatchewan Women’s Institute. 
 
May I suggest, Mr. Chairman, that those who vote against this particular resolution, are voting against 
these organizations. They are going to be demonstrating in a very real way, Mr. Chairman, if they vote 
against the resolution, that they don’t care about the 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2020 
 

Wheat Pool; they don’t care about SARM; they don’t care about United Grain Growers. I suggest, Mr. 
Chairman, that those who dare to vote against this resolution are going to be asking for a continuation of 
the existing situation; a continuation of labor strikes; labor management strikes. They are going to be 
asking, once again, for the Legislature to get involved in dealing with all labor disputes of a major 
nature. 
 
Those who are in this House know full well how the milk strike was settled. It was settled because the 
Liberal party forced the government to get moving and settle it. We don’t particularly like to be in that 
position. We want to avoid that situation from arising again, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
So I say, Mr. Chairman, that this resolution may be the start, may be the start of a process to bring about 
long standing labor-management peace. I suggest that those, Mr. Chairman, who vote against this 
resolution are simply there to oppose what the people of Saskatchewan have said in a very real way, 
through these organizations as to their wishes. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Chairman, that I hope the members in this House, all members in this House, will vote 
for this resolution and we can get on with doing the job of making sure that labor gets a fair deal; and, 
perhaps, most important of all, the innocent third party is protected from further disruption of their lives. 
 
I am sure members opposite agree with that philosophy. I am sure that they will be pleased to join with 
these organizations and support the resolution that has been proposed by the member for Morse. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. Order please. The member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to say a few words on this 
particular resolution. What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is simply this, that when suggestions for labor 
and management peace come from the Liberal caucus, I am always suspect. I am always suspect. 
 
I think that the people in those farm organizations were sincere likely in their belief that they are having 
a number of different problems and they think that maybe we will sit down and talk about. That is right. 
The Attorney General says you put it in the hands of the Liberals and you ruin it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — If you look across this country — Look at the post office! Just look at the post office 
as an example of Liberal answers to solving labor-management problems. Every six months we have a 
strike in the post office. Why, why is this? 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, is that the Liberal Party is opposed to working people Working people in this 
country know that. They do not trust the Liberal Party and the people in the post office do not trust the 
Liberal government. They know what they would do in those workers as soon as look at them and our 
own province, Mr. Speaker. we’ve seen the Liberal’s answer to labor-management problems. Their 
answers are — Bill 2. Bill 2 wasn’t good enough for them. I remember the 1971 election, their answer 
there was labor court, for an independent labor court. We are going to sit down reasonably and listen to 
the workers’ problems and then tell them to go to blazes. That’s been the 



 
April 26, 1978 
 

2021 
 

record of the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, and when they come into this House and suggest that they can 
talk reasonably in terms of labour-management relations, well, Mr. Speaker, everybody knows that 
that’s ridiculous. 
 
Now, I think, Mr. Speaker, on this particular motion, as the Minister of Agriculture said, this is a 
national problem this is a problem that we have had with us for along time. 
 
MR. CAMERON: — The milk strike was a national problem? 
 
MR. ALLEN: — The milk strike is only one little part of a national problem that we have had in this 
country and the problem is basically this, that the Liberal party and those who have supported the 
Liberal Party traditionally, have been against working people and have shown themselves to be against 
working people. That has built up a friction in the country and now we have a situation where we have 
to remove Liberals everywhere if we are going to be able to solve the very difficult labour relations 
problem that we have in this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — . . . attempts to throw up a smoke screen as he did 
yesterday, to try to get an issue out of something that was no issue at all. He should have learned a 
lesson yesterday. He took a bit of a shellacking and it seems that he does not learn a lesson easily. 
 
Certainly this dairy strike that has gone on here a few days ago is just one problem. But it was a problem 
right there at home, and I think the Minister of Agriculture should have learned a lesson from them to try 
to see that it does not happen again. There was thousands of dollars lost in that and certainly, many 
individuals lost very much money. Now, the member for Rosemont said it is a very little thing. It wasn’t 
a very little thing for those young farmers that were ready to go bankrupt! It wasn’t a very little thing for 
their wife and their kids that are going to have to go without a lot of things because of the thousands of 
dollars they lost! It might be little thing for him, as union organizer, to go out so that he can get more 
pay for the union heads, but it is time that we quit wasting food as was done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — The Minister of Agriculture seems to O.K. the waste of milk being dumped 
onto the steps of the Legislature. There was only one other place they could have done that, and that was 
out on the manure pile at home. I think it’s time that he sat down and took a good look at the agricultural 
industry and there has got to be a better way and it is time that you started looking for that better way 
and stopped hiding. 
 
Read the resolution and you will see the better way, Mr. Attorney General. Quit waving your hands and 
shouting and read the resolution and let it sink in. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — I say that it is time that this doesn’t happen again. I say it deserves the 
support of every member in this Legislature and I say it deserves the support the Attorney General and 
the fellow who is sitting beside him at this time too. 



 
April 26, 1978 

 
 

2022 
 

Mr. Chairman, is it now 5:00 o’clock? 
 
The Committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 o’clock p.m. 
 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Cancer Care Program — Medical Staffing
	Unemployment Situation
	Pipeline Delay
	Unemployment Situation in Saskatchewan
	Quality of Air Service by Air Canada
	STATEMENT
	Remarks by member for Regina Wascana

