



















































Hansard: January 09, 1978


1489 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

January 9, 1978 

 

EVENING SESSION 
 

Committee of the Whole on Bill 47 continued 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. When we rose for calling it 5:00 o’clock there was a motion before the 

committee that the committee stand Section 7 and report progress. This was made by the member for 

Lakeview (Mr. Malone). Is the committee ready for the question? 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, I have a number of questions that I would like to direct to the Attorney 

General about the intention of the government on this particular section and I am particularly intrigued, 

of course, with subsection 1(f) . . . “any deduction that is not reasonable in the circumstances.” I wonder 

if the Attorney General would just tell me what the government’s thinking is in this regard and what a 

deduction would be that is not reasonable in the circumstances? What basis do you have for this 

particular subsection? What are you trying to get at? Who is going to decide what is reasonable or not 

reasonable? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this section, basically, subsection 1(f) is in its general 

objective, designed to prevent taxpayers from artificially reducing their oil well income by artificially 

inflating their costs. Accordingly, since this is the deduction section what we feel is necessary here is the 

kind of general provision which would prevent a deduction. I am not sure that I could give a specific 

example at this time but a kind of a deduction which would be viewed to be artificially high. Quite 

clearly an artificially high deduction would mean a reduced income and a way to get around the tax. 

Accordingly, the power there is needed in order to make sure that there is no deduction which is 

unreasonable in the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Perhaps you could answer the rest of my question as well as to who is going to make 

this determination? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, the determination, of course, would be made by the assessor applying the 

interpretation of the regulations. The regulations say here, under 7(1) that “no deduction shall be made” 

. . . sorry, I guess I have the wrong section . . . there will be no regulations here. This is an out and out 

prohibition section. Section 7(1) just simply says “any deduction not reasonable in the circumstances” 

and the guy who is going to be making that judgement calls the assessor. 

 

Mr. Malone: — That’s what concerns me. So what guidelines . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I think in order to keep in order I think we should deal with this 

motion that we have before us and then if you care to go back into the section again, that’s fine. But if 

you can keep and confine your remarks to this motion that we stand Section 7 and report progress, that’s 

the motion that’s before you and if you care to deal with that. 

 

Mr. Malone: — What I am trying to illustrate, Mr. Chairman, is that that the government has no idea 

what they are going to do with this section and because they have no idea what they are going to do with 

this section that the matter should be stood 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1490 

 

to allow for further study and I am attempting, by my questioning of the Attorney General, to try and 

gather from him the government’s intentions now. If you wish to go on with the vote, fine, but we are 

going to return to this after the vote. I think it is appropriate to me to continue with this questioning and 

my remarks. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — That’s in order if that’s the way you intend to go. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well let me again say to the Attorney General that with this discretion being in the 

hands of the assessor, it allows him to go to two companies, carrying on business in exactly the same 

location in the province, having a similar operation (that is the same number of wells) but what it does 

presumably allow an efficient company which operates on the basis of trying to pay the least tax 

possible under the Act and so complying with the Act, to arrange its affairs in such a way that it pays 

less than perhaps the other company which is not so efficient. And what this particular subsection then 

says is that the assessor can come along to the efficient company and way, ‘well, we don’t care how you 

arrange your affairs, you have artificially reduced the amount of taxation that you should be paying.’ 

(this is what you just told me). ‘The company that is right down the road from you is not as efficient and 

as cunning as you are in avoiding taxation so you are going to pay the same tax as that particular 

company.’ Isn’t that a logical result of the subsection? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, it’s not a logical result of the subsection because the hon. member overlooks the 

fact that there is, of course, a right of appeal. If the assessment is illogical or unreasonable as the hon. 

member would, in his example, say the assessor would arrive at, there is of course the avenue of appeal. 

So I believe that the assessor’s action are subject to a lot of recall or a lot of review and I cannot agree 

with your conclusion. 

 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Attorney General, pardon my legal ignorance on this 

particular subject but I think the member for Lakeview has come up with an extraordinary good point 

here. Now I believe in your opening response to the member for Lakeview you indicated that you could 

not give a specific example. I would ask you to consult with your officials and give us a specific 

example. My curiosity is aroused in this area. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I say I do not have a specific example readily at hand. Maybe the officials could 

give one, but it doesn’t matter in any event because it would be purely of a hypothetical nature. I say 

again that the purpose for the subsection is clear, it is to prevent taxpayers from artificially reducing 

their income by artificially inflating their costs. We will see as to the particular circumstances. I think it 

is a reasonable provision under the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Attorney General, with all due respect, income tax is income tax. Now how do 

you artificially inflate your costs? Give us a hypothetical example, give me any sort of an example 

because I believe the member for Lakeview strikes a very valid chord when he suggests the government 

really doesn’t know what this subsection is themselves. They really don’t know what they want it for. 

Give us a hypothetical example. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, one could, I am sure, think of a lot of hypothetical examples. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just one, just one. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1491 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Let me say, one could think of a lot of hypothetical examples. The question is 

whether or not they can, under the circumstances, all of the hypothetical examples can under the 

circumstances be viewed to be reasonable examples. But when the member asks me for a hypothetical 

example he also presumably is asking me for one which is one that it totally reasonable. I can think of an 

example which you may not agree with because the moment I give it to you you would say, ‘oh no, it 

never happened’. Buy five Lear jets and try and write it off on cost. Oh no, no corporation would ever 

do that. Or fly up on a Lear jet to examine one well and write it off, write the cost of the travel off as 

against the company in business. Whether those are reasonable or unreasonable, I don’t know, but those 

are hypothetical kinds of unreasonable costs, perhaps, under all the circumstances, it would not be 

permitted. You ask for an example, I gave you two. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He says probably, and sits down. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Attorney General, now I can’t believe that you sat down after those two. I refuse 

to take those seriously. Now let’s get down to the specifics. Give us an explanation of two, what you 

would call, hypothetical examples. Now realistically the Lear jets are again, pretty far out. You’ve got 

something in mind for this particular subsection. Now consult your officials, take 30 seconds or a minute 

or whatever you have to and tell us exactly what you are trying to get at. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, that’s exactly what I am trying to get at, the kind of hypothetical 

answer that I gave to a hypothetical question. It’s exactly what we are trying to get at. There may be 

others that one could think of. I can’t add to those examples. The hon. member doesn’t accept those 

examples because he doesn’t choose to accept those examples, but that doesn’t say they are any less 

valid. In fact, I would say that, quite frankly, I feel they are good examples of possibilities that could 

occur. That, I think, would be an unreasonable inflation of costs and wouldn’t be accepted. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let’s just use that example but make it a little more logical one. Are you suggesting 

that a company that says we can maintain our oil wells by having one truck, one service unit and by, 

perhaps, having more intelligent people involved in this particular job, we can get away with 

maintaining the six wells in this area with just this one unit, driver mechanic truck, I am not sure what 

they use, but say it is a driver mechanic truck. But because of the efficient operation of the company 

they have determined that they can keep their wells running with these few people, this one piece of 

machinery. The other company that also has six wells in the same field is, perhaps, not so efficient and it 

determines that we have to use two trucks and two drivers and two mechanics. It really doesn’t matter 

because it is a legitimate expense and it is a legitimate expense, I suppose, if that is the only way they 

can do it. 

 

Are you suggesting because of the efficiency of one company that it leaves an opening for the assessor 

to come in and say, well, the one company is getting away with just using one truck therefore, the other 

company that is using two trucks is in a different situation, therefore, the companies are paying, one 

company or the other is paying less tax. We determine you are artificially reducing the amount of t axes 

you are paying because of your efficient operation, pony up and pay the tax. Is this what this leads to? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, not at all. I don’t see where the member comes to that kind of a conclusion. 

Under your hypothetical example if the assessor, in his wisdom or lack of wisdom, should decide that 

one taxpayer’s expenses in having two trucks is an 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1492 

 

unreasonable expenditure under all the circumstances, the proper course to follow for the operator would 

be, of course, to appeal that assessment if he couldn’t persuade the assessor the other way around. 

 

This section is a flexible section which is designed to give the assessor the kind of freedom which is 

necessary to block abuse. But I can use that example that you say, perhaps, against you. Maybe one 

truck for six wells is reasonable, maybe two trucks for six trucks is reasonable, but maybe six trucks for 

six wells, with six mechanics, six service operators for six well is unreasonable. That would be a kind of 

situation that might very well allow the assessor to say, no, that is not a reasonable expense under all the 

circumstances. One can’t draw a firm line on these things. Very often there is a fine judgmental line that 

has to be drawn by the assessor. That is the situation. The assessor draws the line and there it is, but he 

has to have that kind of freedom. And if the judgement should be wrong then, of course, the avenue 

open for the taxpayer is to take the necessary appeal. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Another question on this point. At least can you tell me, in the Act, where it is the 

assessor that has this power? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I am trying to put a finger on this, but this is quite clearly like an 

assessment in income tax under the Income Tax Act. There are certain deductions claimed. We all claim 

them on our income tax. We do them, partly, under the law as it is written up by the income tax rules. 

We do it, partly, by the regulations as they are ruled. There is an assessment of that and this is what 

happens here. Section 16(1): 

 

The assessor shall examine the returns delivered and any other information furnished under this Act, 

and shall send to every taxpayer a notice of assessment. 

 

It sets out there if it is the right amount should be paid if not there is an appeal and so forth. That is the 

kind of a mechanism. So that is the provision that is attached there. That is part of the assessment 

process. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, if I could get back to this real winner of a hypothetical example that you used, 

the Lear jet. What part under this Act would be, in the opinion of your assessor, which would be the 

greater of the evils? The part that cannot be deducted, is that going to be the depreciation of the Lear jet, 

the depreciation of the capital cost, or is the operation cost providing a pilot, the fuel and the 

maintenance going to be the part that cannot be deducted? If I could respectively as you that question to 

your own example. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I am afraid I can’t answer and the boys here don’t think that they can give me an 

easy answer to that because, really, one has to see what the circumstances, the totality of the 

circumstances, are. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I just told you. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, you haven’t told me and the totality of that taxpayer’s circumstances would 

decide what is reasonable under the circumstances and what is unreasonable under the circumstances, 

allowing the assessor to take the provision of subsection (f). 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1493 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Attorney General, under this, I suppose my question is, is your assessor 

going to evaluate how this company operates? In other words, are they going to have the power to say to 

the company, and I am sorry to keep referring back to the Lear jet that is the one that you have chosen, 

but are they going to have the power to say, you don’t need a Lear jet. You simply don’t need this in 

your operation, that a fleet of cars will do the job. Is that what he is getting to power to say? I suppose 

then in essence to then say that they cannot depreciate off the capital cost of the Lear jet. Or are they 

saying, or does he also have the power if he can determine this particular level of management to them, 

can he also say the operational costs would involve the pilot, maintenance, hanger, etc., can he also say 

you cannot deduct that too? Let’s go into it a little further. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I forgot to say that I am glad to see the Conservatives 

entering into this debate on Committee of the Whole after an afternoon of silence. I wouldn’t suggest 

that it has anything to do with the fact that their leader is outside of the city today. But in any event I 

welcome the contributions, particularly of my good friend, the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

I want to say however, speaking to this substantive issue that is before us, that the questioner says, look, 

is this section intended to have the assessor tell the oil company how to run their business. That is what 

it boils down to your question and the answer to that is, no, this is not the intention nor it is the operation 

of the law. The law operates here as it does in your own personal or corporate income taxes. You file a 

personal income tax or a corporate income tax and somebody assesses that and puts out a final 

assessment notice in the Department of Revenue Canada, under the Income Tax Act of Canada, and they 

say we are not going to allow this deduction. The fact your farms, ranches, the Lear jet under the 

circumstances is not a proper allowable one, or under the regulations isn’t an allowable one, or 

whatever, and makes an assessment. If you don’t like it and readjust your income tax accordingly and if 

you don’t like it you have your avenues of appeal under the Canada Income Tax Act and this is the same 

kind of a provision that is applicable here, exactly the same. How one can say, with any precision, as to 

what is reasonable and what is unreasonable and under what circumstances these things operate, it is not 

possible to speculate. All that I can say in specific answer to the question is that it is intended to tell the 

company what it can or can’t do. The answer is, no. What this is intended to do is to make sure, as I 

have said, that the company can’t artificially inflate or add costs which are really not a part of the cost of 

pulling the oil out of the ground which is part of the revenue. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Attorney General, under whose jurisdiction or what department or what minister 

will this assessor be operating under? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — It is Mineral Resources. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Subsection (e) of Section 7(1) as I read it, but before I get to that let me just ask another 

question on (f). In an earlier reply to my question you said that this subsection was required to prevent a 

taxpayer from artificially reducing the taxes paid. I assume you used the word ‘artificially’ advisably in 

that it is the subsection that says that even if your tax deductions are legal or permitted within the Act 

and if it is artificial you can’t do it. So if you have that particular subsection here in 7(1)(f), I wonder if 

the Attorney General can tell me why he needs, what I call rather extraordinary powers, in Section 31 

which would seem to be the similar provision — I am sorry, not 21, 34 which I took exception to the 

other day when I was going over these amendments in general. That is the subsection which talks about 

artificial reductions. It seems to do the same 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1494 

 

thing as Section 7(1)(f) and I am inquiring of you now as to why you need both sections? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, to some extent the powers are complimentary, but under Section 34 here the 

minister is given the power to make directions if he determines that one of the main purposes for any 

transaction was, obviously as the side note says, an improper avoidance or deduction of taxes, whether 

that transaction was entered into before or after the effective date of the Act. The tax here is to be 

assessed or reassessed and collected in accordance with any direction of the minister, under Section 34. 

So we are dealing here with a transaction or transactions which the minister has determined, really are in 

effect in a sense almost avoidance or out at arm’s length, if you will, under 7(1)(f). We are dealing with 

one of the factors which the assessor must take into account in the assessments of the tax. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let me then turn to Section 7(1), I guess it’s (c), the tax section. Do I take it, Mr. 

Minister, from this particular section that the purpose of that is to disallow as a deduction any taxes a 

taxpayer may pay to the federal government by virtue of the provisions of the Income Tax Act Canada? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, under 7(e) . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pardon me, (c). 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, well under 7(c), income profit and similar taxes, which would of course include 

federal income taxes and provincial income of corporation taxes and I would say to the hon. member 

that it’s been the law for quite some time that in calculating income or profit for the purposes of any 

income tax statute no deduction is allowed for income or profit taxes paid to any other jurisdiction, 

unless of course this is authorized specifically by the taxing authority or a taxing statute. The member 

will know of course that there is nothing in law to prevent two jurisdictions from imposing taxes on the 

same income of a taxpayer. The amount of tax paid to one jurisdiction is not a deduction for the 

purposes of the other jurisdictions since it’s not an expenditure for the purpose of earning the income 

before taxes. This is a fairly longstanding provision so the answer to your question is correct as you’ve 

asked it. The prohibition of deducting federal income tax I think is self-evident. 

 

Mr. Malone: — My question then to you is, are you saying to me that Bill 42 or amendments or 

regulations had a similar provision or a provision that had a similar effect as Section 7(1)(c)? My 

recollection is that it didn’t. I could be wrong but my recollection is that this is changing the situation. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I don’t know what the exact provisions on Bill 42 were in this regard but what, of 

course, must be kept in mind is that Bill 42, so the Supreme Court also told us, it was not an income tax. 

We are dealing here with an income tax, we are giving accordingly in the determination of the income 

that is to be taxed the allowable deductions. The question, therefore, comes up in determining that 

income whether or not tax is paid to another jurisdiction is a cost of doing business. I am saying that the 

law has been stated for some time in income taxation law that it is not a cost of deduction or cost of 

doing it. I say to the hon. member that that’s the situation. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let me again, I know what the law is, Mr. Minister. What I am asking you is, does this 

particular section in any way change the effect of previous taxing authority, whether it be Bill 42 or 

some other authority that allows you to tax the oil industry? I suggest to you that the effect of this 

section changes the situation between 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1495 

 

Bill 42 and Bill 47. If it doesn’t, I hope that you can explain to me how it doesn’t. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am not quite sure how I can answer this question other than 

to perhaps put it the other way around. We are not here dealing with Bill 42, we are dealing here with an 

income tax Act and I have to come back to the same answer that I gave the hon. member earlier. Bill 42 

was not an income tax Act and that the Supreme Court said. This is an income tax Act and as an income 

tax Act this is the standard provision. That’s the only answer I can give to the member. When he says, 

what did you do under Bill 42, he is trying to compare apples with oranges, to use an old cliché, and no 

such comparison can be made. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well, let me put this to you then. Is it conceivable because of this particular provision 

that an individual taxpayer could be put in a position of losing money on his day to day operations 

because of the fact that he is required to pay income tax to the federal government on profits that accrue 

to him as a corporation and at the same time, on the same profits, he’s required to pay taxes to the 

province of Saskatchewan pursuant to the provisions of Bill 47? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one is tempted to turn the tables in a sense on the Liberals, on 

the Leader of the Liberal Party or at least to try to turn the tables on them by saying that I don’t know, 

it’s possible I suppose, to answer the question specifically. But I remind you that if this kind of a 

situation takes place, I am not sure that it will have that impact. I remind you that it was the Turner 

budget of May, 1974 which resulted in this kind of an invasion, in a sense, of the provincial field. As I 

say, one is tempted to get into that. I don’t think that much can be done by getting into that kind of a 

discussion tonight but that is partly relevant to the extent that we’ve taken the position that there is 

provincial primacy in the field of resource taxation over and above any of the other arguments that I’ve 

talked about in terms of allowing the standard deductions in income tax and arriving at the tax payable. 

So I can’t answer with precision whether or not somebody could be losing because of the tax situation. 

It’s possible, I suppose, is the short answer. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well, that’s what I wanted to get to, of course. What you are doing this particular 

section is similar to what happened under the Turner budget, which you deplored and damned and I 

can’t let it go by without commenting that you were the author of that particular piece of legislation 

because of your tactics under Bill 42, but I don’t think any purpose would be served by getting into that 

particular debate again. What I bring to your attention now is that when you reached this position where, 

quite properly, the government of Saskatchewan indicates that it has the right to tax resources and when 

the Government of Canada indicates, quite properly, that it has a right to tax income, whether it comes 

from resources or not, that you’re set on a collision course and that somewhere along the way somebody 

is going to have to sit down and determine, as I said before, who can tax what and under what 

circumstances. Now some time ago we urged on the Premier the course of action whereby you would 

attempt to get together a First Ministers’ conference to determine this particular point. The Prime 

Minister was recently in the province before Christmas and indicated at that time that he was favourably 

disposed to such an arrangement. Now my question to you at this time is what headway, if any, has 

happened in this regard? Have there been any discussions with the Premier’s counterparts in other 

provinces and in particular, Premier Lougheed, about such a conference so that this question can be 

determined once and for all? 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1496 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t think very much by way of concrete results can be 

explained or set out this evening because the simple fact of the matter is that while there have been on 

again and off again discussions, jointly and separately, involving some of the provinces or all of the 

provinces, involving the federal government and so forth, there has been no kind of an accommodation 

or arrangement arrived at. I don’t think the agenda is quite firmed up for the First Ministers’ meeting in 

February coming up in a month’s time or a month and a half’s time but my understanding is that there 

will be at least room for discussion of this very situation at meeting at that time. I don’t know what 

results we can expect but certainly Saskatchewan, I think, would be prepared to look at some sort of an 

accommodation with the federal people but it must be done and it must be consistent with our belief 

that, as I have said, in the field of resource taxation the provinces have primacy in that area. If we can 

sort of work from that assumption then I think some kinds of arrangements may very well logically 

result but quite clearly it is a bone of contention. 

 

Mr. Malone: — I am not suggesting for a moment that you back off any position that the provinces 

have available to them to ensure that the provinces get the maximum amount of revenue from resource 

taxation. But what I am seeking from you now is an acknowledgement on behalf of the government that 

until such time as such a meeting is held or until such time as administrative arrangements, if that’s a 

correct recollection of the Prime Minister’s statement, are arrived at is that we are not really going to 

solve the problem on resource taxation by passing a law in the province of Saskatchewan when all the 

other provinces are going to be affected by this critical question and, indeed, the only way you are going 

to be able to get the whole murky situation cleared up is by such a conference. Now do I have your 

undertaking, as a member of the government, that you will be seeking such a conference at the earliest 

possible date? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t give the member that kind of a commitment because I 

really haven’t had an opportunity to discuss it with the Premier. I really think he’s responsible for those 

kinds of commitments, but my failure to give a specific commitment to get a conference to work out the 

administrative and other kinds of accommodations, ought not to be viewed negatively because the fact 

of the matter is, as I have indicated in the first part of the answer, a minute or so ago, this situation will 

be back up for discussion at the First Ministers’ meeting in the middle of February. I don’t know 

whether it is a specific agenda item or what the situation is but I do know that it will be discussed at that 

particular time. I think that sometimes, while this matter has not moved very quickly, that it’s best be 

left to its natural course and see where it goes. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Don’t you think one of the necessary things here is to seek the view of the federal 

government with respect to the deduction of your taxes before they calculate their taxes? Now that’s the 

very dilemma you got into with respect to your charges under Bill 42 because the federal government, as 

you know, moved to disallow the expensing of royalties paid provincially with the exception of the first 

25 per cent. 

 

Now what you are saying here is that the federal government is saying to you, first of all, you can’t 

expense any portion of your provincial royalties, with the exception of that 25 per cent. You didn’t like 

that very much, and you are now saying in this Act that any portion of federal tax is not deductible first 

in determining what your income is for taxation purposes under this Act. So you are sort of back in that 

same ball game again with them and the rules presumably now are sort of wide open for additional 

negotiations. Isn’t it essential to tack that down? 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1497 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I sympathize in some ways with the objective and I don’t know 

what can be gained by me sort of repeating again to the members that we try to achieve that objective 

but we have been doing that now since 1974, May, 1974 with the federal government and there have 

been all kinds of representations with them for three and one-half years. 

 

Mr. Malone: — What has happened since CIGOL? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well specifically since November 23 I don’t think anything specifically happened 

other than perhaps the exchange of some document (well I won’t say exchange of documentation) but at 

least the discussion of this matter at the forthcoming First Ministers’ meeting in the middle of February. 

It’s not because of CIGOL, but the First Ministers’ meeting was going to come on stream in any event 

because of Prime Minister Trudeau’s objectives, but CIGOL came in between there and conveniently we 

will be able to discuss it. I can’t say it is because of CIGOL but that’s probably the event since CIGOL. I 

don’t know what more I can say other than to say that we have been met with (I don’t mean this in any 

political sense necessarily) but we have just been unsuccessful in doing the kinds of things that the 

member for Regina South and the member for Regina Lakeview want us to do. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What I suggest to you now is you are making it even worse. Because now what you 

are saying is that how you calculate income under this act is you calculate your gross income and you 

make certain deductions. Now you are not giving the companies an opportunity to deduct what they pay 

in the way of income tax. So they calculate what their income is. They pay a pound of flesh to the 

federal government. You are not permitting them to deduct that pound of flesh under your scheme and 

you say you want a pound of flesh with respect to the same subject matter here. Now as you know the 

last time this happened is when it was done in reverse. The federal government didn’t disallow the 

expensing of provincial royalties. You got yourself into a jam and you had to back off your taxing, you 

had to give special incentives to the industry to encourage them to explore and then you had to go into 

Estevan and give them a sort of special subsidy program there to keep some of those people in business 

and so on. So you had to back off substantially and the federal government backed off a little bit. Now 

you are back into this whole new area but you are the guy it seems to me that is sort of taking 100 per 

cent at this stage. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I really want to sort of emphasize that 7(1)(c) that we are 

talking about here does not change the situation any. Any kind of a royalty, I think in fact any kind of a 

payment or tax payment by a company to the provincial government could not, ever since Turner’s 

budget in May of 1974, be deducted as your cost of doing from the federal income tax payable. That’s 

the situation. This doesn’t change it one bit, so when the member for Regina South says that we are back 

into it or we are compounding the situation, we are not compounding it because up until May 1974 the 

rule was that anything paid by a company to a provincial government was deductible from the tax, the 

federal income tax. In May of 1974 Mr. Turner in his wisdom changed those ground rules, the first ever 

change in the history of Canada. There it is. We have been working with this new rule for the last four 

years. All this is, this is a royalty, this is an income tax and the same provision applies. Now we would 

like to see some sort of an arrangement or accommodation worked out but to do that at the expense of 

what we say is paramount here and end the provincial primacy in the resource taxation area, which is 

what I think is implied if not directly suggested by the hon. member for Regina South, something that 

we can’t go along with. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1498 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well I want to make one little observation. Mr. Attorney General, you are confusing 

chalk and cheese. You keep talking about taxes being matters of expenses. Now you don’t expense 

taxes. The Income Tax Act gives you certain expenses that you can write off against your income. You 

are given certain exemptions that you can deal with. You are given certain deductions under the Act. 

Taxes are not matters of expense. You keep referring to taxes as not being money spent to earn income, 

which is a test of an expense, but a tax isn’t a test of an expense. 

 

For example, any taxpayer, take the ordinary farmer, he pays education and health tax. He is permitted 

to deduct that expense from his expenses in computing his income. He pays municipal property taxes, he 

deducts that as an expense in computing his income on which he has to pay tax. Well those are the 

logical, normal rules. Now you are trying to lead us to believe that ordinarily taxes are not expense 

items, which is a lot of nonsense because taxes normally are expense items. And I have just proven it to 

you by indicating to you that farmers are entitled to deduct education and health tax and they are entitled 

to deduct property and municipal taxes, plus all the other licence fees and expenses they incur by way of 

tax in generating their income. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again, I don’t know if much can be gained in going over this 

again, but I maintain the position that there are two points here. First of all, an income tax legislation, it 

is standard not to allow the deduction of income tax paid to another jurisdiction as far as the taxing 

jurisdiction is concerned. 

 

I am saying that in the are of resources the effect of Mr. Turner’s budget was an attempt to muscle the 

provincial governments out of their area of resource taxation, their additional area, that’s the impact of 

it. And I am simply saying that whether he had the right to do that legally, that’s one issue. The impact 

and the effect of it is another issue. But in any event, my point is this: (1) that’s the standard provision in 

an income tax; (2) we can continue to work with the federal government on this area and see if we can 

come out to a solution. 

 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — What representations did you have from the oil industry with regard to 

specific provisions in Section 7? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — With respect to Section 7(1)(a), (b), (c) . . . all the way down we had nothing . . . but 

actually the only representation we had was on 7(2)(b) and that deals with overhead or administrative 

expenses. They simply said that they thought some difficulties in the regulations could come out when 

they are formulated if the wording persists as set out in 7(2). It talks about unit agreements in existence 

that provide contractually for overhead and administrative changes and we understand there is no 

intention to disallow the same and there is no intention to disallow the same with respect to these unit 

agreements. And that’s not very much. That’s the end of the objection and that’s the only comment on 

all of Section 7 from the oil industry. 

 

Mr. Lane: — In other words, you are saying that the oil industry is prepared, in effect, to allow the 

government of Saskatchewan to review its books to such an extent as to be able to basically go into the 

day-to-day operations of the oil companies and they made no strong objection to you? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let’s be clear about what the member says. The member started 

off by asking what did the oil companies say to you about Section 7? This I have answered specifically. 

There is a short four-sentence argument which I 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1499 

 

have advocated on Section 7(2)(b). I don’t believe that there is anything else on the submission with 

respect to the business of fear about going into books. I would have to go through the submission in 

detail to check that out. But that’s another issue, unrelated to Section 7. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let’s pursue this income thing from another angle. I usually don’t like asking questions 

that I don’t know the answer to but I will take the chance this time. Prior to CIGOL am I correct in 

saying that a federal tax liability for a company carrying on business in the oil patch in Saskatchewan, 

the companies were allowed to deduct 25 per cent of the royalties that they paid to the province of 

Saskatchewan from their federal tax liability as an expense? Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I am advised that they were allowed to deduct 25 per cent of their net income as a 

resource allowance. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Sorry, 25 per cent of their net income or the royalties that they paid? I understood it 

was on the basis of royalties. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Net income. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Now, here is the question I don’t know the answer to. As a result of Bill 47 being 

retroactive, wiping out the provisions of Bill 42, companies now in effect filing new returns for 

provincial tax liability under the new income tax Act being Bill 47, does it change in any way their 

liability to the federal government from the years 1973 to 1977, either to their advantage or to their 

disadvantage? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The explanation that I get is, for all purposes of the questioning this evening, the 

answer is no, there is no change. They get their resource allowance. There is, however, a period, I am 

advised by the boys here, between January 1, 1974 and May 1974, and May 1974 being the time of the 

Turner budget which is kind of a grey area, and we are working on the federal people for that period in 

order to allow the resource allowance of 25 per cent net income as resource allowance to work, also, for 

them during January to May 1974. 

 

Leaving that as an aside for the time being there should be no change in the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Malone: — then the period that you refer to, that early 1974 period, how does it work so far as the 

oil industry is concerned? Do they get an advantage by the new Act or are they facing a disadvantage 

because of the new Act? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this gets all rather complicated but the officials advise me that 

they have been working with the federal government to try and work out an administrative arrangement 

whereby nobody is penalized so that the question you asked can be answered so that nobody gets hurt 

and nobody gets advantaged during that period of January to May of 1974. During that period from 

January to May 1974 it was straight payment of royalties. Those were the deductible amounts allowed. 

Since May of 1974, of course, the Turner budget changed the ground rules with respect to the 25 per 

cent net income. There are some difficulties there but we are in active consultation with the feds to try 

and in effect, this is a bad word but I will use it this way, to equalize out the situation during this period 

so that there is nobody advantaged or disadvantaged by it. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1500 

 

Mr. Malone: — I am not sure I follow you and I’m not sure you know what you’re talking about but 

anyway let me pursue it a little further. In an earlier question to you I believe I asked you about 

negotiations with Ottawa. I suppose I framed it at the higher level of the Premier but do I understand that 

there are negotiations going on with Ottawa at the departmental level about the provisions of Bill 47 and 

do they go beyond this particular problem that I have raised? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — These discussions with the federal government are at the official level involving this 

period of January to May, 1974. It took place very shortly after the CIGOL decision. I think the federal 

people were here at the time or soon after the CIGOL decision as to allow this matter to be raised at that 

particular stage. 

 

Mr. Malone: — We are correct in assuming that for your departmental officials to intelligently discuss 

the matter with the officials at Ottawa, they must have some knowledge of what the tax rates are under 

Bill 47, to be able to sit down and determine this equalization situation that you are talking about. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll bet you thought you had me, ah? No, we don’t need it. Apparently the discussion 

has been going on a basis of the principle and the concept. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let me just ask one more question on this and I’ll get off this area. Do you anticipate 

having to have amendments to this particular Act or legislation of some nature to put into effect 

whatever administrative arrangements are evolved as a result of the negotiations that are going on? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I don’t think so. I don’t want to close the door because I know that I’ve had enough 

bills that I have piloted through the House and we have had to come back with some amendment or 

other but right now we can’t foresee this because of this. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, let me ask you how that subsection (e) would apply to a net royalty lease? Do 

you propose to permit the deduction by the operator of the ell of the 50 per cent that goes to the Crown 

of don’t you? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What’s your question again, I’m sorry. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Among other leases that you have out do you recall the old net royalty lease you used 

to have which in the last three or four years you have re-instituted. Under a net royalty lease the operator 

of the well drills the well, produces the oil, 50 per cent of the income is attributable to the government, 

50 per cent the operator retains. That’s the usual arrangement under those net royalty leases although 

there are different percentages that apply. Let’s take a standard net royalty lease under which 50 per cent 

of the oil that is produced belongs to the Crown, goes to the government of Saskatchewan under that net 

royalty lease. Are you permitting the operator of that well to deduct the 50 per cent that is payable to the 

government? If not he is paying his income tax on 100 per cent of the production but he is only getting 

50 per cent. I don’t see how, under subsection (e) you are giving him the right to deduct the 50 per cent 

of the production he pays to the government by way of net royalty. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, the answer is, no, to the question. The net royalty lease is, I am advised, in the 

same category as something known as a bonus bid and the answer to the question there as you have 

explained it is, no. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1501 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, let me understand, is an operator with a net royalty lease permitted to deduct 

the 50 per cent of the production that goes to the Crown under a net royalty lease? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — How, you tell me how you can explain the justification of that. If I am an operator 

and I have a net royalty lease and let’s suppose I produce 100 barrels of oil in a given day, 50 of those 

barrels belong to the government under the lease and I retain 50 barrels. Now are you saying I have to 

pay tax on the whole 100 barrels even though only 50 come to me. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll try to give an explanation. Is your Dad giving you the bullets here to fire away? I 

shouldn’t shay that because I know that you’re . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I didn’t hear that. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, I said is your father giving you the bullets to shoot at me here on bonus bids 

and net royalty leases? You’ve got to watch these Camerons. Seriously for a moment, I’ll try to give an 

explanation and if I don’t make it clear take another run at me and I will try to get the officials to explain 

it to me again. As I understand the situation, on something called a bonus bid, the bid and the money bid 

for the production is allowable as a deduction; it’s allowable as a cost of doing business. 

 

In respect to a net royalty lease, on the 50 barrels which are paid to the government, that is allowed as a 

deduction as a cost of doing business, but where the confusion has come in, on my part or otherwise 

with respect to subsection (e), the royalties are not. If you view the 50 barrels as a royalty, you don’t. 

The 50 barrels is equivalent to the bonus bid cost. Rather than paying an all round sum in your initial bid 

you are saying, look we will take it on a net royalty basis and I will pay you the percentage, the 50 per 

cent as the cost rather than for the bid. If you take the bid sum you can deduct it but you are not doing it 

on the net royalty, you’re paying a certain percentage through the barrels. If you’re paying net 

percentage you’re paying through the barrels. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Chairman, my friend is, I think, wrong about that. Listen, we’ve got two items 

here. When you bid to acquire a net royalty lease you offer a cash payment in order to get your net 

royalty lease. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — It can be very small. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yes, it can be very small. Suppose I want to bid on a half section of land and I will 

offer $5,000 to get the lease, that’s the bonus bid. Now you say that is deductible and I agree with you 

that that would be deductible as a bonus bid. That’s an expense. Then I get my lease if I am successful. 

Now I have my lease in my pocket and under that lease I have to pay to the government such percentage 

of the value of the production as I bid on. If, as is usual I bid on the basis of 50/50, I would then have to 

pay to the government the net amount of 50 per cent of the production, and that’s a royalty under the 

lease. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1502 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, you say no, but I tell you it is. Yes, it is. Well, as my friend knows, he is 

entitled to collect a royalty. A royalty traditionally is in the nature of a rent paid for the use of the land 

belonging to the government. That’s how, through all of these years you are entitled to collect royalties. 

It is not an indirect tax for that reason. And I believe that those payments are called royalties under those 

net royalty leases. Now you check that and tell me under what section I can deduct the 50 per cent that I 

have had to turn over to the government by way of cash incidentally. That is paid in cash and not in 

kind. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — We will just take another run at it here, O.K.? the advice I am getting on this is that 

you would be deductible under Section 7(2)(c) as a pre-production expense. 

 

Mr. Malone: — While my colleague considers that, 7(2)(c) doesn’t permit any deductions unless 

authorized by regulation. Now what is the anticipated regulation, that 50 per cent will be allowed as a 

deduction? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well the . . . I don’t know what the 50 per cent figure — I don’t know whether it’s a 

50 per cent figure or not. The intention would be to allow the net royalty figure, the percentage figure 

whether it’s 50 per cent or whatever. That’s the intention that I know is the present thinking. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Look, surely what you are doing is taking a quick run at this. Surely if you can’t get a 

deduction under 2(c) . . . If you look at subsection 2, subsection (c), that’s an expense that you are not 

allowed unless specifically authorized by regulation. But that is called a pre-production expense. How 

could you possibly dub this a pre-production expense, and remember that to do so you would fly in the 

face of the express words of subsection 7(1)(e) which specifically, with no flexibility disallows the 

royalty? Or it says that any amount paid or payable to the Crown under a Crown lease. Well the 50 per 

cent is derived under a Crown lease and it is clearly payable to the Crown. 

 

Now as you know, in interpretation of statutes, you look at the express words of the act. Those are the 

express words of section 7. You are not permitted those deductions. Now I don’t see how you can go 

into subsection 2 and say by some indirect process you could be entitled to a deduction. 

 

The only point I make in conclusion is this, and it is evident with respect to all of us. I think if we asked 

a lot of detailed questions that we could be here for another six months. What I think this demonstrates 

is that you have got a whole host of problems here yet unresolved, and it’s unfortunate. Maybe under the 

circumstances it is understandable, but it really is unfortunate that an act of this variety has to come 

before the legislature with all of these questions which yet in my view, clearly remain to be answered. I 

wouldn’t be at all surprised if over the next three or four years, we see the legislature being asked again 

and again and again to approve amendments to the act because, and frankly I weep for the people who 

have to administer it. As I say we are only scraping the surface in respect of all the difficulties that will 

arise. 

 

Let me put to you another question under subsection (e), section 7. Will there be a deduction for the 

royalties or moneys currently being paid to the government by oil companies under The Mineral 

Resources Act? Now as you know, dating back to November 1975 you ceaions of The Mineral 

Resources Act, and that was in the nature 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1503 

 

of a royalty. And again, subsection (e) of Section 7(1) would disallow that as an expense. Now surely to 

goodness these people are going to be permitted to claim as an expense the amount that they have paid 

under the provisions of The Mineral Resources Act from November 1976 to January ’78. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me say this. With respect to the net royalty lease I 

grant the member for Regina south an argument. I think there is no way around that. But I do say that 

it’s not such a grave argument as he would represent. I do believe that when you look at Section 7(2)(c) 

view the net royalty lease in the nature of something equivalent to a bonus bid, where you’re bidding, a 

pre-production expense, you can accordingly cover it by regulations. I know the hon. member for 

Regina south will immediately say ah ha, but look it, it’s called a net royalty lease and under (e) it’s a 

royalty and you are not allowing any deduction on a royalty . . . what is it and he’s going to get into an 

interpretation. We’re going to have to take a look at that. But in any event, I don’t view that as any 

insurmountable or difficult problem. Nor would I say, with all due respect to the hon. member for 

Regina South, I certainly am not going to pretend that I know the intricacies of the oil industry but I 

don’t believe that this bill has got too many difficulties posed in it; even the net royalty lease situation 

vis-a-vis pre-production expense is something I argue as manageable. So I simply make that observation 

in passing. 

 

However the question now is: what happens to the sums paid since November of 1976 under the 

so-called royalties under the mineral taxation, the other statutory provision? The situation is that under 

Section 7 they are not allowed as a deduction, as a cost of doing business, as an expense, by anything in 

Section 7 but they are allowed as a deduction from the amount of tax payable under this bill, under 

Section 12, which is something that comes up later on, a deduction from tax otherwise payable. We have 

a House amendment attached to that. So the answer to the specific question from the member for Regina 

South, not as a cost of doing business under Section 7 but yes, as an amount owing for the tax under Bill 

47, a set-off or a credit. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well, I’m not sure why the member for Regina South is so kind tonight and is not 

pursuing this argument. I think it is ludicrous to suggest that this royalty is a pre-production expense. 

I’m sure the Attorney General in due course will be fixing and patching the Act up to clarify the 

situation. 

 

Let’s move on to another point. Subsection (2) which states no deductions whatsoever in these particular 

categories until permitted by regulation. I just can’t for the life of me understand why you have 

administration in there, which is an expense that surely you are going to recognize as an expense of 

carrying on business and at this stage saying, no deduction shall be allowed for it until approved by 

regulations. What are you trying to get at here? Surely the section should read that any overhead or 

administrative expense permitted by normal accountancy practice is permitted, rather than just 

disallowing it holus-bolus. Now, what is the problem that your officials foresee by having this particular 

section there to cure it? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the overhead and administrative expenses 

portion that we are dealing with here, I think all members of the House would recognize that the nature 

of the industry is such that companies will have operations in more than one province very frequently 

and occasionally there is a question of what portion of the total cost should be allocated to Saskatchewan 

production. We say in order to achieve some administrative sense out of this, to achieve some 

administrative simplicity if you will, we’re looking at practices currently 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1504 

 

applying for unit operations for the determination of the appropriate overhead or, alternatively an 

allowance on a per well basis. Where such expenses are made within Saskatchewan for purposes of 

production in the province, actual and reasonable expenditures will be allowed. Now, what we need here 

by regulations is a degree of flexibility in order to attain this particular kind of sensitivity in allowing 

those expenses which are categorized as overhead or administrative. I have tried to pinpoint the kind of 

problem which is the most obvious, namely, where a company has an operation in more than one 

province and we’re trying to determine the amount of the cost of the production which is directly actual 

and reasonable expenditure as applied to the province of Saskatchewan. The best way to go about that is 

to prohibit it in order to avoid a holus-bolus flooding of all kinds of claims for expenses in this area, 

prohibit it and then by regulation apply the normal and hopefully administratively simple practices 

which are currently in play. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Surely you’re just saying exactly what I said, is to do it that way. What do you 

anticipate? Are you going to set a per dollar figure for every taxpayer in the province as to what he will 

be allowed as an administrative or overhead expense as per his production in this province or is it going 

to be a percentage based on some scale? Surely this is not too much to ask at this stage as to what your 

plans are. In due course these companies are going to have to start trying to complete these returns. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The present thinking is that it will be done on a per well basis, dollars per well 

allowed for overhead or administrative expense. 

 

Mr. Malone: — What you are saying is an arbitrary figure per well, $2, $20, I don’t know what figures 

you’re looking at. Is that what you are getting at, an arbitrary per dollar figure? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I think that it’s most likely to be, rather than an arbitrary figure per well, computed 

in a sense on that basis but what probably will happen is averaging of all the current administrative and 

overhead expenses and applying that on an average basis. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well then, what you are doing is artificially setting an expense limit, having no 

consideration really for the actual administration or overhead, if you’re going to do it on a per well basis. 

You’re in effect saying, if you have got 20 wells, therefore we deem your administration or overhead to 

be X number of dollars, no matter what they have. Isn’t that what you’re telling me? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, that our position is as I have indicated that we’ll want to 

hear from the industry on this. They have already written to us particularly on this aspect of overhead or 

administrative expense. The only thing that I can do is to indicate to you that in our conversations with 

the industry they say this, they expressed concern on overhead or administrative expense. They say this, 

we foresee difficulties when the regulations are formulated if this wording persists. There are unit 

agreements in existence that provide contractually for overhead and administrative charges and we 

understand there is no intention to disallow the same. That’s right, there are unit agreements in existence 

that provide contractually for overhead administrative charges and we don’t intend to disallow the same. 

That is the only concern of the industry related to this particular section What we intend to do is to apply 

an overhead or administrative expense and tend not to disallow this as they have 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1505 

 

indicated on the basis of the usual normal procedure. But there was no way we could that in legislation, 

we had to have that flexibility to do it by way of regulation. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let me move on to the next subsection on exploration, development or pre-production 

expense which we touched on earlier. Again, how are you going to set that by regulation? Surely, 

without knowing too much about the oil industry, but I would assume that some wells are very difficult 

to bring in, you have an extra expense because of the long hours on the rig; some wells are relatively 

easy to drill. What are you going to do? Are you again going to set an artificial figure to cover the entire 

province without any relation whatsoever to the actual expense incurred? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not so sure that the hon. member here is talking about a situation 

which pertains to overhead or administrative expense, as much as he’s talking about exploration, 

development or pre-production expense. In this regard, Mr. Chairman, what we must keep in mind is 

that we have in effect, the pre-1974 and post-1974 period. What we will have to do is take into account, 

with respect to deductions, for exploration, development or pre-production expenses, those two different 

periods. 

 

Mr. Malone: — This opens up a whole new can of worms, as far as I see it. What about exploration, 

development or pre-production expenses that have already been determined by a taxpayer prior to now, 

approved by the federal government in the tax he pays to the federal government. Are you going to 

re-open that whole can of worms and say that company X who has legitimately declared certain 

expenses up until now is going to have to go back and re-calculate the expenses on this artificial formula 

that you are suggesting? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer is no, we don’t intend to do that. We don’t think 

that will be the effect of the regulation that is passed here. 

 

Mr. Malone: — They must though. The Act and the regulations are retroactive. How is the taxpayer to 

avoid going through this particular exercise? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I just am not sure that I fully understand what the member is getting 

at because, well perhaps you could rephrase the question. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let me put it this way to way. These taxpayers no doubt have already filed federal 

income tax returns for the period that is going to be covered by the retroactivity sections of this Act. 

Now I suspect that some of them have carried on business strictly in Saskatchewan and that when they 

filed those returns they figures out certain expenses allowed to them pursuant to the Income Tax Act 

Canada expenses for exploration, development or pre-production in the province of Saskatchewan. They 

calculated those expenses, they showed them in their federal income tax return, they were allowed or 

disallowed as the case may be, tax was paid. Now what you are saying to this particular taxpayer is he 

has to go back and go through that entire exercise again to comply with the regulations that are going to 

be set under Bill 47 and indeed the expenses that he has already calculated and presumably were 

approved by the federal authority are now going to be somehow challenged or recalculated because of 

this provincial legislation. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, Mr. Chairman, we don’t intend that, we intend to follow the federal definition as 

closely as possible. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1506 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well, O.K., you say as closely as possible. Can I just take that to mean you are going to 

follow whatever was done on the federal return? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — As best as we can. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Does that apply as well to items (a), (b), (c) and (d)? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I think with respect to items (a), (b) and (c), the answer is yes. With regard to the 

depletion we may have a small change there because the federal income tax depletion provisions there 

were — I think there has been a recent change — for a while they were perhaps a little more generous 

than we would be prepared to follow but in any event with respect to (a), (b) and (c) the answer is yes, 

we will try to follow it as closely as we can. On (d) depletion we have not yet decided, we’re looking. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Do you want to make a speech? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — No, you are doing fine. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Well, just let me continue then. Let me say this to you then. I assume from what you 

have told me is that when the taxpayer completes the returns under Bill 47 that he will satisfy all the 

requirements of your government as far as the items covered in Section 7(2) are concerned by simply 

filing the same thing as he did with the federal government with the possible exception of the depletion 

allowance. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, you’re putting words in my mouth. What I said was what I shall say here again. 

With respect to the definitions for these deductions we will try to make them in the regulations 

correspond as closely as possible to the federal income tax definitions for deductions. We will try and 

make them in such a way so that there is as minimum a disruption to the taxpayer’s return that he is 

required under Bill 47 and consistent with his federal income tax returns. That’s the objective, I can’t go 

the one step further and say that all we have to do is lift off the returns. There may be some differences, 

I’ve indicated that on the depletion one we’re still looking. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Before we get to the vote on the amendment, Mr. Chairman, just let me say this. 

Nothing has demonstrated more the necessity for having this clause stood and having these matters 

referred to the Law and Amendments Committee or to some committee to give them a proper hearing 

and a proper consideration. It’s apparent that the Attorney General through the questioning of the 

member for Regina South has indicated at least one instance the matter as it is now set out in this Act is 

not covered properly. The answers may I suggest to you have been vague. It’s been a matter of we’re 

going to refer it to somebody to do this or we’re going to follow that maybe. The government really 

doesn’t know which way it’s going to go in setting out the deductions that are so implicit to an income 

tax Act. And may I suggest to the Chair and to members of all parties that the amendment for that reason 

should be adopted. That if the government is concerned about passing a proper income tax Act that we 

can move to do the things that a legislature would normally do and set out the exemptions and 

deductions from the income tax Act by consideration by the legislature. I ask all members to support the 

amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Section 7 agreed to. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1507 

 

Section 8 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Section 8 — Limitation on deduction of royalties. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I have an amendment, I am proposing a government amendment on Section 8. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Yes, that’s true but we have two other amendments, Mr. Minister, that come prior to 

that. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, the amendment that was tabled by the member for Wascana, do I 

understand the government is prepared to stand the section until the member for Wascana is going to be 

back? Well, I am standing it only for the purpose of considering his amendment and I am not saying to 

stand the section right through. I understood that some agreement had been made to permit that. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — I am not aware of any. The amendment, if the member isn’t here to move it we are 

not in a position to put the amendment. Then the next amendment is an amendment by the hon. member, 

Mr. Romanow, and it amends Section 8 of the printed bill . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could just go back to this in the interest of my other hat, 

House Leader. The discussion we had today at 5 o’clock said this — the member for Wascana was not 

going to be here this evening and he wanted to move his amendment, he wanted the right to move the 

amendment and he wanted me and the Conservative caucus members to agree not to move this 

amendment tonight so he would have a chance to speak to it presumably tomorrow night. I indicated to 

him that I would consent to that if I had an assurance that this was, in fact, not prolonging this bit if, in 

fact, I had an assurance that what he said was right. Namely, what he said was that in any event we 

wouldn’t get through with the bill tonight and that the Leader of the Liberal Party was going to indicate 

his intention to this effect in which case I was no further ahead in trying to ram it through and I would 

stand it. I don’t want it to be represented that in that sense I foreclose any options of mine so if we’re in 

that kind of a situation I would be prepared to go back to the member for Wascana and stand it and then 

deal with the Qu’Appelle motion and deal with my motion and we can come back to section 8 

tomorrow. But if we are closing off tonight on this bill I sure don’t want to be standing this section just 

out of some private agreement between the three members. 

 

Mr. Malone: — I think I can give the minister the assurance that it is highly unlikely that this bill will 

be complete this evening and, indeed, if it is completed I can appreciate that the Attorney General 

doesn’t want to bring it back tomorrow but on the understanding that we don’t get through the bill this 

evening do I have the undertaking from the Attorney General that we will get to this amendment 

tomorrow? 

 

Agreed. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The hon. member, Mr. Romanow, amends section 8 of the printed bill by: 

 

By striking out ‘the’ where it appears for the first time in the seventh line and substituting ‘an oil’. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I so move this amendment. It is 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1508 

 

consequential to the area amendment we passed changing it from a well by well basis to a taxpayer by 

taxpayer basis. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Before the question comes if the Attorney General can just explain the effect of the 

section as amended or as proposed to be amended. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well yes, Mr. Chairman, what this means is that all royalties other than those paid to 

the Crown will be deducted in the calculation of a taxpayer’s oil well income. Such royalties though are 

taxable in the hands of the recipient under this Act. However, you have to read this in conjunction with 

section 37 because section 37 provides an exemption to small free-hold owners and farmers who receive 

royalty income. While these receipts are not taxable under this Act they are deductible from oil well 

income by the lessee and that’s the effect of section 8 and what we are doing on the House amendment 

is making it consistent with — it doesn’t affect the main thrust on section 8 as I have explained it we are 

making it consistent with the earlier change that we made which was calculating the income tax on a 

well-by-well basis and changing it to calculating the tax on a taxpayer-by-taxpayer basis. This is a 

consequential amendment to that earlier one under section 4. It does not, this House amendment, relate 

to the substantive aspects of section 8 which I have outlined. 

 

Amendment agreed. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Just a question on this, Mr. Chairman. That renumbering is consequential to the series of 

amendments that we have which come later in the bill. I would like to make the following suggestion to 

the chairman and to the government House leader, if it’s in order, that if the subsequent substantive 

amendments are acceptable involving that change, we then have the leave to revert to Section 8 and 

make the change at that time. Is that in order with the House Leader? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — It’s fine by me. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Let me ask a couple of questions on section 8 before we get to the amendments. I’m 

confused about two aspects of this. Tell me how this applies to a company with the usual 12.5 per cent 

gross royalty lease on freehold land? Are they not entitled to deduct the 12.5 per cent that’s paid to the 

farmer in view of the exception in subsection (b) that relates to Section 37? I’m confused as to how you 

do that. Can you explain that to me? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what you mean by ‘how we do this’. How do we 

do this administratively or how do we do this under the law, under the act? Because in effect, this is a 

provision under section 8 that simply says that the taxpayer may deduct any freehold royalties that are 

paid by him in a taxation year if he has first included the amount of those royalties in his oil well income 

for the year, or if the person duly pays those royalties other than an exempted owner, also includes those 

royalties. And under section 37 there is an exemption to small freehold owners and farmers who do 

receive royalty income. While these receipts are not taxable they are nevertheless deductible from oil 

well income by the lessee. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1509 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What is the necessity for adding the exception in subclause (b) relating to Section 37? 

You can deduct your 12.5 per cent royalty normally, but it says ‘only to the extent that the amount’ and 

then it excepts the amount paid under Section 37 which are amounts that go to freehold owners. This is 

what I can’t understand. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s perhaps legalese in the extreme, but what one should do it 

take out the words after the word ‘amount’ in subsection (b) up to Section 37, and if you read that you 

will see that what the effect of it is that that amount which he has paid on freehold, the taxpayer may 

deduct in the taxation year but he must first have included it in his oil well income, and coming back to 

(b) striking out those words ‘except’ etc., and if that amount paid is received or receivable by the 

recipient thereof in the taxation year as an account of or in lieu of payment of, or in satisfaction of, any 

revenue derived from the production of oil, etc. That’s what that means. 

 

What one might have done, for better draftsmanship perhaps, is have a subsection (c) except that such 

amount paid or due payable is not applicable to any owners under Section 37 which is the 1,280 acre 

owner, so that read together, you see the provision is as I have explained it — the deduction may be 

made for an freehold payment if he puts it in his oil well income and if the person to whom he has made 

the payment puts in his payment with the exception of Section 37, in which case it doesn’t apply 

because it is straight exemption to the explanation small freeholder, 1,280 acres. That’s the that I gave in 

the sense. I think you may have put a finger on it. Maybe it shouldn’t have been drafted quite that way 

but that’s the effect. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Just one last . . . I think I understand that. Why in Section 8 do we there distinguish 

between a royalty payable to the Crown under a Crown lease and gross royalty payable under a freehold 

lease? Why is the difference between the two created in Section 8? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The difference here, I am advised, is because a royalty is treated as a tax credit, 

royalty paid to the Crown, and the royalty paid on the freehold is deducted as an expense. 

 

Section 8 stood for further amendments. 

 

Section 9 
 

Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): — I have a couple of questions to the Attorney general that I hope 

aren’t too technical in nature. In Section 3(a) it says that the operator of every oil well shall deliver 

written notice to the assessor of every discontinuance of active operation. I would like to know just how 

touchy you fellows are going to be about a discontinuance of operation. Now, obviously if a company 

has some problems with its production, say a well drops off from 12 barrels a day over a period of a 

couple of months to about 4 barrels a day, and they shut that well down perhaps to run some tests or to 

do some steam injection to see if they bring it 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1510 

 

up, when do they determine or do they have to determine whether or not that well has been discontinued 

in service? There is obviously a situation where these people might have that well shut down for three 

weeks and not know at that time whether or not it will continue in active service. I would like to know 

what sort of information you are looking for. What do you consider a discontinuance? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I am advised by the Mineral Resources people that under the circumstances you 

have described, this takes place on a monthly basis now. This kind of a reporting mechanism takes place 

on a monthly basis and presumably, accordingly, we would give them that same month for that kind of 

an operation in your present situation under this present bill, perhaps even an extension on that, 

depending on the circumstances. I don’t think one can be too hard and fast about this. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Well, the one thing it brings to mind is something I wasn’t aware of. It may be that I 

have never considered it but you seem, in this bill and particularly this section and I suspect in your 

general day-to-day operations of the Department of Mineral Resources, to be quite interested in 

determining exactly which wells are operating and for what specific lengths of time. Now I can only 

assume when you go to these lengths to try and determine this that you are curious to know exactly how 

much oil is being produced at the wellhead site. It would have been my assumption that you would have 

some good idea, some better method of checking. I suspect that’s why this section is here, so that you 

people can actually determine how much oil is being produced so that no one . . . say they cemented in a 

well and the next thing you know six months down the road, you find out that it’s actually been in 

operation for the past six months. 

 

Do you not have a better way of determining the amount of oil that is being produced and from which 

companies it is being sold, than to have a wellhead to wellhead check or a mandatory written notice? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again the people have advised me in Minerals Resources, that it’s 

done by a well by well basis at the present time now so that this is not an unfamiliar procedure. I think 

as a general comment one can say that much of the information I think we have probably on file now in 

the Department of Mineral Resources and part of the discussions which we will be having with the 

industry will be an attempt to try and avoid duplication or reapplication of paper, etc., under this bill in 

order to give information in some areas that we have. But in order to make and in order to have the 

legislative authority to compute the information of production and in order upon which to determine the 

assessment of the income and the tax and so forth we need to have this on a statutory base. So again, it is 

a question of the black and white of the law, coupled with, hopefully, the reasonable application of that 

black and white through information that we have and discussions which will be ongoing with the 

industry to avoid the difficulties you mention. 

 

The point that I wish to make is the boys tells me this kind of a mechanism now is something that they 

do. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I don’t doubt that, but satiate my curiosity a bit. The 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1511 

 

sole reason for this type of reporting, as I understand it then, is so that you have some accurate way to 

determine how much oil is actually being produced in Saskatchewan? I tried to say earlier, I am 

surprised, I would have thought there was some easier mechanism to do that, either taking nominations 

for example on a provincial basis in determining how much oil is sold on that basis, etc., but you say 

that it’s only because this is the best way for you to decide how much oil is being produced. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, the people in DMR (Department of Mineral Resources) say that this is 

something which the companies are familiar with, they know it, this well-by-well basis and they have 

not complained to me in the correspondence as a result of Bill 47 on this. I know this is not quite 

meeting your question, which is: is there not some other way other than well-by-well? There may very 

well be some other way and I readily acknowledge that I don’t satisfy you when I say that right now 

perhaps I am not inclined to look at some other way if this is the way that the industry seems to be 

generally familiar with and generally acceptable to them. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I am sure that if there was an easier method that someone would have come up with 

it with before now, but as I say, it was my surprise that I want satisfied. 

 

One other question about this method of determining by written notice — now the assessor (as I read the 

bill) is apparently responsible for this information. He is obviously the person who, while not compiling 

the production levels on each wellhead, at least has to check them. What procedures do they now, under 

present legislation, go through to verify that those submissions by the companies or producers or 

operators are accurate and is there to be any change in this bill brought in? For example, Imperial Oil at 

Smiley submits a list of their Eagle Lake field — which wells are cemented in and which ones are 

operating; the number of barrels they are producing each day, does the assessor run a check on that? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, again I am advised by the officials at DMR that what happens here is 

that there are field personnel of DMR who do some field checks and there is also an audit and accounts 

branch or whatever they call it in DMR which occasionally will carry out an audit to make sure that the 

reporting is accurate. That’s the mechanism of checking now. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Is this role of assessor currently being operated today under present legislation the 

same way as you envisage it operating once this bill receives proclamation if in fact it does? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, not really. I think the assessor under our bill here is something a little different 

and I don’t want to quantify these things but he does have, I think, more responsibility (or different 

kinds of responsibility) rather than saying more, different kinds. He has the responsibility, of course, of 

checking the taxpayer’s return and finalizing the assessment or modifying the assessment and so forth. 

This is a little bit different than a pure audit function or a field check function. There are kinds of checks 

in the present mechanism of auditing of which the assessor has similar characteristics, but in essence 

there is an expanded role and a different role for the assessor who 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1512 

 

is in effect an income tax assessor rather than an auditor. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, if I had a brief with the oil companies, I would levy a great complaint against 

you as a taxpayer under this Act because the information you are here requesting is stuff that they have 

filed every month since 1974 and years prior. A producer has to file with the Department of Mineral 

Resources a monthly production return and he has to show in his return how many barrels of oil he 

produced this month from that well. If the well was shut in he has to show it was shut in. If it was shut in 

for a given period or periods he has to show them and he has to explain why the well was shut in. Now 

they have been required for the last four years to file those monthly production returns and they have 

done that. The Department of Mineral Resources has those returns in respect of every well. Now he has 

to go back (you are asking him to go back) to the first part of January, 1974 and somehow sort of 

recalculate all of that and re-file. Why don’t you simply send the assessor over the Department of 

Mineral Resources and he can check the records that are there, that have been filed in respect of every 

month for the last four or five years? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, at fear of provoking the opposition into making a great speech 

about what I say, the fact of the matter is that as I indicated in response to the question of the member 

for Kindersley, we have one of two ways that we can view this Section 9 obviously, and that is to say to 

the industry, ‘look, by law you are going to be required to give us all this information all over again,’ in 

which case the sense of grievance that the member for Regina South says some taxpayers may feel, I 

think would be fully a proper one. Perhaps under circumstances where the taxpayer refuses to comply 

with the bill we may very well have to do that if there is a pure black and white legalistic interpretation. 

But in reality the CPA and the IPAC have not complained about this business because in our first 

discussions with them I think that are reasonably assured that it is to their advantage and to our 

advantage to avoid duplication of material and information that’s on now and I think it will be a fairly 

simple method of checking in effect the returns under Section 9(1) with the returns that have been filed 

in the past and as I have said, discussions are under way with the industry to avoid this kind of 

duplication of paperwork and the like. 

 

So I don’t see that kind of problem which would lend itself to the sense of grievance that has been 

expressed here. 

 

Section 9 agreed. 

 

Section 10 
 

Mr. Chairman: — We have a House amendment on Section 10. It is moved by the hon. minister, Mr. 

Romanow, amendment Section 10 of the printed bill by adding after subsection (2) the following 

subsection: 

 

(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) the assessor may upon application by an operator or a 

taxpayer permit books and records to be kept at a location outside the province, provided that the 

operator or taxpayer undertakes to make such books and records available to the assessor upon terms 

and conditions satisfactory to the assessor. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1513 

 

Does the member so move? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I so move this amendment. A brief word of explanation. 

 

This amendment basically comes about in attempt to at least part way meet some of the concerns raised 

by the CPA and IPAC. They requested that books and records be permitted to be kept outside of 

Saskatchewan and we’ve attempted to accommodate this somewhat by this particular subsection (3) 

which would permit the books and records be kept in a location outside the province, provided that the 

operator or taxpayer undertook to make such books and records available to the assessor upon terms and 

conditions that are satisfactory to the assessor. 

 

So it is our attempt to try to accommodate the situation and the recommendations made here by the oil 

industry. 

 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Chairman, I am assuming that the Attorney General is 

saying in Section 10 (and I am including the amendment that he has) what this department as this falls to 

the Department of Mineral Resources is they are prescribing the form such as the Department of 

Municipal Affairs prescribes a form that you now have the same form for submission to the department 

as prescribed by the Department of Mineral Resources and that in Section 10 you see the beginning of 

some sort of standardization in reporting. Is that what I read in that particular subsection? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I don’t think that you are reading it quite accurately there, but I may be misreading it 

myself. You are reading the words ‘as may be prescribed’ and you are interpreting them as the form may 

be prescribed. That’s not the motion here. What we are saying is that every operator shall keep the 

following — books, records, information, and particulars as may be prescribed. It is a different operation 

here. I am simply saying that your assumption that we are trying to standardize everybody’s books of 

account, that does not follow. What we may be doing by regulations as prescribed is having them 

maintain here in this province books, records, information and other particulars as required. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1514 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Why did you think this particular section should be retroactive? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are looking here at again a situation which is trying to 

determine the tax payable from 1974 and in determining the income tax here we have to, obviously, in 

the deductions which are supposed to be allowed under Section 7, we’ll have to look at the provisions 

that we have talked about. There are some questions about unreasonable and so forth, it seemed only 

logical that the section would apply in that regard as well. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, it’s pretty hard to comply with this section retroactively isn’t it? The only 

reason I raised the question is that it shows some of you of the absurdities that flow from making some 

of these sections retroactive. Now Section 10 says you have to keep certain books that are prescribed. 

Now if you haven’t done it in the last four years how are you going to retrieve that retroactivity and yet 

technically the Act makes that an offence. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the question of keeping the books in the province retroactively, 

there is no doubt about that, that can’t be done retroactivity because the period obviously has gone by. 

By here we are looking at, under Section 10, the purpose of this thing, of course, is to make sure that the 

books of accounts of the taxpayer for the period of taxation from 1974 to the future are such that they 

can be made subject to review or some form of inspection and while physically we can’t roll back the 

clock., there is no doubt about that, the fact is that during this period from 1974 to the future this section 

certainly has validity especially in the case of any dispute that may arise in certain circumstances 

between the taxpayer and the assessor. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Well, not being a lawyer but I remember during the potash debate 

there was a statement that you can’t get to the books of a corporation that don’t have their books in the 

province. Is that correct? During the potash debate the statement was made if a corporation did not keep 

its books within the province you could not force them to show their books. Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You are asking me whether that statement was made, I don’t know if that statement 

was made or not, I can’t recall right now. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — I am asking if the contents of that statement is correct. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well the question really comes down to this that from a legalistic or constitutional 

point of view the province, of course, has power to pass laws which pertain to its jurisdiction over its 

citizens and the like and to the extent that we would pass a law in Saskatchewan which presumably a 

taxpayer or somebody who is peripherally involved in the province of Saskatchewan would not want to 

obey, there would be a difficulty in making that section comply in another province. I mean if the 

taxpayer moves out of the jurisdiction our remedies are tougher. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — With that in mind if you put in this (c) clause which says they keep their books 

elsewhere but they must endeavour to make sure that they are available to you, are they not agreeing to 

no matter what you are looking for to allow you in to look at their books on any part of their operation, 

not only their Saskatchewan portion but their 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1515 

 

United States portion or their Australian portion or anything else even though it has nothing to do with 

your accounting? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, I don’t see that. I see this situation which simply says, look it, if you keep your 

books and records under this House amendment, say in Calgary, which is generally thought to be one of 

the key oil centres in the country, O.K., the assessor might say, let’s keep that, that’s the way your books 

are and the records are there but we would like to have some conditions, we would like to set a condition 

out saying that if we give you a notice for 30 days pertaining to the Saskatchewan portion of your 

production of your company’s activities and we would like to see those books. Things of that nature, he 

can set out those kinds of terms and conditions which are satisfactory to him and are necessary to doing 

his job, namely, determining what the revenue and the income is from the production of oil in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Well, to get into my point now . . . In other words this will give you rights to look at 

the operation based within Saskatchewan and not to look at any of their oil business that they were doing 

elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, I don’t know if I can answer that because I suppose a lot will depend on the 

kinds of bookkeeping that go on. I am not familiar with that, I don’t know how they bookkeep but I 

assume that they obviously relate only — they have it broken down to their provincial productions and 

presumably that would be the situation. I don’t see any real purpose in us looking at other fields of 

activity in other jurisdictions unless it was open to the belief that somehow there was a shell game going 

on, if you will pardon the expression, which would be perhaps something that could be looked at. That’s 

a hypothetical situation I suppose maybe to an extreme point. I am saying simply here we are talking 

about books for the assessor to do his job. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — What I am saying to you is exactly — what you just indicated, the shell game, where 

your assessor could say, I think the equipment that you’ve shown as an expense in Saskatchewan is 

being used elsewhere or vice versa and under that argument going in further to their books, say their 

Alberta division, their Texas division or wherever they may operate and I am just wondering if you 

would be tempted to say limit it to Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the other part of it will be if they may use their other expenses in another province to back up an 

argument that they are having with you under Section 7 on the expenses legitimate. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, I think that there will be a, I’m hopeful in any event, fairly free and easy 

exchange of information. Again keep in mind that what happens under this bill is that the assessor will 

make an assessment and, if the company objects to the assessment made, presumably one of the things 

which he will be off with are his books and he’ll say, look it, you are not giving us enough for 

administrative or overhead expenses or whatever and similarly presumably we would have the same 

access under other powers; this is designed to supplement those other powers. 

 

Amendment agreed. 

 

Section 10 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 11 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1516 

 

Mr. Chairman: — We have a House amendment and the first one again in order on the section is 

moved by the member for Regina Wascana. 

 

Mr. Malone: — The same consideration on that amendment. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Stand that amendment then. We go to the amendment moved by the Attorney 

General to amend Section 11 of the printed bill, clause (a) by: 

 

By inserting after ‘force’ in the second line of subsection (1) or within such longer period as may be 

prescribed and (b) by striking out ‘180 days’ in the first line of subsection (2) and substituting six 

months. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I so move both of these House amendments. Both of these 

amendments come again as a result of representations to us by the industry. The industry requested that 

the 90-day period after proclamation be extended to 180 days. The government did not accept this 

request since the time period can be extended if necessary under Section 41. However, to make it clear 

that the time period can be extended by regulation if necessary, it is a specific reference to a long period, 

as prescribed, has been included by this proposed first House amendment. 

 

On the second House amendment the CPA and IPAC people wanted a change from 180 days to six 

months and this would correspond — this would allow the annual tax return to correspond with the 

fiscal half year end and we have agreed to this request which is implemented in the second House 

amendment. So I move those amendments. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Just on the first one, a question. Have you had any indication from the industry as to 

how long they anticipate it will take them to comply with the filing of records as Section 11 insists that 

they do. I would suspect that some of the smaller companies could do it in a very short period of time 

but it may be very difficult for some of the majors to do it within 90 days or even within double that 

period of time. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I’ll just check to see if there is anything. Well I think it would be fair to summarize 

the industry concern this way, they feel that 90 days is too short, 180 days would be more realistic. So to 

answer your question presumably their idea would be up to 180 days but they do say that if you can 

amend it to make it absolutely clear that administerial discretion is permitted to extend the period that 

that seems to be O.K. by them and that’s precisely what we are doing in the first amendment. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Let me just ask you a couple of questions, one of some concern to me and the other 

perhaps of a minor nature. The section refers to a verification by a certificate and I am not quite sure 

what that involves or why it’s really necessary. I am sure you have to have something saying the 

operator verifies that what he says is true but what are you getting at with the certificate business? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I guess the best explanation I can get from the boys here is that by this mechanism 

we are getting somebody who is verifying it, taking responsible for the return. 

 

Mr. Malone: — If there is some doubt as to the certificate will those that are verifying be called in to 

meet with the assessor, like we have in the election returns going on right now to explain and question 

some of the things they say? 

 

However, I have another question. In subsection (3) there is a provision that causes me 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1517 

 

some concern. It says the assessor or any officer of the department — not a special assessor or assistant 

assessor — may do certain things. What is of concern to me is he may demand the writing from any 

other person believed to have knowledge relevant to the proper assessment of taxes under this Act, that a 

return be filed. 

 

I wonder if the Attorney General could tell me what other “person” is contemplated by this particular 

subsection and what you are trying to get at by that particular provision? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like to say that there is precedent for 11(3). The 

Mining Tax Act of Ontario has a provision similar. It is a great Act, believe me. We have learned lots of 

things from Ontario. Secondly, an example of the kind of person who might be asked of information — 

the best example would be an operator who is not a taxpayer. That is possible, you know, it could be 

beneficial an owner who is not a taxpayer but has information and knowledge which is of relevance to 

the return. He could, perhaps, be the kind of person the assessor would want to go to. 

 

Mr. Malone: — May I suggest to you the way it is worded is so wide that it catches people such as 

chartered accountants, lawyers, people who have a confidential arrangement recognized in law. Whether 

we agree with that recognition or not it is still recognized and indeed it permits, as I read the Act, a 

departmental official or the assessors, as the case may be, to demand of a particular law firm to file a 

return involving the knowledge they have as to the taxpayer’s business. Indeed, the same situation 

applies to a chartered accountant where there is a degree of confidentiality between the accountant and 

the client that he services; the accountant could, under this particular provision of the Act, be required to 

file the return that is mentioned. Would the Attorney General agree with those comments that that is a 

correct assessment? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I think that almost any legislation can be, if one wants to, viewed with other 

interpretation. All that I can say is — I come back to the Ontario Mining Tax Act because it is 

important, it is a statute which has been judicially improved and, therefore, it would be wise for us, 

where possible, to use that judicially approved statute for our intentions here. I think that is the reason 

for putting it in. One could draw a pretty wide circle, I suppose, in theory of the legislation and whom it 

could catch. 

 

I wouldn’t agree with the lawyer example, particularly. It has been some time since I have been 

practising law, actively practising law, but I would guess that under the circumstances that you state, the 

lawyer would simply say, look here I have a privilege, this isn’t a client privilege and he is just not 

getting it and I’m taking it to court to see what applies. At least that would be my judgement that it 

would apply. I don’t want to get into that necessarily with the hon. member because my point is that his 

fear that the section is so wide that it could embrace all kinds of circumstances, although I don’t agree 

with specific circumstances, is not valid mainly because you could read almost any legislation that way 

and more importantly because this section has already been judicially approved elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Malone: — I don’t really care whether it is judicially approved elsewhere and I really don’t want to 

get into the arguments about the privilege that it attaches to solicitors on income tax matters. I have 

some thoughts about the applicability of such a privilege on matters of that nature. I ask the question, 

and I point out the danger. The Attorney General, in this particular Act as in other Acts, has always said, 

well, it doesn’t really matter because we never use that power anyway and it is designed to catch 

somebody else. That doesn’t take anything away from my criticism that you have given 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1518 

 

yourself power that you don’t need. You’ve given to yourselves and to departmental officials power that 

I think is unnecessary. It may well be that as time goes by, you won’t be sitting over there in 

government, there will be some other government that will not treat the power in such a restrictive way 

as you, that you indicate you will. And I suggest to you that it’s the role of any opposition to bring these 

matters to the attention of the government and to complain about them. And we do complain about them 

and take exception to them because they’re unnecessary for the proper working of the Act. 

 

Let me take it a step further. Really what this section provides is that employees of a taxpayer, whether 

they’re currently employed or whether they’ve been fired and are disgruntled and perhaps have 

something in for the taxpayer could be required under this particular section to divulge their knowledge 

as well as to the operations of a particular taxpayer. So I say to you that the section is far too wide to 

accomplish the purpose that you want to accomplish and I say to you that it should be changed. Now, I 

have an amendment, Mr. Chairman, I believe on this particular section which I’d like to move now 

unless anybody else wants to get in on it. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — An amendment by Mr. Malone to amend Section 11 of the printed bill (a) by adding 

the following subsection . . . 

 

Mr. Malone: — I believe the member has some questions on the earlier subsection. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — I have one question. This is sort of connected to the question I had about the 

assessor. I’d like to know . . . you have oil under your fingernails, Roy. I’d like to know under what 

circumstances an operator and I assume by this someone that a taxpayer or an oil well owner has 

contracted to operate a well for him, under what circumstances he would have information which would 

be valuable in terms of this Act which the government could not obtain through the regular role of the 

assessor? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, it’s hard for me to answer this but I’m advised again by the Department of 

Mineral Resources people that the operator could be in any kind of a variety of operation circumstances 

where there are repairs being conducted to the well and to the operation of the well site which would be 

very pertinent to the taxpayers. The taxpayer may be claiming too much of the expense or 

overestimating the expense in the course of deriving at his income. And the only way you could get at 

that, perhaps, is to go right straight to the operator and ask what kind of repairs or what kind of 

improvements did you actually make? 

 

Mr. McMillan: — He’s submitting the income tax form in the first place, is he not? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, not necessarily. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Well, all right let’s take the instance where the taxpayer isn’t the operator but only 

receives the revenue. The operator is the one, under those circumstances, who’s responsible for filling 

out that tax form, is he not? He’s the one who calculates the extent of deductions, etc. There’s a 

connection there I’m not sure I’ve got at this moment. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, let me perhaps give you this kind of a rough hand understanding of the 

situation. You may have a pooled field and as I understand it, there is a kind of an agreement or an 

arrangement by operators with respect to this field. You may have one taxpayer within this unit area, the 

same guy who does all this sort of collecting and all the payments out and all of the expenses and the 

like. It’s kind 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1519 

 

of an administrative arrangement. In the course of deducting expenses from this fairly extensive field, 

there may be somebody out in some other north quarter or section who, in effect, has some repairs or 

whatever the situation happens to an expense which the assessor does not agree to. The assessor 

summons that operator and says, look, and tells what the story is. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — We have a motion by Mr. Malone to amend Section 11 of the printed bill, (a) by 

adding the following subsection: 

 

(4) Notwithstanding anything hereon contained, the taxpayer may elect within 60 days after the date 

this Act is proclaimed in force to advise the assessor in writing that all sums paid by the taxpayer 

pursuant to the Oil and Gas Conservation Stabilization and Development Act 1974, and amendments 

thereto and the regulations thereunder may be applied in full payment of any amount the taxpayer is 

liable to pay pursuant to this Act, upon the taxpayer so advising the assessor and upon entering into a 

written agreement satisfactory to the assessor not to seek recovery of any sums paid by the taxpayer 

pursuant to the said Oil and Gas Conservation Stabilization and Development Act 1973, and 

amendments thereto, the regulations thereunder, the taxpayer shall be relieved of any obligation of 

filing returns hereunder up to the period ending December 31, 1977, of making any further payment or 

payments for the said period up to December 31, 1977. 

 

Does the member so move? 

 

Mr. Malone: — Yes, I so move, Mr. Chairman. Let me again . . . if the Attorney General can gag the 

bionic mouth for a moment, repeat our position on this and indicate to members what we what we think 

this amendment would accomplish. We believe frankly, that it would clear up the past; that one of the 

alleged purposes of Bill 47 is to assure for the people of Saskatchewan that we retain the $580 million 

illegally collected under the previously bad Bill 42. What we are saying by this amendment is that we 

are putting the oil companies and the oil industry in the position where they have to weight in their own 

mind, the cost of preparing all of the documentation referred to in the earlier sections in this particular 

part of the Act against the possibility of waiving a future right that they may or may not have or a right 

that they may have now. We say that most companies would be eager to avoid the expense and bother 

and concern of complying with the earlier sections of the Act if they could find some device to get away 

from doing so. We say as well that this particular amendment would give to those companies the avenue 

by which they could overcome the difficulties that would be involved in filing the forms that are 

required. We don’t think that they should be allowed to get off scot free just by writing to the minister 

and saying, apply the taxes you’ve already collected. We do say that they should be prepared to give up 

something and that something is the right to go back and sue this government under the provisions of 

Bill 42 to recover taxes that they have already paid. We believe as well, that it would save the 

government a great deal of trouble. It is certainly apparent from the debates and comments tonight by 

the Attorney General that the assessor and the legion of advisors and special assessors and administrator 

assistant assessors that are going to be necessitated by the Act are going to be probably working for 

months and months going over the returns that are filed to bring the oil industry up to date. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1520 

 

We can really see no point in putting the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to that bother and to that expense. 

The Attorney General has indicated time after time in these debates and on Committee of the Whole that 

the amount that’s going to be collected under Bill 47 is going to be roughly the same as collected under 

Bill 42. And indeed, he went to great lengths the other night describing the so-called administrative 

process that’s going to be gone through to ensure that the money that’s been collected under Bill 42 will 

be applied to any tax indebtedness under Bill 47. Indeed what he is suggesting is not as strong as the 

proposed amendment. What he is suggesting is that the companies and the civil servants get into this 

exercise of calculating these so-called taxes that are owing and once they do so and once the returns are 

checked, the government is just going to say forget about them anyway. I don’t see really where we are 

going to have the situation that I can foresee where any particular company from 1973 to the present 

time is going to be in a position to pay any more or any less tax, if we follow the words of the Attorney 

General in Committee of the Whole. Indeed, the whole exercise of completing these returns is really 

going to be a farce because the government is going to gain little from the information that’s offered. 

They are going to have some obligation to go through the returns as filed to check them for their 

accuracy and really the information is going to be meaningless in any event, because the government has 

already indicated that the taxes that were paid already are roughly the same as are going to be collected 

under Bill 47. So where are we going? Why are we having this exercise completed? Surely the 

information that the government requires to gain for the future administration of the Act is going to 

come anyway, it’s going to come in due course once the Act is proclaimed. So to say that the industry 

and the civil servants have to be preoccupied for, I would say months, checking the records for really no 

apparent purpose, is really just nonsense. 

 

So I say to the government, that you can clear up the past or most of the problems of the past if you 

adopt this amendment or a variation of it. I say that you will be able to readily identify those companies 

that may indeed be seeking to seek redress in the courts for the money they paid under Bill 42. And that 

at least we’ll get to the situation as to identifying the enemy, if I can put it that way. I believe that most 

companies, in fact, the vast majority would pick the option that’s being offered by this particular 

amendment, get away from the bother and the harassment of going through this exercise, that most of 

them would be willing to waive any rights that they may have, in the legal term, stopping themselves 

from any right that they may have and to get on with the future. We have heard on several occasions in 

this House, we’ve heard statements from the industry that they are not particularly concerned about the 

past, they are concerned about the future. I say that an amendment of this nature would clear up the past 

for all intents and purposes and we could get on with the future. 

 

Now the Attorney General quite properly points out that this type of provision would make the Act more 

colourable than it already is. It is very interesting the choice of words that he uses because it indicates an 

admission that there is some colourability already attaching to Bill 47. We concede that. We concede 

that that is a problem but we say it’s a lesser problem than we are already facing right now. We say that 

if this amendment is adopted, or a variation of it, we would be able to be in a position to have some 

certainty to be able to tell the people of this province that we do not have to worry about this potential 

catastrophe and that the whole matter of 1973 until the present time can be ignored and forgotten about 

really for all intents and purposes. 

 

Now I urge on the government a consideration of this amendment. Indeed if the Attorney General 

indicates that we can’t put such an amendment in this particular Act, we will be more than willing to 

introduce a separate statute if that would serve the 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1521 

 

purpose of clearing up the colourability argument that the Attorney General will no doubt get up and 

make once again. So I say, Mr. Chairman, that this particular amendment will go a long way to ensure 

that one of the two aims of Bill 47 is accomplished and that is, that the money that has been collected 

that is in jeopardy right now will be assured and will stay with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to say a few words with respect to this amendment. I 

want to say, Mr. Chairman, that there are two amendments which in my judgement, amendments, one by 

the Liberal Party, this is one and another one by the Progressive Conservative Party, which we will get 

to later today or tomorrow, that I think are probably the most serious attempts to colour this bill and to 

make it unconstitutional. I want to deal with this amendment that is before us right now, as an example. 

I’ll deal with the Conservative one when we come to the Conservative one, the one on Section 37. Apart 

from its constitutionality aspect, there are other aspects about the Conservative amendment which I 

think makes it as equally dangerous to the entire bill. But for the time being, with respect to Section 11, 

Mr. Chairman, people should be absolutely clear that if there is any way that you wanted to go about 

setting an attack on this legislation, this is the way to do it, by adopting the motion of the Leader of the 

Liberal Party to amend this particular bill. Mr. Chairman, I say that if this amendment were adopted, it 

would be a clear indication on the face of the legislation that a colourable attempt was being made by 

the people of Saskatchewan to preserve the taxes collected under Bill 42, to do again exactly what the 

Supreme Court of Canada said that it could not do. Now there would be no surer way of rendering Bill 

47 unconstitutional, the very thing the Liberals say they are trying to protect us from. Whether you split 

it into two bills doesn’t help the situation any because the court obviously would look at the two bills in 

totality and come to that kind of a conclusion. In practice, Mr. Chairman, individual taxpayers may 

adopt an attitude toward the government with respect to some of the legislation and their proposals and 

the government may wish or may not wish to consider those proposals in practice by the individual 

companies. That is on a case by case basis. We have no policy set out in that regard, although we have 

statutory authority under The Department of Revenue Act to look at it, but that’s another issue. 

 

The amendment which is before us, if we adopted that, would simply in effect destroy what Bill 47 is. 

Bill 47 is a tax, it’s a new tax under a new bill, it bears no relationship to a tax under Bill 42 and nothing 

like this amendment should be allowed to colour this particular Act. Now, Mr. Chairman, I say the 

Liberals are attempting to introduce this amendment as the Tories are attempting to introduce an 

amendment in Section 37, which we’ll deal with at the time, purposely designed to leave a mine field for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. It is purposely designed there so that the people of 

Saskatchewan would step on the mine field and cause a terrific potential loss of money, the very kind of 

thing the Liberals and Conservatives say they’re defending and standing up for. Mr. Chairman, to adopt 

this amendment would in effect jeopardize the province of Saskatchewan by making the bill colourable. 

I’m saying to this House, Mr. Chairman, that if there is anything which indicates exactly where the true 

intentions of the Liberal Party lie, it’s this very proposed amendment that the Leader of the Liberal party 

now recommends. And if there is anything which reveals where the true intention of the PC Party lies, 

it’s with respect to amendment to Clause 37 with which we’re going to deal at a later time. And so, Mr. 

Chairman, I urge the people of this House and the people of the province of Saskatchewan to know 

exactly what’s being contemplated by this. And this is the way to make a bill colourable if you want to 

go about making a bill colourable. Let’s not be fooled by what the Liberals are about here. It’s to protect 

their corporate friends in the oil industry and, Mr. Chairman, we’ve got to defeat this amendment put 

forward by the Leader of the Liberal Party. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1522 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, you always know when you’ve got your point hold to the government 

opposite because we don’t know what to say when they can’t get up and agree that we’ve made a good 

suggestion. They get into their multinational friends attack. I’m surprised the Attorney General has 

restrained himself so long from bringing about this attack that’s so familiar to us all on this side of the 

legislature. I predicated my remarks, Mr. Chairman, by acknowledging that there is a danger of the 

colourability being enhanced of the Act. The Attorney general has admitted that the Act is colourable. 

The Attorney General has admitted that there’ll be problems with the Act and indeed I say to the 

Attorney General, what’s the difference between this type of an amendment and the powers that you’re 

taking unto yourself about administrative arrangements, of saying to us at length the other evening as to 

these arrangements that you’re going to go through to ensure that the money collected under Bill 42 will 

be applied to Bill 47. If that doesn’t make this Act colourable, I don’t know what does. Furthermore, Mr. 

Chairman, we have to go back to remarks by the Premier on this Act. He talks about royalties, he talks 

about this not being an income tax, it being a royalty Act. What sort of admission is that as to what the 

validity of this Act is? The Attorney General knows full well there’s going to be an attack on this Act. 

He knows full well that it’s just a matter of time before somebody in the industry takes up the legal 

action once again, puts this whole business back into doubt and has the people of Saskatchewan facing 

this tragic situation. What we’re trying to do, Mr. Chairman, is to solve the problem once and for all. 

We’re trying to get before this legislature a device to get ourselves away from the mess that this 

government got ourselves into through the introduction of Bill 42. All the rhetoric in the world from the 

Attorney General about friends of the multinationals just won’t wash, Mr. Chairman. I say that we’re the 

only party in this legislature that has a genuine concern for the people of Saskatchewan. In this debate 

for the past weeks we’ve been attempting to get the government to come to its senses and realize just 

how bad Bill 47 is, to realize that there is going to be an inevitable attack on this bill, we don’t know by 

whom. I suggest to you the remarks from the senior spokesman for Husky Oil as reported to the 

newspaper certainly hit at some sort of an attack from that particular company if they don’t get their way 

as to future royalties. I say, Mr. Chairman, that the government opposite has been derelict in their duty 

with this Act. They come in here, the Attorney General usually can’t answer the questions we’ve been 

asking about Section 7, about Section 3, about all the guts of the Act that we’ve been talking about and 

then he has the gall to get up and say that we’re the ones that are trying to have this Act fall down, we’re 

the ones that are trying to ensure that the oil company is able to retain this money that they collected. I 

say to you, Mr. Attorney General, that’s nonsense. You know it’s not true. You know the people of 

Saskatchewan know it’s not true. Now you’re trying to desperately recreate your old arguments about 

the Liberal Party and multinational corporations, arguments that you may have been able to get across at 

one time, Mr. Attorney General, but I say to you now, they won’t be successful in this day and age. I say 

to all members in this legislature that if they’re genuinely concerned about the money that has been 

collected, they will consider this amendment, they will vote for it, and if they’re really concerned about 

the future of this province and the money that it has collected in the past, and what it’s going to collect 

in the future, they will give proper consideration to the amendment as proposed, they will support it and 

we can get on with the further business of this House. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, make no mistake about what the Leader of the Liberal Party is trying 

to do by this amendment. He in as much says so. He says the argument for splitting it up into the past 

and into the future is very clear. He says you go to the oil industry and you say protect the past revenues 

under Bill 42, and what he’s asking in effect is, we’ll give you a future tax break with respect to the 

revenues that 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1523 

 

you’re going to pay under Bill 47. Mr. Chairman, that amounts to intimidation by legislation. That’s 

what it amounts to. That is in effect putting a gun at somebody’s head and saying you do this and if you 

do in exchange we’re going to do that and then the . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Whose head? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Oh sure, defending of the oil companies and then the Leader of the Liberal Party 

says that that’s not colourable. He says that somehow that kind of an action is not colourable. Where in 

the world has the Liberal Party been? Look at all of the cases that are before the Supreme Court, the 

authorities, I cited one or two of them the other day in this area. Where in the world has he been? If 

there’s any way that he wants to make this bill colourable, it’s the way that he’s going about it. That’s 

exactly what he’s doing and he surely must know that. He surely must know that to have that kind of a 

mechanism where someone can say it’s intimidation by legislation where it’s trying to go back under 

Bill 42 to recoup under Bill 42, that’s the very thing that you guys have been railing against me and the 

government for, for the last four or five weeks. That’s the whole substance of your argument. Now all of 

a sudden, you’re incorporating the argument in here and to argue somehow that that shows a concern for 

the welfare of the province of Saskatchewan as opposed to a concern for the welfare of the oil 

companies escapes me. And I don’t care whether it is cliché in your judgement or an old socialist 

bogeyman about the Liberals and their corporate friends, that’s the only possible motivation that one 

could attach to this. The only possible motivation, because anybody who would take a look at this thing 

legally would say that’s exactly and precisely what you’re trying to do by this amendment. Forget about 

Bill 42. This is a new tax, this is a new bill, this is the law that is going to be applied with the regulations 

in due course. Don’t put a situation into this bill, don’t put a hooker into this bill by way of this 

amendment, the effect of which would be to bring down the entire legislation. I can only assume, Mr. 

Chairman, that by so suggesting, the Liberal Party clearly has but one thing in mind, that this inevitable 

attack on Bill 47 that the Leader of the Liberal party keeps on reminding me about, this inevitable new 

legal challenge, the only thing that they’ve got in mind is that this inevitable legal challenge will indeed 

add some legal basis upon which to base the challenge — something that they don’t have now — and 

the Leader of the Liberal Party is asking the province of Saskatchewan to accept a pig in a poke by this 

amendment. He’s asking the people of the province of Saskatchewan and the members of this House to 

accept something which will definitely be a legal basis for challenge, something that up to now this bill 

does not have, something which we’ve got to protect. And I say, Mr. Chairman, and make no mistake 

about it, whether it’s under this Section 11 or under Section 37, that the Tories are advocating, which is 

exactly the same thing in a different operation, that’s exactly what the two old line parties are up to, 

exactly what they want to do and the people of this House, members of this Legislative Assembly should 

not buy that kind of an approach. And that’s why, I say again, without political speechmaking, this 

section, this amendment is placing the entire bill in a colourable situation, something which the bill does 

not have now. It must be rejected by the members of this House. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1524 

 

Mr. Malone: — Not just yet, Mr. Chairman. Now I think that I can say that I’ve seen everything. I’ve 

seen everything. The Attorney General is up in this House saying we don’t want to intimidate the oil 

industry, we want to get along with they oil industry, they’re our friends. I never thought I’d see the day 

that the Attorney General would get up and defend the oil industry. Mr. Chairman, when has this 

government ever been afraid of intimidating anybody? They kicked the potash industry out of this 

province, they’re doing their darnedest to kick the oil industry out of this province, they have tried to 

kick every private operator in the resource sector out of this province by intimidation, by taxation, by 

regulation, by all of the tools of government, to intimidate everybody that comes into connection with 

them if they don’t go along with their socialist programs, their socialist plans as to how those people 

over there think this province should be run. Let’s just review what the Attorney General has said over 

the past few days. He says this will make the bill colourable. And I conceded that. Make perhaps an 

already colourable bill a little more colourable. But what do we gain from it. We get something back if 

this amendment is adopted. We get the oil industry that seeks to take this option of stopping themselves 

from making any attack on Bill 42 or this bill. Now what’s the government’s alternative? We’ve heard 

time and time again in this legislature that the tax rates in Bill 47 are going to get about the same amount 

of money as the tax rates under Bill 42. What’s the difference? What’s the difference in effect of Bill 47 

as far as the past is concerned? Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General has told us time and time again 

there is no difference. There is no difference at all. Now if that isn’t making the bill colourable, I don’t 

know what is. Now I say to the Attorney General at least we offer you one thing with this amendment. 

We offer you a device whereby the oil industries or some of them will have stopped themselves from 

taking any further legal action. What your device suggests is that they are going to pay the same amount 

of money, they are going to be in the same position after this bill passes, and they’re still going to have 

the same right to take you to court once again if you don’t come up with some favourable rates or tax 

rates under Section 3. 

 

You keep saying that the tax rates are going to be about the same. I suggest to you, Mr. Attorney 

General, that you know darn well you are going to back off those tax rates. You are going to make the 

tax rates more agreeable to the industry so that you will attract some of the industry back to this 

province. And what you are desperately hoping for is that you can set a rate that is of such a nature that 

the industry will be afraid to challenge that rate. You want the industry back in here as much as anybody 

else in the province, you just won’t admit it. So what you are going to do is exactly what we have 

suggested you do except that you are not going far enough. You are not getting anything from the 

industry to prevent a future attack on Bill 47, an attack to collect moneys that were paid under Bill 42. 

So don’t get up holier than thou in this House and tell us that you are defending the rights of the people 

of this province. We suggest to you that you are doing an abominable job of it if that’s what your 

concern is. We are suggesting to you a layout of the situation, a mess that you got yourself into under 

Bill 42 and a mess that is going to be even worse we predict under Bill 47. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I invite the members of the House to examine the logic for a moment 

of the Liberal Party as articulated by the Leader of the Liberal Party. He says that this bill is a little bit 

colourable the way it is now, perhaps even a whole lot colourable the way it is now, something I do not 

subscribe to and then he says — and this amendment which I propose I acknowledge to you is going to 

make it even more 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1525 

 

colourable and then the logic is but somehow this is going to help you out in your position with the oil 

companies. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I ask the members of the House to consider that for a moment. What would be the effect 

if that Liberal amendment were adopted? The effect of the amendment would be on his logic — on his 

logic why in the world would any corporation on an already colourable bill, adding onto it some 

colourability, but you admit yourself that is what the amendment does — why would any oil company 

make any payment under Bill 47? You would only add to the legal challenges that you had before it. 

You would only provoke non-payment and — you would for certain guarantee a lawsuit, certainly 

guarantee a lawsuit because if you got colourability, what kind of an inducement is that to the oil 

companies not to go ahead and sue, what kind of an inducement is that to the oil companies to settle? 

You are giving the oil companies the kind of ammunition not to settle, the very kind of thing you are 

saying we should be doing. You are giving the oil companies the very kind of legal and political 

ammunition to simply say the heck with you boys, we are not moving at all because your legislation is 

colourable. But where does the logic get you, Mr. Chairman, on that kind of an approach by the Liberal 

Party? 

 

I’m simply saying to this House, I don’t care whether the people in the oil industry view me as their 

friend or not, but what I do care about is that we as legislators passed the best bill that we 

constitutionally can pass in order to do the job. I think we’ve got that in Bill 47. You may not agree, but 

one thing that you and I do agree is that by Section 11 amendment you are going to put the bill into a 

colourable situation. You agree with that and I agree with that because that’s my position with respect to 

Section 11. 

 

I’m saying this to the Leader of the Liberal Party that if we are going to be challenged, for goodness 

sakes let’s make sure that we don’t give more ammunition to the oil companies in which to challenge 

this bill. Let’s not make the bullets for them to shoot them at us and that’s exactly what you are doing 

with respect to this proposed amendment and surely you can’t do that in conscience. It does not matter 

whether you make two separate bills or whatever that is clearly the very thing that you have been 

arguing against for the last four or five weeks or longer in this legislature. 

 

I can only repeat again, Mr. Chairman, I close on this that I cannot understand why it is that the Liberal 

Party that represents itself as having told us about the constitutional predicament of Bill 42, that 

represents itself now as telling us what’s wrong with Bill 47 and proposes constitutional amendments, 

why in the world would they be proposing this amendment which is so patently an amendment which 

would allow a challenge to somebody? Why? And you can say, oh well it’s because I’m going back into 

my political motivations again. Well, I just don’t think that you people, notwithstanding the fact that we 

are all politicians primarily and then lawyers, I suppose in a second way, I don’t even believe that you 

people don’t know what the constitutional mine field here is with respect to that amendment. You must 

know, you must know with respect to that amendment and the reason that you know and the reason that 

you are advocating it is I say a public policy point of view for one reason and one reason only. You want 

that in there so that the oil companies can seize on it and beat the people of Saskatchewan over the head 

with it if it were ever taken to court on the very loss that you say and that’s precisely the same situation 

with respect to Section 37. I’m going to deal with Section 37 in a little more detail because in some 

ways it is even more odious in Section 37 for that same purpose. Liberals and Tories, Tories and 

Liberals, Mr. Chairman, make no mistake about it, they are at Edom with respect to the oil industry and 

their concern in this area. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1526 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Let me ask the Attorney General a question. Suppose Imperial Oil had paid you 

under Bill 42 $87 million in various taxes, royalties and mineral income tax. Now suppose Imperial Oil 

comes to you tomorrow and says, now look, you fellows want to retain the bulk of the money collected 

under Bill 42; I’ll tell you what, we’ll give you the $87 million we collected, we’ll waive any right in 

respect to it and don’t charge us any tax under Bill 47. Would you be prepared to accept that? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the obvious answer to that is that this is a tax under Bill 47 which 

applies for a period from January 1, 1971 to 1974 perspective for who know how long. The tax rates that 

are set there for the retroactive portion or the perspective portion are due and owing as according to the 

regulations in the law by the taxpayer. That’s the answer I give. I’m not prepared to say to the member 

now that that’s the situation that we would adopt, of course we would say to the taxpayer, you must 

follow along the regulations. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Let me comment this again to you. There is an oil company that owed, let us say, $50 

million and paid you $50 million under Bill 42 for the period January 1, 1974 to January 11, 1978. They 

have paid you $50 million under Bill 42. They came to you and said, now look, under Bill 47, we will 

release you in respect of any claim of the $50 million we have already paid and will you accept that as 

full payment of any taxes we may owe for that period, the retroactive period under Bill 47? Do you 

know what your answer would be? You answer would be — certainly we will accept that arrangement 

and that’s the very purpose of your Section 39. Section 39 gives you power to compromise your claims 

and that is the reason you’ve got it there. It says where it is considered by the government in the public 

interest not to demand payment of the whole amount of any taxes, interest or penalties imposed under 

this Act, then the government can compromise and settle the matter. It could accept any amount of taxes 

it considers proper and with the t axes et cetera you could refund some portion of it, you can collect it 

all. You have full powers of compromise under Section 39. 

 

You have said and your Premier has said consistently that the principal purpose of this bill is to retain 

for the people the money you have collected under Bill 42 in whole or large part. If a company came to 

you under the Section 11 that is proposed, if all the companies came to you and said look, all the money 

you have collected, the $540 million we have paid under Bill 42, we will treat that as past money paid to 

you; write it off, we will make no claim in respect of it; we ask you to chalk that up against the taxes we 

owe for that period under Bill 47; of course you would say, certainly we will accept that. Wouldn’t you? 

You are in no position to say no, because that is the purpose of the retroactive provisions that this bill is 

to collect, is to retain what you have already collected. So if they allowed you to retain what you have 

already collected by way of an agreement and some compromise under Section 39, you would agree to 

it. 

 

One of the interesting things here is that I agree with you. This Section 11 would make this bill 

definitely very colourable and in my view this section would make the bill open to attack in no uncertain 

terms. I believe the bill as it stands wants to do this very thing. It may not say it in the bill but you have 

said it, the Premier has said it — your purpose with Bill 42 insofar as it’s retroactive is to retain the 

money you have collected. That is exactly what this amended Section 11 tries to do. The interesting 

thing here is that we smoked you out if nothing else, with respect to this amendment, yes we have. 

 

It is interesting to observe some of your words. You said the effect of this would be to 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1527 

 

bring this whole bill down. Those were your words. The effect of this amendment would be to bring this 

whole bill down. You made the argument. You said, now my friend, you have said that you insert this 

Section 11 in this bill and you said this bill would come down. You said the effect of accepting this 

amendment would be to bring down the whole of this bill. That’s what you said and I agree with you 

that that is correct. But the bill insofar as it’s retroactive is doing exactly what Section 11 explicitly 

would do. Only you are trying to do it implicitly. Well you say no — what are you trying to do, are you 

trying to collect with your retroactive provisions which you got in Bill 42 or aren’t you? Now you can’t 

have it both ways. If you intend in your retroactive sections of Bill 47 to collect or to retain what you 

have collected under Bill 42 you are then doing exactly what Section 11 says. The important part of it is 

that the argument we have been trying to make to you now for four weeks plus is finally got home to 

you because you are now understanding, now understanding that insofar as this bill is retaining the 

money you collected under Bill 42 is not valid. That’s the difficulty you have got. The interesting thing 

about the amendment to Section 11 is that it finally smokes you out in respect to that argument and I see 

now more clearly your own concern. You are very much aware of this colourability problem that you 

have got. If you take Section 11 as this amendment suggests, you said it would definitely be a basis for 

legal challenge and there is no question it would be. 

 

Now I can tell you I had some reservations about bringing forward this amendment. I was persuaded in 

my own view by someone who said that at least we’ll bring this problem to a head and we’ll get some 

admissions perhaps from the Attorney General about the difficulty he’s got with the retroactive 

provisions of the bill and the reason why the bill ought to be split into two parts as we earlier suggested. 

I don’t think I have to belabour the point. I think it’s clear to the members who paid some attention to 

what you said, that you have finally accepted an argument that we’ve been making to you for the past 

four weeks and that is that insofar as the retroactive sections of this Bill 47 are intended to recover the 

money you paid under Bill 42, it’s open to attack and likely unconstitutional and by your own admission 

tonight you admitted that as far as I’m concerned. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I simply cannot allow this clause to be voted on by sitting passively, 

especially in response to the last member’s remarks, let it be interpreted that by my silence there would 

be some acquiescence to the submission that he makes. Because to the contrary, I do not believe that Bill 

47 as it is worded, even with it’s retroactive features, is unconstitutional. I do not believe that; I have not 

said that. I have said however that in my judgement this amendment to Section 11 which the Liberals 

have proposed, which you and your caucus have proposed could make Bill 47 unconstitutional . . . 

(interjection) . . . 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1528 

 

No, not a back up, well okay I don’t know whether what the count, I’m only giving you on the best 

advice I have and my own common sense and experience on this thing that that would be the situation 

and that’s a position that I take and nothing at all of the amendments that you have proposed, although 

this perhaps now is an overstatement I shouldn’t be saying it, but I’ll say it. This amendment is probably 

the most visible of the series of amendments designed to put this bill into something which it is not now 

and that is to put it into an unconstitutional state. Now let me close by simply saying if an individual 

company comes with that kind of a proposal as you outlined to us under Bill 47, clearly we’d look at 

that. Yes, but that’s totally different than putting it into legislation. If a company on its own voluntarily 

wants to sit down with the tax assessor and say, look it, let’s have a set offer, whatever kind of a 

situation, any kind of a tax authority to look at it, that’s one thing, but to put it in an amendment is in 

effect to say that that is the purpose of the legislation and that is the objective and the intent of the 

operation. I’m saying legally and constitutionally you couldn’t do anything more which would give 

without major bullets to the oil companies, you’ve said that yourself, you agreed with that proposition 

yourself. So my only point more is getting up and I’ve said it far wordily than I intended to, I do not 

believe that Bill 47 as it is before us is unconstitutional. I am confident that Bill 47 is, with retroactive 

provisions a direct tax being an income tax within the exclusive power of the province of Saskatchewan. 

That’s my view. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Let me ask you one simple question. Is Bill 47 insofar as it’s retroactive to January 1, 

1974, intended to give you the legal power to retain what you collected in Bill 42? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, the member uses the word to retain what we’ve collected under Bill 

42. We have said that Bill 47 will collect a sum under the Income Tax Act, which will approximate the 

sum collected under Bill 42. You keep on saying that it’s intended to retain. You’ve asked us many 

questions in question period and otherwise and we’ve said wherever there is a legal obligation there will 

be that honouring of legal obligations, we’ve talked about the set-offs and all of that. And that is a very 

important distinction. This is a new tax, it’s an income tax. The incidence of the tax on individual 

taxpayers may very well be different. I fully suspect that it will be different. Totally unlike Bill 42 which 

is not an income tax in any e vent, the Supreme Court told us that. So that the kind of an argument that 

says that it is to retain is an argument which does not simply go deep enough. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You collected from the oil industry in the four years January 1, 1974 to January 1, 

1978, you collected taxes under Bill 42 first of all, starting November, 1976 you began to collect under 

The Mineral Resources Act, right? All right. I ask you a question earlier this evening about whether or 

not a person would get a deduction for the taxes he paid under The Mineral Resources Act in calculating 

his tax payable under this Act. Your answer was generally yes, your answer was yes. In other words you 

assess, just take a look at this, what you do under Bill 47 is you assess your income tax for the four-year 

period of January 1, 1974 to January 1, 1978. Then you say to the company this is how much tax you 

owe, then you say now we’ll give you a deduction, you don’t have to pay twice, we’ll give you a 

deduction for what you’ve paid under The Mineral Resources Act since November 1976. In other words 

what you are wanting to get under this Act is the difference between what you’ve collected under The 

Mineral 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1529 

 

Resources Act and what you’ve collected under Bill 42, that’s the difference that you want to get from 

the oil companies under Bill 47. That’s why I say to you that you have said throughout, that your 

Premier has said, one purpose of this bill apart from it’s prospective application is to retain for the 

province the $500 million you’ve already collected. Well you shake your head at the use of the 

expression retaining. What kind of silly little semantics are these we’re getting into? You collected 500 

and some odd million dollars under Bill 42 in part. Bill 42 is now wiped out, you have no base, no 

lawful base, to retain any portion of that money with the exception of what you collected under The 

Mineral Resources Act. The purpose of this bill insofar as it’s retroactive is to tax back what you missed 

on Bill 42 because it went down the tube. That’s clearly what we’re doing with Bill 47, insofar as it’s 

retroactive, that’s what we have said throughout that you’re likely to run into constitutional problems 

because you are attempting to do by way of a different route what you’ve failed to do under Bill 42. The 

interesting part of the argument that we’re having tonight now is in my view, you have clearly indicated 

that that’s the fact. The only difference between the amendment is it’s explicit and what you want to do 

is implicit in the Act but the Premier in his words and you in your words have been every bit as explicit 

as the provisions of Section 11 as amended. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Section 12 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Deduction from tax otherwise payable and we have one amendment on 12. It’s been 

moved by the Attorney General that we amend Section 12 of the printed bill by inserting after “in” in the 

second line of subsection (1) “respect of”. Does the member so move? 

 

Amendment agreed. 

 

Section 12 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 13 
 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, the purpose of this amendment is that the legislation proposed by the 

government kept on with the tendency almost towards a war on business by this government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, no! 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Yes, well it’s true. This, Mr. Chairman, is the only government in Canada as far as I 

know, that persists . . . 

 

Interjection 

 

You were going to say something on your way to the diner, no doubt . . . that persists in . . . he’s been to 

the diner, has he? I can tell . . . that persists, Mr. Chairman, in bringing forth legislation which imposes 

criminal sanctions upon . . . well, that’s what it does. It imposes criminal sanctions on directors of 

companies. It imposes sanctions in areas that should ordinarily be civil areas, and that’s the area that we 

are faced with here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if the original proposal is voted down, I will then be moving an amendment which will 

make it, I suppose, more difficult to obtain a criminal conviction. That is the simplest way to put it. 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1530 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Will you be moving it by jet or what? 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Oh, I’ll always move by jetstar, but I appreciate the member’s encouragement in this 

regard. 

 

Mr. Chairman, seriously, it is most improper for this government always to demonstrate its sort of 

anti-business bias and I don’t want to press that flavour of my argument, but the fact is that there is no 

need in a debt collection area to always move to criminal sanctions, and that’s what this government 

does with this section in a very aggressive way and I say to the members of the House that if you treat 

directors and you treat companies as though they are a group that has to be castigated and treated in a 

separate and critical way, then the result is that they approach their dealing with you in a competitive 

way as well. The only kinds of legislation that I know that allow for criminal sanctions against directors 

of companies are the combines legislation, and in that area you have to establish that the directors 

involved wilfully and deliberately knew what they were doing and participated in a personal way. This 

section doesn’t provide for that, and the way this section reads it would be possible for directors to be 

subject to criminal sanctions because of the actions of their subordinates, and that’s improper. I suggest 

to the Attorney General who is himself a person who deals in legal matters, that clearly this is a wrong 

section and it is a matter that the Attorney General should consider. 

 

The amendment to Section 13, the amendment to Section 30, and again the amendment proposed as an 

alternative in Section 13, all of those things deal with the same problem — that the government is going 

to subject people to criminal sanctions when it is improper to do so, particularly in the oil industry 

because it’s such a complicated industry. 

 

Now, I don’t know whether the mini-conference called by the Attorney General indicates that he is 

considering the things that I have said, but it approaches 10:00 o’clock and it may be, Mr. Chairman, 

that the Attorney General would be good enough to consider the position. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I think there is an argument which can be used to say we don’t need 

the amendment — the argument of mens rea. You have to show mens rea on the statute whether it’s 

there or not. That is the provision with other provincial statutes and other statutes. So to argue that we 

should have the word in here in the alternative, the wilfully word is, I think, perhaps stating the obvious. 

However, it seems to me that the hon. member might feel a little bit better in yet supporting this bill in 

third reading. I am assuming that he has moved the amendments of re-numbering and I would urge the 

members of the House to defeat the sections on re-numbering. If you want, I’ll give him the honour of 

doing it, if he would amend Section 13(8) by inserting after the word “who” in the first line, the word 

“knowingly” rather than “wilfully.” I think it’s better. We’ll accept knowingly as an amendment. It goes 

to show you that we do listen to the opposition from time to time. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, I knew that knocking on all those doors tonight would accomplish 

something. I appreciate the minister’s thinking and I move then the alternative and withdraw the 

amendment to Section 13 which the government indicates we would vote down. I say in substance and I 

don’t want to look a gift horse in the mouth but I say in substance that the Attorney General will know 

that in a criminal prosecution the argument of mens rea though it always applies in doubly difficult 

where wilfully is included. When you are dealing with a corporation, if a criminal charge is laid against 

the corporation, and you can show that the corporation has been 



 

January 9, 1978 

 

1531 

 

criminally libel. There are authorities that then allow a conviction to be entered against the directors in a 

personal way. While, with the inclusion of the word “willfully” I am satisfied that the directors will . . . 

knowingly as opposed to wilfully? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Half a loaf, Tony! 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Half a loaf is it? 

 

Pause in the proceedings 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Chairman, it being 10:00 o’clock. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee report progress on this bill. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — It has been moved by the Attorney General that we report progress on Bill 47. Is that 

agreed? 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I was going to move the committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again, and I so move, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — It has been moved now that the committee rise and report progress and ask for leave 

to sit again. Is leave granted? 

 

Mr. Malone: — Mr. Chairman, while we are waiting for Mr. Speaker, then if I could ask the Attorney 

General a question about the proceedings of tomorrow. The Attorney General indicated earlier in the day 

that as House Leader it was his position and if necessary he would bring in a resolution dealing with the 

matter that has become known as the Berntson affair. I am now asking the Attorney General, is it your 

intention tomorrow before orders of the day to bring in such a resolution? I believe that all members 

would be interested in giving some consideration over the evening hours as to their position on such a 

resolution. Are you bringing one in tomorrow? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I am sorry I just can’t tell because I have not had an opportunity to 

consider. The remarks were made at 2:30 today and you know we went right into Bill 47 and I only had 

the supper hour or dinner hour to consider it and frankly I didn’t have much time to do it then either. So 

I have just not had a chance to do it. All I can say to the members of the House is ‘stay tuned.’ 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 o’clock p.m. 


