



















































Hansard: April 06, 1978


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

April 6, 1978 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 

to this Assembly a group of grade eight students who are seated in the east gallery, 26 of them in 

number. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Tim LeBlanc and chaperons, Barb and Pat Hanke. 

Mr. Speaker, in introducing these students I would like to tell the Assembly that this group of students 

have been for time on a project of their own in learning the civic affairs of this country as well as 

studying the parliamentary system. I know that everyone in the Assembly will join with me today in 

welcoming them here. I will be meeting with this group at 2:30 o’clock this afternoon and we have some 

drinks, I don’t know about the pictures, I will have to talk to them a little later. For the benefit of those 

who haven’t been near Beechy, I can tell you you are missing one of the most picturesque parks of 

Saskatchewan. Have a safe trip home. We welcome you to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I would like the members of the legislature to join with 

me to welcome a fine group of grade eight students from Aberdeen school. 

 

They are here today with their teachers, Mr. Nick Peters, and Mr. Lyle Meyers, and their bus driver, Mr. 

Cavill. They have visited the RCMP Museum, they are going to visit the Museum of natural History this 

afternoon, and I hope that their stay here this afternoon will be an educational one, and hope the 

members of the legislature will demonstrate what Parliament really is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

wish these youngsters a safe journey home. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.H. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): — I wonder if I could join with the member in welcoming the 

students from Aberdeen, Mr. Cavill, Mr. Peters and Mr. Meyers. It may be arguable whether Aberdeen 

is in the best constituency of the province, hut it is certainly not arguable whether it is in the best school 

unit in the province. I want to join with Mr. Thibault in wishing you well and hoping that you enjoy your 

stay and that you have a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. H.H. Rolfes (Saskatoon Buena Vista): — Mr. Speaker, no, I am not from Aberdeen but it is my 

pleasure to introduce a group of students from the school district though in the province, the school 

district of Saskatoon and, Mr. Speaker, it indeed gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce this 

group of students because they come from a school that I had the privilege of being principal for three 

years. I don’t think they have yet recovered from that but, Mr. Speaker, I know many of these students 

personally and I would like to ask the members to join with me in making sure that the students are 

welcomed here. They are accompanied by their teacher, I believe it’s Ken Rieger and one of their 

parents, Mrs. Edith Quinn. They are seated in the west 



 

April 6, 1978 

1108 

 

gallery. I will be meeting with them a little later today, hope to share some refreshments with them and 

answer any questions that they may have. Again, I hope the students enjoy their stay here in Regina, and 

in the legislature and I will be prepared to answer any of your tough questions that you may have on the 

proceedings in the House. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.W. Lane (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with Mr. Thibault and Mr. 

Penner, in welcoming the students, staff and chaperons from Aberdeen. I am from Aberdeen and for the 

first 18 years of my life I called it home, and I have no reservations in telling you and the hon. members 

that it is the best darn town in Saskatchewan and I would like all the hon. members to make them feel 

very welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you in the east gallery, a 

group of high school students, grade 11 and 12 from Hepburn High School who are here today. They 

have been to the IPSCO plant, they will be here for a while and will be seeing the RCMP. We hope you 

enjoy your day here, and have a good trip home. By the way, Aberdeen is also part of my constituency. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Statement in Star-Phoenix — Medicare System 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question 

to the Minister of Health. According to a news report in the Star-Phoenix on April 3, the Minister of 

Highways made some very serious allegations about so-called freeloaders and damned poor citizens, to 

quote the article, living near the Saskatchewan-Alberta border who are taking advantage of our medicare 

program and of our SGIO program. He indicated that investigators are kept busy in connection with the 

freeloaders. I would like to ask the Minister of Health, how many people are involved in the province of 

Alberta who have been taking advantage of medicare, what you are doing about it, whether prosecutions 

are anticipated, and how much money this has been costing the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, yes indeed there are people from the 

province of Alberta who we have discovered have had Saskatchewan medical cards. There has been for 

the last several months an inquiry made in, particularly, the Lloydminster area because of concerns 

brought to our attention when I was up there, I forget — in November or October. There have been 

discovered, as I said, a number of these people and what the follow-up is going to be I can’t say at this 

time because that has not been determined. The numbers are in the area of about 50, I understand. 

 

Alberta Gas Tax Legislation 
 

Mr. Malone: — Supplementary question. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. In the same article the Minister 

of Highways indicates that in his view the Government of Alberta was arrogant and shortsighted in its 

passing of legislation in connection with the gas tax in that province. My question to the Premier, is the 

Minister of Highways speaking on behalf of the government when he makes these comments and, if so, 

have you 



 

April 6, 1978 

1109 

 

communicated your feelings that the Government of Alberta is arrogant and shortsighted? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. Minister of Highways was expressing 

his views. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Then, from the Premier, the views being expressed are not the views of your 

government; you do not believe that Alberta’s position is arrogant and shortsighted; and you agree with 

it. If so, if you do agree with it, why don’t you do the same thing in Saskatchewan so we can get some 

relief from the heavy taxes on oil and gas in this province? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, one can disagree with a particular policy without believing that the 

person acting on that policy is either arrogant or shortsighted. Accordingly the dichotomy, the choices 

which the hon. member puts to us, either adopt their policy or label them as arrogant and shortsighted, is 

I think clearly illogical fallacy and I don’t intend to pursue it along that line with him. 

 

Pipeline for Northern Gas 
 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the Conservative Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I will address my question 

to the Premier. As he knows the Commons have recently given approval to the pipeline, the gas pipeline 

to bring in northern gas and it is anticipated that the Senate will give very fast approval to this. We 

realize that the Government of Saskatchewan has taken steps through the IPSCO plant to attempt to get 

in on some of the action, as it were, with reference to this pipeline. What steps has your government 

taken to consolidate and co-ordinate the efforts of the very fine Saskatchewan companies and 

organizations and co-operatives that are in the service industry that could well take part in some of the 

construction of this pipeline? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I doubt very much whether these vigorous business organizations need 

any assistance from us in order to go out and solicit business. I think all our indications are that they are, 

indeed, pursuing opportunities. I know, for example, that IPSCO has made contacts with the Foothills 

Yukon group and that active discussions have proceeded between the two companies. It is not for me to 

say what the results of those discussions are except to say that we have offered our good offices to that 

company, that Saskatchewan company, and I think other Saskatchewan companies are well aware of our 

willingness to give them any assistance they may feel is desirable in order to permit them to pursue 

business opportunities. 

 

It is not our belief that we should foist our services upon the private sector. If they believe we can be of 

any assistance, we will be more than happy to attempt to provide it. 

 

Mr. Collver: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is well aware of the magnitude of 

the expenditure that is being contemplated by this pipeline and the magnitude of the occasion. Surely the 

Government of Saskatchewan would want to participate in helping to sell the various organizations that 

are the head contractors on the benefits to be derived by Saskatchewan organizations in providing 

service contracts and service to that tremendously large project and especially since it is going through 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question again is, would the Premier not agree that a consolidated and co-ordinated effort by many 

departments of the Government of Saskatchewan, in other 



 

April 6, 1978 

1110 

 

words by his government, would be in order at this time in co-operation with the private sector, in 

co-operation with the co-operatives. A project of this magnitude surely warrants direct attention by your 

government. Would you not agree to that? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, I would agree that it warrants direct attention by our government. It does not 

warrant any direction to the private sector or to the co-operative sector as to how they ought to pursue 

their business interests. 

 

We certainly have given it attention. All of those organizations which have indicated that they felt we 

could be of any assistance to them have, I believe, received such assistance as we can offer. We would 

be more than happy to assist them, either individually or as a group, if they felt that a co-ordinated 

approach was desirable. 

 

Mr. Collver: — A final question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has not indicated that his government is 

prepared to take the lead in this regard and he is going to wait until the private sector comes to him. My 

final supplementary question is this, would the Premier not agree that by taking a co-ordinated sales 

effort, or a co-ordinated effort, towards this project that the Government of Saskatchewan could be of 

great help in the creation of jobs in the province of Saskatchewan and therefore should take the lead not 

in directing the private organizations but in convincing the various head organizations that there are 

organizations in Saskatchewan capable and ready to work on that pipeline project. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we do not believe that the Government of Saskatchewan is any better 

salesman than the private businesses of Saskatchewan. We do not, therefore, believe that our approaches 

to Foothills Yukon, for example, the sponsoring company, will necessarily be any more productive than 

those of the private sector in Saskatchewan. We have pursued the general issue with vigor with the 

federal government, both with respect to pipe size and generally with respect to any other issues which 

may involve Saskatchewan content and Canadian content. 

 

With respect to whether or not we should, for example, set up an agency of government which would 

co-ordinate those people or those companies and organizations in Saskatchewan that wish to sell on the 

project, we believe that while we have a facilitating role, we think there should be some indication of a 

desire on the part of the companies involved for such governmental intervention before such 

intervention is mounted. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — A final supplementary. If the Premier could follow that up or if the Minister of 

Industry could indicate whether or not he would think it wise to have the Department of Industry 

catalogue a list of materials and services which might be required by the Foothills Pipeline in the 

construction of that massive undertaking and circulate it to Saskatchewan businessmen and then do a 

likewise catalogue of Saskatchewan materials and services that might be utilized in an effort to assist 

Saskatchewan businessmen in obtaining contracts on the pipeline. 

 

Hon. N. Vickar (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, that point is very well taken. 

My department has already examined that phase and I am sure they will be coming up with something 

for the business people. 

 

Transfer Between High School Systems 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — A question to the Minister of Education 



 

April 6, 1978 

1111 

 

regarding the Act now before us. The minister knows that some time ago the separate school board in 

Regina expressed to him a concern shared by the Moose Jaw and North Battleford school units that their 

freedom of choice and the freedom of choice for students to transfer between the high school systems 

was going to be restricted. I ask the minister if he would not review the legislation to ensure that the 

freedom of choice of students in those areas is maintained. I ask the minister whether he would not agree 

that it is unfair to parents who want to send their students to one school system or another, not to make it 

possible for that transition to be maintained. 

 

Hon. D.L. Faris (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I am really baffled by the member’s question 

because we have done nothing that would interfere with those rights. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, why then have you failed to respond to the separate school board 

in Regina which has expressed a concern to you that you have indeed changed those rights and he has 

expressed the view to you in writing some time ago and as I understand it you have not responded that 

they are concerned that without some intervention by you the right of transition will be restricted. 

 

Mr. Faris: — Mr. Speaker, I met with the Regina Separate School Board yesterday afternoon; we 

discussed this kind of matter and no such point or failure of communication was indicated to me. 

 

Statement in Star-Phoenix — Medicare 
 

Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. In light 

of your answer to the question from the member for Lakeview that there have been abuses by Albertans 

in our hospital programs and our SGIO, my question is, first what department is conducting this 

investigation and second, do you also disagree with the executive director of Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan when he says that there have been no, or he doubts that there have been any — to be 

precise the executive director of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan said Tuesday he disagrees 

with the cabinet ministers claim that Alberta freeloaders are taking advantage of these programs in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is quoting as I see from a newspaper. I 

disagree that the executive director said those words. So that answers the second question. The first 

question is that the inquiries were made through the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan in 

co-operation with the city of Lloydminster and that is the way that the information was gathered. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have some sympathy for the minister for not agreeing 

with the accuracy of everything the Leader-Post prints but supposing the director of the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan is quoted as accurate, do you disagree with him or not? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a supposing question is a hypothetical question and, therefore, 

deserves no answer. 

 

SGIO Rate Reductions 
 

Mr. W.H. Stodalka (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. The minister in the budget 



 

April 6, 1978 

1112 

 

indicated that there was to be a 5 per cent reduction in automobile insurance and yet when people are 

getting their official notices of the rates that they are going to be charged as of May 1, and there on, 

many people are finding that there is no change in rate. That really, in effect, the price of their insurance 

and their licence plate this year is exactly the same as it was last year. Would the minister indicate who, 

in fact, did get reductions? 

 

Hon. E.C. Whelan (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the rates that were going to be 

charged to people who will have a May sticker on their licence plate will be reduced and if they aren’t 

then there is some mistake somewhere. The starting date is May 1 and it will run for the period to April 

30. If you like I will give you a copy of the instructions that go to every issuer in that respect. I think that 

the rates are not 5 per cent for passenger vehicles, they are 7 per cent; 10 per cent in some other 

categories but the overall average is 5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Is the minister suggesting then, that every car will receive at least 5 per cent or in the 

case of an automobile, 7 per cent? The information that I have is that somebody who had a 1977 Le 

Mans Pontiac was charged $206 last year and his licence became due again this year on the 1st of May, 

which I believe is the effective date of your change, and he again received the same billing of $206. Is 

the minister saying that this is an incorrect billing? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — No. I think you could go into one item after another but if you ask me, I will give you 

the rates, the instructions and the detailed rates. I think you really have to have the book to see the whole 

picture of what is going to happen. 

 

I’m not sure if this is for a May . . . if it is for the month of April there will not be a reduction on it 

because it doesn’t come around until next year. I had someone come to the office the other day and 

claim that it was for the month of May but that wasn’t the case. It was really for the month of April. 

 

Now if it is a new vehicle that has just been bought for the first time, that may be a difference and the 

rate book will show that. I’m not just sure what . . . If you will give me the statement I will be prepared 

to look at it and bring it back and give you the rate book in conjunction with it and explain it. 

 

Natural Gas Storage 
 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister in charge of Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. SPC has four caverns in which they store natural gas during the winter and this 

natural gas is used for the peak periods, assisting to feed the lines in this area. My understanding is that 

these caverns reached very low proportions during the winter (dangerously low). Could the minister 

verify if this is correct or not? 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t be precise in answering the 

member’s question. The cavern were drawn down considerably. I think that is understandable in regard 

to the type of winter that we had, especially the months of December and January but I do not believe 

that they were drawn down to a dangerous level. Certainly when the weather has moderated, as it has 

now, we will be undertaking to replace the gas in those caverns. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1113 

 

Mr. Larter: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if I could ask the minister just how much gas, 

and at what price, was bought from Trans-Canada Pipe Lines (this is excessive gas they normally would 

have bought in the normal winter)? At what rate? We understand it is about 10 times the normal rate. 

Could you tell us the amount you bought this winter? 

 

Mr. Messer: — I’ll take the question as notice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Miss L.B. Clifford (Wilkie): — A question to the Minister of Labour. The women’s division which was 

formed two years ago had 11 permanent positions in 1976-77. In 1977-78 there were 11 positions and 

this year in the estimates you say there are 10 positions. With increased concern by women’s groups and 

members on your side of the House (like in resolution no. 13) will your department re-evaluate the 

priorities so that the programs may be expanded and so that the members in permanent positions may be 

expanded so that you are simply not having a token program but something that is effective? 

 

Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I hardly think that the assessment of the 

member can be regarded as being accurate at all. The determination of the department to do those things 

that are appropriate will be announced in due course. 

 

Miss Clifford: — The investigators in the women’s division do approximately the same kind of a job as 

the investigators in the consumer affairs division. Up to three or four months ago they were being paid 

less than the ones in the consumer affairs division and as far as I know that is still the fact. Would the 

minister not agree that this is fostering a program that does not support equal pay for work of equal 

value? 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I can assure the hon. member that within the government there has been no attempt at 

any time to treat employment in government any differently than the investigations that have taken place 

in the private sector. If there are inequities and, of course, if they are reported then the responsibility 

rests with the women’s division to ferret out those differentials and amend the program in such a way as 

to make it equitable. I am not aware of the circumstances that the hon. member draws attention to in the 

Department of Consumer Affairs. 

 

Spreading of Brucellosis 
 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. I am 

sure that the minister and his departmental officials are aware of the very alarming spread of the disease 

in the cattle industry known as brucellosis. I would like to ask the minister, since becoming rather 

apparent that one of the major factors aiding and abetting the spread of this disease are our community 

pastures, whether it be provincial or federal. Has the minister and his departmental officials considered 

the possibility of before allowing animals in your community pastures, in 1978, that these animals will 

be blood tested by the Health of Animals branch of the federal Department of Agriculture? 

 

Hon. E.E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, the control of brucellosis, as you know, 

under the control of the federal Department of Agriculture. It is an area in which they are assuming 

control and have, in fact, full control and if they feel that it should be a requirement that we should do 

the testing at the community pastures, certainly we will co-operate with that effort. But to this point in 

time they haven’t 



 

April 6, 1978 

1114 

 

requested that we do that. So I would suggest that it is a matter which should be brought to their 

attention and see whether there is a need for us to do it. So far we haven’t had any request or an 

indication on the part of our department that this needs to be done. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that it is hardly 

the role of his department to wait for some bureaucrat in the Health of Animals to decide that this would 

be advantageous? Would the minister not agree that it is his initiative and his departmental officials’ 

initiative to protect the breeding herds in the province of Saskatchewan against this dangerous disease? 

Is the minister not aware that one of the reasons why this disease has sprung up again, is because the 

Health of Animals ‘blooped’ 15 years ago and stopped the vaccination program? 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, whether this is the reason that brucellosis has sprung up again, I suppose 

we will have to leave to those people who are more knowledgeable than you and me. However, I do take 

your comment seriously and I will certainly be examining whether there is anything additional that the 

provincial department should be doing, but I know that our people are aware of the activity being carried 

out by the federal Health of Animals people and are in daily contact with them. I am sure that everything 

that needs to be done is being done. 

 

Little Red River Park Project 
 

Mr. E. Anderson (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 

Resources. There seems to be a misunderstanding between the minister’s department and the city of 

Prince Albert that is holding up the development of the $800 million park development in what’s known 

as the Little Red River Park project. Could the minister clarify for the House what action he is taking to 

correct this misunderstanding which seems to exist on the cause of the delay? 

 

Hon. A.S. Matsalla (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 

there is any misunderstanding with respect to the Prince Albert city placing their application before the 

department for the development of a regional park. Some concerns have been expressed locally with 

respect to the development and I think I could summarize the concerns as being three. It is indicated to 

me that one of the quarter sections that is involved in the regional park area belongs to an Indian band, 

as well as there is some concern with respect to an Indian burial ground, and furthermore local concerns 

were expressed with respect to the fertility of the area. Until the time that these concerns are thoroughly 

discussed on a local basis we are not going to proceed. 

 

Mr. Anderson: — Supplementary. Could the minister, has he brought up the question, a problem that is 

very much a concern is that the traditional burial grounds of the Wahpeton Indian band will not be 

desecrated. Is your department giving any assurance to this band that their burial ground will not be 

desecrated or taken in as a skiing area? 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, certainly once these concerns are resolved on a local basis and there is a 

desire and a wish to establish the regional park in the area, we are going to give it further consideration. 

 

Mr. Anderson: — I am sure you are going to give it consideration but it seems the consideration is 

between the city of Prince Albert and your department. Where the 



 

April 6, 1978 

1115 

 

concern lies with the Indian band is that it is their traditionally burial grounds that are being on the area. 

What assurance can you give that their burial ground is not going to be desecrated and left out of 

discussions between the city and the department? 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Well, certainly we are interested that the burial grounds not be desecrated and that 

they be preserved and I think this is in the interest of the Indian bands in the area as well as the local 

area and as far as that goes, in the interest of the government. Until these concerns are ironed out. Then 

we will consider the application further; but in the meantime I do not think that I would like to see my 

department get involved in the making of the decision as to what is to be done with the burial grounds 

and the quarter section of land and so forth. When the concerns are resolved on a local basis we are 

certainly going to be looking at that application further. 

 

Regina’s 75th Birthday Celebration 
 

Mr. Bailey: — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Tourism and Mineral Resources. 

Because of the time restraints, Mr. Minister, I will put all of the questions in one. 

 

The first part of the question, Mr. Minister, is: — we in Saskatchewan are aware of the 75th celebration 

of Regina coming this summer and the importance of that to all of Saskatchewan because of this being 

the capital city. Have you been asked by the city to assist them in any way through your department in 

the promotion of this particular celebration? 

 

The second part of my question is, what programs are you initiating at the present time to somehow 

draw back the great deficit in the tourist trade that we have been receiving and which we probably will 

be experiencing again? 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to our involvement with the 75th anniversary of the city of 

Regina, I am not aware of any request that has come in from the city asking for our assistance but 

certainly if there is a request we will attempt to assist in every way possible. 

 

With regard to the second question, regarding the deficit that has been occurring in the tourism industry, 

we are certainly concerned about it and we are attempting to carry on the programs as we have done in 

the past; as a matter of fact, we are attempting to improve these programs in promoting the tourism 

industry. 

 

We are also concerned, as you probably noted in a recent editorial and in other articles appearing in the 

paper, regarding the Night Hawk flights and Air Canada ABC flights. We are expressing our concern to 

the federal government hoping that, if it is not possible to get Saskatchewan under the program this year, 

it will hopefully be so next year. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Second Readings 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Faris that Bill No. 

22 — An Act respecting Elementary and Secondary Education in Saskatchewan now be read a 

second time. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1116 

 

 

Mr. H.W. Lane (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to second reading of this Bill, I 

would like to point out why I personally find the Bill such a disappointment, quite apart from any 

general dissatisfaction which we in the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, feel about it. 

 

Prior to becoming involved as a lawyer, I trained for and spent a number of happy years in the teaching 

profession and as a result, I will probably always look at educational matters to some degree, at least, 

from a teacher’s point of view. However, with the firm determination that, with all deference to the 

different point of view of teachers, trustees, parents, all other educators, there is only one legitimate 

viewpoint in respect of this new educational legislation namely Bill 22, and that is from the perspective 

of what the proposed legislation will do to improve the education of children in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, the acid test of any new school law is whether the students interest are served and 

whether such legislation further enhances and advances the academic climate in Saskatchewan schools. 

No reasonable person would argue with that premise. The question then, Mr. Speaker, is: — has this 

government, in forwarding Bill 22, passed the acid test? I believe that the answer is, the government 

struck out. Strike number one, Mr. Speaker, was the white paper on educational administration, pardon 

me, on Education, wherein the government, hiding behind one of its typical ‘speak up, your government 

wants to hear from you’ charades, pretended to care what the average Saskatchewan citizen had to say 

about this important matter, and ended up outraging every parent and their elected representatives in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are a generous lot and by nature the people of Saskatchewan 

are particularly so. They have given the government a second chance, a second swing at the ball — and 

that was Bill 43 which was introduced in the last session of the House. I don’t have to remind the hon. 

members about the swift demise of that particular piece of legislation, nor do I have to remind them of 

the fact that by this time it had become evident to every one that, in a cheap political move to re-enforce 

waning electoral support in other sectors, the government had by this time succeeded in outraging all the 

teachers as well as the process, using up their second strike. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in a fair ball game you are allowed three chances. Let us see what the government 

did on the third time up to the plate. Did they do anything to improve the professional status of teachers? 

Not a thing. At least the teachers of this province don’t see it, nor do I. (I would like to spend a few 

minutes in detail on that aspect later on.) Did the government do anything to provide the parents of 

Saskatchewan through their locally elected representatives, with the tools to accommodate a reasonable 

level of education for their children? Not a bit — at least there isn’t anything that a thinking parent or a 

reasonable trustee in the province will see in that, and I certainly don’t see it either. But most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, did the government take this opportunity to provide overall improvement in 

the standard of education for the children of this province? The answer must surely be a resounding No 

— and a resounding ‘Strike Three’ and the people of Saskatchewan in their own quiet way, will call the 

government out of office in the next general election, not just for the government’s insensitive and 

heavy-handed approach in the education matter. This remind me of several other things and not just 

because the government, for example, loses control of the public purse to the tune of $45 million a crack 

and the government members don’t know where it is; not just because the government fraudulently 

forced the potash takeover on the people of the province without having breathed a word of such a major 

issue during the 1975 



 

April 6, 1978 

1117 

 

general election; not just because the PC government in Alberta, for example, can provide gasoline to its 

citizenry at 20 cents a gallon less and at the same time providing an extremely lower provincial share of 

income tax by comparison to this province but rather a multitude of reasons that time doesn’t permit me 

to elaborate on at this moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mention these things because it is evident that this new Education Act, while it may be 

the most critical and current fait accompli at the hands of this band of ruffians that call themselves 

government, it is just another example in the continuing series of events that serve to expose a tired and 

incompetent party that will soon be given a chance for a well overdue rest and the recuperation is so 

evidently requires. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the call of strike three on this government is out. After all the 

studies, the hearings, the writings and the rewritings, after the time and money that was spent on this Bill 

to deliver a document such as Bill 22 into this House is unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into the main thrust of my speech I would like to refer hon. members to a press 

release issued by the hon. minister on Thursday, March 23, upon introduction — reintroduction of the 

Education Bill into the legislature. In the first paragraph of that press release it is stated: 

 

Legislation designed to modernize and consolidate the province’s school law was reintroduced in 

Saskatchewan’s Legislature today by Education Minister Don Faris. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have no quarrel with the intent. It is too bad that while they consolidated they 

failed to modernize. In paragraph four of that same press release it goes on to say: 

 

In several instances, however, these concerns have resulted in substantive and significant changes in 

proposed legislation. 

 

Well that surely is the understatement of the year. The minister has created in his department, the 

Department of Education, a little cagey bee that he can use to monitor and supervise and inform himself 

an control in every way all of the educational matters that happen in Saskatchewan. I am wondering why 

in his press release he didn’t mention that particular little change that has come about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well before I get into the main body of my speech, I would like to cite for the attention 

of the hon. members of this House, what can only be referred to as sloppy draftsmanship, the kind of 

draftsmanship that this government will go down in history for and has become manifest in this 

particular Bill. I know we are ordinarily given an opportunity on the third reading and in a clause by 

clause study to raise these matters but it is in this particular case that I believe a few brief examples must 

be pointed out immediately. 

 

Let’s start, Mr. Speaker, with something easy like the name of the Bill. I would like in this regard to read 

a brief quotation from a reply given by the SSTA — a reply to the white paper on school law. In section 

1 the SSTA say: 

 

It is desirable that the name of an Act convey what it is about. It should be broad enough that every 

section is indirectly at least referable to it. But it should not be so broad as to lead one to expect 

provisions which are not there. A name such as The Education Act would reasonably be expected to 

include laws relating to universities and other post-secondary institutions. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1118 

 

All common law provinces except two use the name here suggested or one similar (and they refer to 

the School Act). 

 

That is not bad, it is not a good start certainly but in looking through any reasonable index I would start 

by looking for this kind of legislation under something referring to school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s have a look next at the sections immediately following the name, namely the 

definition sections. I refer hon. members to 2(b). Section 2(b) defines attendance area. Now the Act 

says, “That means a portion of a school division containing one or more operating schools.” Well, isn’t 

that nice, Mr. Speaker, but what does it really tell you? I would like to refer to 2(g) compulsory school 

age. Here is a goody. This means having attained the age of seven years but not having attained the age 

of 16 years. Now that is some pretty loose stuff, at least I think it is because if you go into any city 

school in the major cities in Saskatchewan today you will find that there are youngsters graduating prior 

to the age of 165. So I guess what it means, Mr. Speaker, that when a child reaches the age of 15 and 

one-half and he has completed his education, then he will either be in breach of the law, if he leaves the 

school for that last half a year or he will be obliged to hang around the janitor’s quarters or hang around 

the school until the law catches up with him and he can legally leave the school. 

 

Let’s have a look at section (m), under that same section. District or school district means a school 

district as described in section 120. Well that helps. Is this the definition section or is this an index? 

Now, here is a good one, Mr. Speaker. I would like to refer to part (o) under the definition section of 

section two. “Elector means a person who is a Canadian citizen under the full age of 18 years.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened attentively to what the hon. members over here had to say and what the 

hon. members over there, when they spoke on this Act and I would ask them to extend me the same 

courtesy. I didn’t, of course, agree with everything and in some instances nothing of what was said from 

those quarters, but I would ask them for the courtesy to listen to what I have to say in reply, in the proper 

time and place. 

 

Section (o) “elector” means and a person who is included vote, under subsection (o)(ii) who is the chief 

resident officer of a company or a representative of the company nominated by the officer in writing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been absolutely no thought applied to that section. Which companies does 

the minister have in mind? Perhaps, and the minister was already awarded one Schenley Award in this 

House, for the contributions which he and his party take from the major liquor companies around 

Canada and around the world. Perhaps it is the big booze companies, the Schenley’s, Melcher’s and 

Seagram’s, or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the company here includes the Chemical Bank, located in the 

Bahamas. 

 

What this section obviously intended to do was to refer to companies that carry on business, or are 

located with their head office in the constituency which is referred to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me refer to subsection (r) “guardian”. This section says “guardian” means a person who 

is not the natural parent of a child and who has been made responsible for the care of that child, and 

includes any person who has lawfully and formally received into his home another person’s child. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1119 

 

Well, that is pretty tough to understand. It includes children who are lawfully and formally received into 

a home, whatever that means, then someone who is a guardian under The Infant’s Act, which is 

obviously what this was to get at, was not even included. It doesn’t mention The Infant’s Act at all. That 

is normally under the laws of the province of Saskatchewan contemplated as what a guardian is meant to 

be. Instead this Act totally misses the point and picks up The Family Services Act which has nothing to 

do with the matter of legal guardianship of infants. 

 

In The Infant’s Act, the Minister of Social Services is appointed as guardian for special purposes when a 

child is placed in his custody, but has nothing whatsoever to do with guardianship as contemplated by 

law. 

 

Now, this one, part (y) “owner” is the one that gives me the most trouble in the definition section. 

Owner, means a person who has any right, title, estate or interest in property other than that of an 

occupant or mortgagee. First of all what is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that was meant by the word 

“property”. It should have been put together with the word “real property”. Surely that is what the 

minister intended to say, but he didn’t say it. He just left it at property. So does it, therefore, include 

people who own personal property in voting? My seatmate says people who own Volkswagens could be 

entitled to vote under this section and I think he is absolutely right. 

 

The other point is, having missed the qualifier real, in referring to property, now having missed the 

matter of real property — that is obviously what they intended to do and if they intend to do that, then 

they say — any person with an interest in property. Well, if the minister had asked for some legal 

counsel in this regard it would have found out, very quickly, that in terms of an interest in real property, 

even a mechanic lienholder, who takes a charge against certain property, is someone who has legitimate 

interest in property, or perhaps someone who files easement. Are all these people included? It is 

obviously meant that it is to be real property. Why not say that and why not clarify the intent of the Act? 

It is very loosely drafted and very poorly drafted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice that the Minister of Education has not bothered to stay in the House to hear the rest 

of our comments. I would like the record to show that. 

 

In the main body of the Act there is reference to mid-year, or to terminations and a board of reference. 

As I see it this section creates another whole problem. 

 

Now, under the custom that exists at the present time, I believe that it is fair to say that both parties to a 

teaching contract are entitled to believe that they have a one year contract, both in law and in fact. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, at common law the courts would not enforce the performance of a personal contract 

because by enforcing the performance of a personal contract, that to the courts of rule was tantamount to 

slavery. 

 

Now, the Act the way it reads right now looks very much like, in an attempt to look as if the Act is being 

fair, it looks very much like a trustee, it doesn’t refer to make your terminations, it looks very much like 

a group of trustees could take its teacher to task for terminating his contract in the normal course of 

events at the end of a year and call in a Board of Reference and ask him why he is not continuing his 

services for a future year. 

 

Let me refer to another section, Mr. Speaker, section 43. The section states as follows: 



 

April 6, 1978 

1120 

 

Each person nominated as a candidate for election as a member of a board of education shall be an 

elector in the division in which the election is to be held. 

 

Well, that’s obviously done backwards. What it means to say, I believe, is that if you are a resident in a 

certain area then you are qualified to become an elector and a candidate. Now what it ends up saying is 

that you can by virtue of letting your name stand for nomination as a candidate put yourself under the 

aegis of an official elector under the terms of this Act. Very lose drafting. 

 

Section 120, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . clause by clause . . . 

 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — Well, the Attorney General asks us whether we are giving this a clause by clause, 

Mr. Speaker. I would recommend to the Attorney General that before he made a comment like that he 

would have been well advised to get some lawyer on the committee that drafted this legislation. Now the 

Minister of Education had a gentleman who appeared on a recent hot line show in the city of Regina and 

when asked when this gentleman, who quite frankly had a large hand in drafting this particular piece of 

legislation, when asked whether this had been reviewed or whether any lawyers had any input into the 

drafting of the verbiage, if you like, of the Act, he said, no, but he had showed it to a lawyer and the 

lawyer told him it was valid. Well, that’s nice, so what if it’s valid? Mr. Attorney General, you know 

yourself that when that comes to court there is enough difficulty with Acts that are properly drafted 

without this kind of an Act which is so sloppily and loosely drafted and when it gets to court, and it will 

get to court in due course, there is nothing starts from a point of comprehensibility. I think that the 

minister would be well advised to refer his colleague to the fact that maybe there should have been some 

appropriate language used to express the intent and the terms of what they attempted to accomplish in 

this Act. 

 

Now, section 120. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — 120. 

 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — We’re getting there, we’re getting there. In section 120 here is a real humdinger 

for the Attorney General to look at and I invite him to look at this one and I invite the Attorney General 

to ask me how under the sun a school board can comply with this particular section. It says as follows: 

 

(1) In a school division which does not include a city etc. (Section 120(1), then section 120(2) says as 

follows: — The boundaries of a school district shall be determined from time to time by the board of 

education, but shall be such as to include lands owned or occupied by electors whose children attend 

or would be entitled to attend the school of the district for educational services from kindergarten to 

grade 9. 

 

Now you tell me, Mr. Attorney General, how school boards are going to comply with that particular 

section. Supposing, for example, that a child comes from Sweden to Yorkton and lives with his 

grandmother in that section. He has then been lawfully and formally taken into this home, does that 

father’s land in — well I see the Attorney General, case closed, because he is leaving. He, himself, can’t 

understand the 



 

April 6, 1978 

1121 

 

comprehensibility of a section like that or tell this Assembly how the school boards are going to be 

dealing with it. 

 

Mr. Allen: — It’s been a problem for 70 years. 

 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it has been a problem for a number of years and the problem 

will be rectified in one short year’s time from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular section is open to numerous, ludicrous interpretations. I have already 

mentioned an example of a child that moves for some personal reason from one area of the province to 

another. What, for example, if we take the Act in its best light and say what happens in the case where a 

child living with his parents on the home quarter, there is no difficulty with that but in this modern day 

and age people are known to have land situated in other areas, perhaps adjoining or perhaps another 

district, does that mean — that’s what the Act says it means — “occupied by electors whose children 

attend or would be entitled to attend the school or district . . .” Now, I don’t see how school boards could 

possibly comply with that. I would suggest that this section should have read and we will get more 

heavily involved in this later on but it is just another example of the sloppy drafting. This should have 

said something to the effect that it included lands making a regional tributary to the school involved. 

There is no problem with ‘occupied’, I follow that, but what do you do in the case of ‘owner’. Now I 

realize that the hon. members on the other side are very anxious to find out what our position on this Act 

is and, therefore, I will accommodate them and leave out the literally dozens of other examples of loose 

drafting and silliness and downright sloppiness that are unforgivable when you consider the importance 

and the ramifications of an Act such as this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in a case where a minister brings forward such an Act as this, I think the Premier has 

a duty to himself and to his colleagues in this House, quite frankly, to review the portfolio in question 

and until the minister can attend to proper drafting of a Bill such as this, he should be made to account 

and not be allowed to be cut loose on the classrooms of Saskatchewan to try to improve the situation 

there. 

 

Many of the changes in the law which Bill 22 affects will be of unmitigated disaster for both teachers 

and students and, in particular, those changes to Bill 22 in the last session of the legislature; but many 

will say, oh these changes were as a result of pressure from the teacher organizations. In fact it has been 

said that the changes have only occurred because teachers wanted them. I know better than that. True, 

the teachers’ organization, the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) did ask the government to 

consider better provision for job security. I ask whether any one of the hon. members in this House fault 

the teachers for that request. It is perfectly valid and logical that an organization would seek to improve 

its position with respect to the matter of job security, but let no member of the House make any mistake 

about this. It was only because the teacher were prohibited from getting together with the parents or their 

elected officials in a free and democratic way to discuss all the terms and conditions of employment, 

prohibited by this government I might add, that they were forced into a position of going the route of 

binding arbitration, a route that I do not believe will be particularly effective for trustees or teachers. 

Anyone who is involved in the educational scene knows that school boards in Saskatchewan, if 

anything, usually err on the side of compassion. AS in any other profession, there are bad teachers. In a 

teaching profession, we know of some, and that is a standard complaint we hear from people who take a 

side against teachers, from time to time. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1122 

 

 

Some of the members in this House (I believe most of us) will be able to indicate some bad doctors. 

Some of them might even know of some bad lawyers and certainly there are some bad politicians; they 

all sit opposite us in the House. 

 

School boards have been very reticent, Mr. Speaker, to fire bad teachers. On the other hand, in those 

cases where local school boards, motivated by improper considerations, have (and these are isolated 

instances that I am referring to the same as there are isolated instances of bad teachers) acted due to 

improper motivations, and improperly dismissed teachers, the simple fact of the matter is that, rather 

than go through the humiliation of long drawn out and often embarrassing hearings, more often than not, 

the aggrieved teacher will simply bite his lip and move silently to another jurisdiction. The fact of the 

matter is that these kinds of proceedings are the exception rather than the rule anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that does not mean that teacher should not have the right to some form of grievance 

procedure. The fact is that they must have that right and the procedure must have teeth in it. In that 

regard, I do not believe that even trustees argue with that particular position. 

 

When we form the government in 1979, we believe that moves must be taken immediately to offer to 

this particular sector, the trustees and teachers, the right to get together and have an opportunity to 

discuss their mutual problems. I say this to the House. This will be a much more superior position than 

that of this government or the government before, which was to entrench negotiable items in legislation, 

for example, binding arbitration on the one hand and restricted bargaining measures on the other. 

 

Such a move will not be without its problems and I am prepared to recognize that. The first and biggest 

problem — You know my friends to the right here laugh and I know exactly what it is that they are 

thinking of. I watched, very carefully, the speech given by the hon. member for Maple Creek yesterday, 

and I believe there is no cause for that kind of concern. Now I will tell the hon. member for Maple Creek 

why I joined the Progressive Conservative Party. 

 

For years and years, Mr. Speaker, in this province, I have seen different interest groups — competing 

interest groups, pitted against each other for political purposes. We saw, for example, management 

pitted against labor for political purposes. We saw teachers pitted against trustees for political purposes 

and if there is anything this government hopes to accomplish, it is to take a fair position. You know 

there are certain advantages when you take that kind of position, when you are forthright, and when you 

meet with various groups, for example, the groups that are interested in what this debate is all about 

right now. You do not have to, for example, as the Minister of Education did, hide his head in shame 

when it comes to sections relating to a certain group. You do not have to down play, as the member for 

Maple Creek did, certain objects that he knows that perhaps the group is particularly supporting him. 

You see there is no embarrassment when you do that. You can come into the House and you can lay 

your cards on the table because you have already done so behind closed doors. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that if the trustees — Well, I am moved to terror. The member for Saskatoon Eastview says he is going 

to speak behind me. That will certainly be a speech well worth listening to, and I am just wondering 

about the firmness of the position with which he is going to attack this particular Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing is clear, that if the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 



 

April 6, 1978 

1123 

 

and the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) really believed that they could, they would 

have to get together to work out their differences instead of advancing their own organizational goals 

with one particular political party or another, they would in fact, get together. As I say, we can now live 

with both groups because we have stated our position clearly. We have not made them both happy, of 

course, that cannot be done — if you try to do that you will of course take an untenable position . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming back to the position of the fact that we wish to offer to teachers and trustees the 

right to get together and discuss and negotiate all matters concerning terms of employment, and 

conditions of employment, I would refer the members of the House to section 17 of The Saskatchewan 

Act, because I think it presents a problem, especially in light . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh we are 

all unified on this one . . . especially in light of the fact that there has been a relatively recent ruling by 

Mr. Justice MacPherson, the case of the Board of Education of Moose jaw versus the Attorney General. 

(I believe the Attorney General would probably remember more correctly than myself — it was the 1974 

case I believe). Section 17 of The Saskatchewan Act states: — “Nothing in any such law shall 

prejudicially affect any right or privilege with respect to separate schools, with any class of persons,” 

and so forth. But what happens is, if you want to open up the area of negotiations, in light of what Mr. 

Justice MacPherson said in the Board of Education of Moose Jaw and Attorney General case, there are 

certain constitutional problems because the separate school districts have a constitutionally protected 

position in which they have control over tenure, selection of teachers, etc. Now what it means is that 

teachers on the one hand, when they speak about free collective bargaining, if they really wish to talk 

about free collective bargaining, they are going to have to back off a bit in some regards. For example, 

they might have to back off on an area such as binding arbitration and go f or some other suitable form 

of negotiated grievance procedure. It also means that school trustees will have to back off in some 

regards. They cannot use a constitutionally protected position to promote their rights without letting the 

teachers get at them in a full and free way, in terms of the bargaining process. Now, what would happen 

of course is if the separate school boards chose to protect their positions behind section 17 of The 

Saskatchewan Act, it wouldn’t work. Because then you would see two sets of negotiations developing; 

one set of rules applying to the separate schools and one to the public schools, and no one wants that — 

not the teachers, not the separate school boards, not the public school boards. So those are some of the 

problems that would be faced. We are not saying by any means, that this kind of thing can be 

accomplished without problems, but we are prepared to look at it and act on it, if the teachers so desire 

— we certainly won’t ram it down their throats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe, in the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, in improved 

professional status for teachers. I have a lot of contact with good teachers who have developed strong 

professional philosophies, and strong professional skills. We commit ourselves to offering the teachers 

of Saskatchewan full professional status. We will not force it down their throats, it simply can’t be done 

— and again, there are problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all, I would like to examine the area of certification for teachers. There is nothing 

magic about what happens in the Department of Education now. The minister’s signature appears on 

every certificate that is issued in the province of Saskatchewan. (It is not he signing it personally, it is a 

rubber stamping technique obviously, because of the number of certificates that come through). So there 

is nothing magic about that, it is done by and large, on the basis of the kind of 



 

April 6, 1978 

1124 

 

qualifications or the kind of academic training proven through the recognized universities, by the person 

applying for the particular certificate. But the point is this, doctors in Saskatchewan are allowed to 

certify themselves and to handle the certification of their own membership, why shouldn’t teachers, who 

are highly trained and highly professional people, be allowed to certify their own membership? Well, 

some might say there is a difficulty — the difficulty being that in one regard, teachers have the one 

aspect of their own organization which tends to look like a professional group. They have on the other 

hand, a part of their organization which tends to look like, (for lack of a better word) a union group. 

Both of these aspects of the STF are legitimate positions to take. However, we believe that we should 

start from the position that teaching is a profession, and through something or other of their 

organization, they must advance those things which are for the betterment of employment, provisions in 

terms of the teaching force in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, back to the issue of certification. There is difficulty, and a good example of it is this. On that one 

side of the makeup of a teachers’ organization you might have teachers looking for something such as 

follows. In most professions professional misconduct, for example, in the legal profession, the one I am 

most familiar with, professional misconduct is viewed as whether or not there has been a breach of duty 

by myself as a lawyer, vis-à-vis my client. What my relationship with other lawyers is, is my own 

business and whether or not I am getting along with other lawyers that is not a thing that can come into 

the aspect of professional conduct. 

 

Recently in Alberta this business of professional misconduct was moved into such areas by the 

organization of teachers as to whether or not certain kinds of contracts constituted professional 

misconduct on the part of the teachers. I want the House to be absolutely clear on our position. If you 

open up the area of professional competence for teachers certainly other responsibilities will flow. But I 

don’t believe for a minute if you give teachers the opportunity to improve their professional status in the 

community that they won’t to a man or a woman jump at that opportunity, take it and act like 

professionals. I don’t believe that there is any member in this particular House that would argue with 

that. Teachers, if they choose to go that route, as set out in our policy position, will have to perhaps put 

up with some things that they don’t particularly like. For example, on numerous organizations, there is 

representation of the particular governing body of that particular professional organization, 

representation by lay personnel and I am not sure how the STF would react to that kind of thing or the 

teachers themselves but that is the kind of thing they will have to look at. Again, certainly there are 

problems with doing this but they are not insurmountable. 

 

Where does this Act enhance the professional status of teachers? I say nowhere. I don’t believe for a 

minute that the STF wanted to see teachers become instructors and co-operators. They are teachers. I 

still hold a teaching certificate in the province of Saskatchewan and when I was back in my teaching 

days, I tell you that I did not want to be viewed as an instructor and co-operator. I wanted to be seen as a 

teacher. There is nothing wrong about that word. Now, Mr. Speaker, where the problem came up — 

there were other words in the old Act — I believe the words used were teachers teaching diligently and 

faithfully. I can sympathize with the minister on that regard because those words perhaps have become a 

bit outdated and were a bit of an anachronism in the Act. There was the grappling with the word quality 

and I can again sympathize with the minister and I can sympathize with those who were concerned in 

this regard because quality is very difficult to define. But I don’t believe that you can escape the fact 



 

April 6, 1978 

1125 

 

that teachers wish to be viewed in a professional way and there is nothing wrong indeed, that is what it 

is all about, with calling them teachers, they are there to teach. I think the teachers of Saskatchewan 

should be outraged at any attempt to strip them of their professional status. In this regard, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to bring out one particular fact. 

 

Members of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, I believe, and they will correct me, most 

assuredly, if I am wrong in my analysis of their position but I believe what they are saying is that by 

changing that wordage the teachers are not required to perform the functions of a teacher in the 

classroom. I reject that particular position, I cannot follow the reasoning in that position but I can say 

unequivocally that I believe that any move to take out the words “to teach” or words to that effect, is to 

strike a blow at the heart of the very thing that you are trying to accomplish and that is to create in the 

educational business a group of professional, highly skilled people. 

 

I want to direct the attention of the hon. members for a few moments to the whole concept of 

centralization of authority. Much of the present legislation gives the cabinet the right through its power 

to define any words or expressions used in the Act and to say what the words mean. There is more and 

more of this creeping into all of our legislation. I believe there is something similar to it, Mr. Speaker, if 

I am not mistaken in The Community Colleges Act. Now if this Act were a purely administrative Act 

administering the affairs involved in education that might be an entirely different matter but this is not, 

this is different. This particular Act has with it a number of rights and privileges. People get taxed under 

this particular legislation. People can be punished under this particular legislation. I don’t think that, 

when there is that kind of legislation, discretion as broad as the discretion allowed in this particular Act 

should be allowed to prevail. 

 

I listened carefully in this regard to the speech by the hon. member sitting to my right in his reply with 

the Liberal caucus and he came out strongly in favor of the decentralization of authority. I ask hon. 

members whether in light of the performance of Pierre Trudeau et al whether any person in 

Saskatchewan can possibly believe that that particular party stands for a decentralization of authority. 

That’s pure political balderdash and sophistry and no one believes it. No thinking person can believe 

that for a minute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer hon. members to section 372. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you worried about . . . 

 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — No, it doesn’t bother me a bit. This is just another example of what an hon. 

member referred to in some film being imported by SaskMedia I believe called, “Who Has Seen A 

Liberal” and the film in very short order will become a very current and popular film in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Section 372 . . . (interjection) . . . Now there’s a member that is an hon. member. Mr. Speaker, in section 

372 the Act says as follows: 

 

For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act according to their intent, the 

Lieutenant-Governor in Council (i.e. the Cabinet) may make regulations that are ancillary to and are 

not inconsistent with the Act, and every regulation made under this section has the force of law and, 

without restricting the generality of the foregoing, the Lieutenant-Governor in 



 

April 6, 1978 

1126 

 

Council may make regulations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, following that is subsection (r): 

 

governing the procedure to be followed with respect to (and it takes of course its initial meaning from 

the general clause at the beginning) any proceeding or thing authorized by this Act in any case where 

the provisions of this Act are, in the opinion of the minister, insufficient or inapplicable. 

 

What the combination of those two particular pieces of legislation mean is that this government can 

either repeal or rescind any legislation it wishes to under this Act without coming back before the 

House. Now, it might be political dynamite to do so but if you don’t need that power why put it in the 

Act? So if it’s inapplicable they can get rid of it or if it is sufficient the minister can, through his power 

of regulation, add to the particular legislation in question. 

 

I would like to quote briefly from an editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix which was placed there on 

January 17 of this year, which expressed some concern about the regulatory use of power by 

governments. It read in part as follows: 

 

Canada might be offered as an example of a country with a democratic form of government but is it a 

real democracy? A cynic might be tempted to refer to the Canadian form of government as an 

oligarchy. True, the people elect the members of parliament and the members of Cabinet are chosen 

from among those members. The ministers are responsible to parliament but just how much control 

over the ministers and over the civil servants behind them do the people have through the MPs or, in 

this case, MLAs they elect? 

 

It goes on to tell how ministers can evade the parliamentary system in numerous ways. The most 

effective power in cases of evasion is in the hands of civil servants on whose advice the ministers 

usually act and most of it is carried on through the use of regulatory powers. I believe that section 372(r) 

is a potentially very dangerous section. 

 

Section 372(s), Mr. Speaker, goes even further and I protest this kind of legislation. 

 

respecting any other matter considered necessary or advisable to carry out the purpose and intent of 

this Act. 

 

In other words we are into a case clearly, Mr. Speaker, where if in the opinion — he doesn’t have to be 

smart; it doesn’t have to be a good opinion; it doesn’t have to be an opinion based on any of the usual 

and rational methods of thinking that people use — but on the unfettered opinion of the minister. He can 

do as he jolly well pleases; he can rescind legislation and he can make regulations and make new 

legislation, if it so pleases him to do in his opinion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer the hon. members as well to another dangerous example of 

centralization that has been, if not promoted, at least continued in the current legislation and that 

particular piece is section 91(j). The member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) rightly points out that the member 

for Eastview will now be obliged to read this section. He won’t be able to ride on the notes he’s made on 

other people’s speeches and thereby thinly get to this particular section. Under section 91(j) the board 

has a fairly wide jurisdiction. There were two words that were used, formerly the word ‘determine’ was 

used and now I believe the word ‘authorize’ is used. They are almost 



 

April 6, 1978 

1127 

 

synonymous, but when you couple that with basic which means minimal and you couple section 92 

where the general power is removed . . . 

 

Mr. Penner: — Did you read section . . . then you will be able to understand section 92(j). 

 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — Well, the member for Saskatoon Eastview is always very verbose when he is in 

his chair, he has a great deal of trouble advancing any coherent logic when he is on his feet, but be that 

as it may we choose to carry on with proper decorum and don’t get involved in that kind of nonsense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the general power formerly given to school trustees and to parents through their elected 

officials has been removed. Section 92(v) has been taken out altogether, admittedly before it was taken 

out there was somewhat of a redundancy. But let’s see now with a combination of these sections, what 

parents can do to determine the education of their children in local communities through their local 

elected officials. In section 176(1) the Department of Education sets the basic program. In section 91(j) 

the board can approve that basic program. What else? Nothing else. This legislation has totally 

emasculated the possibility of local teachers and local parents through their local elected officials from 

doing what they wish to do and that is control the direction and have input in any way, shape or form 

that is reasonable to reasonable human beings with respect to the direction of education in their locality. 

 

Now the minister will say, what about section 92. Section 92, there should be an answer there because 

there are certain other powers that are given to the board. When you read section 92, Mr. Minister, I 

challenge you because, don’t forget that when an artificial body, such as this, is created in legislation the 

only powers which it derives, Mr. Speaker, are the powers granted to it through the legislation. And if 

you specifically set out the isolated and specific powers which an artificially legislative creative body 

has, then those are the only powers it has and I invite the minister, the hon. member sitting opposite, to 

tell me under section 92, what a school board can do in the event that it is sued? Can you tell me? Can 

you show me one place in that Act that says they can hire a lawyer and defend themselves? Now I don’t 

see that. Because if you specifically set out the powers and refer to them then you should surely in all 

good conscience give them some sort of a general power to do the kinds of things that flow logically 

from the organizational goals which they are intended to promote. 

 

Now, we have then a situation where in section 176(1) the department sets out the basic program. The 

school board is then allowed to adopt the basic program and then other certain specifics are given under 

another following section. The school board is given the right specifically to deal with the program of 

religious educational instruction. It’s specifically given the power to deal with driver training, etc., that 

kind of thing. But suppose, Mr. Minister, that local teachers and local parents decide and fortunately 

have the resources available to them, to put forward as a program which they feel has some merit, a 

program on the instruction of psychology. It is not there, it is not in your Act. If it is a basic program that 

comes out of, well, I’m not on your seeing eye plan yet, or I might have been able to see that, but I’m 

sure that the minister will draw to my attention later on. If the minister, and we will see later on as this 

Act is being used, now it would have been nice, of course, if you had written the legislation in such a 

way that it was not immediately open to that kind of multiplicity of interpretations and duplicity. But if 

the hon. members means by basic skills a very broad range of basic skills not considering just the three 

things that are normally thought of as basic skills. But that is the way it looks right now. Now, we will 

have to see, of course, what in practice the minister chooses to do with this particular piece of 

legislation. This particular educational legislation, ah, well, the hon. member says this is a good speech 

for them . . . I’m not 



 

April 6, 1978 

1128 

 

particularly interested in this House in pleasing any of the hon. members opposite, we are interested in 

promoting our policy. This Act says absolutely nothing about what boards can do by way of local 

programs, not boards, not superintendents, and not the most important people, the parents and teachers 

in local areas. 

 

Now, I’d like to refer to one other section then. This is just another case of the kind of promoting of 

centralized planning and centralized control that this government has now become so famous for. In 

section 10(1) the minister made part (a): 

 

Appointment one or more persons to inquire into the report upon any appeal, complaint, difference of 

opinion, etc. . . . 

 

And then it goes on after subsection (ii) to say: 

 

And upon receipt of a report made pursuant to this clause the minister may make such an order or 

decision as to him seems proper and that order or decision shall be final and binding on all of the 

parties. 

 

Now that particular section, while it may not vary from powers already granted to the minister, does one 

thing. It makes the minister God in relation to the whole field of education. There is no appeal. You have 

to jump over the courts; you have to go before the minister to find out what, in his opinion, he feels 

should be done. 

 

Now, this Act can place responsibilities upon citizens in Saskatchewan. This Act can remove rights from 

the citizens of Saskatchewan and I don’t and can’t support legislation which uses those kinds of powers 

and vests them in the opinion of one human being, who now has more power than a Court of Queen’s 

Bench in the province of Saskatchewan whose decisions are subject to review. 

 

Section 223, and incidentally with respect to section 223 the only comparable section that I know if is in 

The Trade Union Act with respect to the Labour Relations Board (and incidentally in that regard there is 

some justification for that). There is no justification here. There should be an enforcement mechanism. 

The teachers of Saskatchewan are absolutely right — you can’t have an award and then not have some 

way of enforcing it so there must be some enforcement mechanism. But again, do you jump over the 

courts in order to put that in place? I don’t think you do. The powers of this board don’t forget, are very 

broad. I wonder what the teachers’ reaction will be when some board — and boards and tribunals . . . the 

case histories and the legal books are full of these kinds of instances, where some board goes off half 

cocked and orders an award of $500,000 against the local teacher for wrongfully breaching his contract. 

I wonder how the teachers of Saskatchewan feel about that kind of an award and the fact that it is not 

appealable because in the opinion of the minister, that is the final place to be and in the opinion of the 

board which is not open to review by the courts, that is where the matter stops. There is lots of potential 

abuse on both sides. That is why I say that this is not a particularly happy section. 

 

While conceding that the teachers have no other choice if they wish to have a forum in which to grieve 

(and this forum could have some impact and some teeth in it). 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal more to say about this Act. Let me sum it up in this way. What 

happened to all of that input from the teachers in the province of Saskatchewan? What happened to all of 

that input from the parents in Saskatchewan? Where is the improvement in professional status for the 

teachers of Saskatchewan? Nowhere, that’s 



 

April 6, 1978 

1129 

 

where it is. And where are the entrenched rights of local parents to ensure the quality of education for 

their children? I say nowhere — not in this legislation. Where is the increased power of the minister? 

Everywhere — everywhere. Members opposite will say that many of the items I have referred to already 

are in the present legislation, the legislation that existed prior to the coming about of Bill 22. However 

for this government to spend the kind of money it did, the time and the energy it did in an totally 

unacceptable to the Progressive Conservative party; it is totally unacceptable to teachers and parents in 

Saskatchewan, and as you may have gathered, Mr. Speaker, I will find it impossible to support the Bill 

in its present form. Thank you. 

 

Miss Clifford: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman that 

Bill No. 15, An Act to amend the Northern Administration Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. G.N. Wipf (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Minister, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 

was created to improve the lot for northern Saskatchewan, a department dedicated to northern 

developments by and for northern people, as stated in the budget speech by the Minister of Finance. It is 

to help residents, businessmen, local trappers, fishermen, outfitters, wood-handling operators, and the 

list goes on. But what has been happening? Local residents get grants to help themselves and then 

because of many reasons, they can’t repay or don’t repay, and these loans have been written off. 

 

When I look at some of the reasons stated in a document that the minister tabled last year in Estimates, it 

was most obvious that your department was at fault in lending money to some of these in the first place, 

giving these recipients a false sense of security. I would suggest, at this point, that there were many 

loans made, probably for political reasons only and that the DNS did nothing to educate those in default 

of payment about the business of loans and the need for repayment to protect their credit ratings. It has 

become a very clear policy of the DNS to make everybody dependent upon the government while trying 

to show the other side that of a pretense of helping people to help themselves. 

 

Mr. Minister, the same problems arise when you deal with the local businessmen. You brought in 

legislation to control them. We know that the trappers in the North are hard pressed under the 

regulations now, to make a living. As for the fishermen, the deadly combination of the Saskatchewan 

government and the federal government, through the Fresh Water Fish Marketing Corporation, has all 

but broke the fishermen in Saskatchewan and has caused widespread problems in the north, in this 

industry. 

 

The story goes on to include the local outfitters and other enterprising individuals who want to get ahead 

in the northern administration district. That is the story of more legislation, more regulations, or the 

horror story of the change of rules in the middle of the game, or the changing of the rules so that the 

government can win the game. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1130 

 

 

Mr. Minister, the change in Bill 15 to amend The Northern Administration Act, of course, is needed. 

 

Firstly, in section 16 the minister is now forced to change to the metric system. He is forced to change 

because his government brought in the metric system behind the closed doors. In fact, I believe the 

Minister of Agriculture did not even know or realize that the Order in Council was in place until several 

weeks after, about the metric system in Saskatchewan. So the selection on metric conversion is forced 

up the northern administration district because of your own government secrecy and, of course, the 

federal government’s consistent policy of going against the will of the people. 

 

As I stated the last time I spoke of my concern with section 21, the amendment, where the new Act can 

remove the northern municipal council from the administration role, for the LCAs and LICs. And 

through your financial juggling of funds, I believe that you will be attempting to put the LCAs, at this 

time, all on their own — and I repeat, just attempting — and at the same time, I believe that you will be 

fulfilling what I believe is your main objective and that is getting rid of the northern municipal council a 

little prematurely. 

 

The prime responsibility of this government, I believe, is that the minister should be certain that each 

LCA has people available to administer these new funds and should be able to inform this Assembly that 

all the training that may be required is done prior to these changes being enacted. 

 

I asked a question and that is, can the minister assure this Assembly that this is the case at this time? I 

have no doubt that the LCAs in many areas are most capable of handling these new administration and 

budgeting duties that will be brought to them by this Act. However, Mr. Minister, I fear for those who 

are not yet equipped to handle these duties and may choose not to get help from the northern municipal 

council, may not contract to them. I fear for them because then the DNS will have achieved what this 

government wants to achieve and the northern administration district will fall under the thumb of the 

provincial government and, once again, the DNS will be the master of all in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then northern municipal council has asked for a delay in the enactment of this Bill, which 

the minister is aware of, I am sure. But even though you, Mr. Minister, have admitted that this is only 

patchwork amendment at this time, it would seem to be commonsense to do some listening to the duly 

elected representatives of the northern people. And in light of the fact that you said that this was a 

patchwork amendment at this time, I would suggest that there should be more consultation and more 

meetings with the people in the North. If the department, I believe, wasn’t so interested in getting even 

with the one group, the northern municipal council, there would probably not have been an amendment 

to this Act in this session. Instead, it would have been brought in with the new Northern Administration 

Act next year that you announced was to be brought in. It would have been brought in after consultation 

and all preparation was done and the citizens in the north half of our province would then be totally 

prepared for the new responsibilities that will come with the amendment to this Act that is coming in. 

 

I do hope that the NMC, the native women’s groups, the Metis societies, the LACS, the LCAs, the 

trappers associations and all these groups will have a chance to have some input into some of the 

consultations that you are having when we bring in a piece of 



 

April 6, 1978 

1131 

 

legislation that affects each one’s life in the North. However, I believe, because of your government’s 

decision, as I said to punish the one group, the NMC, I should not expect you to follow up on the local 

peoples’ wishes. 

 

I would like to read to you a part from a debate from Mr. Nystrom, on March 25, 1977, his debate when 

the federal government introduced the metric system. This is the NDP stand when they are in opposition, 

as much different when they are in power, Mr. Nystrom says, and I quote, (he is talking about metric). 

“Whenever something like this comes up in the future, a Bill that affects ordinary people in such a 

genuine way in their every day lives, we as parliamentarians, should make sure that we are out there 

with the ordinary people, letting them offer us their point of view. There is a genuine feeling by farmers 

that they were not consulted — that they were not consulted thoroughly enough by some of the farm 

organizations, that they were not consulted thoroughly enough by parliament, that they were not 

consulted thoroughly enough by the government or by the minister involved. The minister may argue 

that point,” he said. “Perhaps there is some merit in our doing it, but there is the feeling of the farmers to 

whom I have spoken. I have spoken enough to them to reflect their general opinion.” Mr. Nystrom went 

on to say, and I quote, “that the feeling in the farm communities is probably summarized by SUMA and 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, when they appear before the committee. Those two 

organizations, like the wheat pools and so on, are very much in touch and very much plugged in to the 

reality of life on the prairies. If there were more consultation with ordinary people when we bring in 

something that affects them in a general way, we would have less cynicism of ordinary people, towards 

governments, towards parliament, and towards politicians in general. Hopefully we can learn from this.” 

He says, “The next time the government brings in a Bill that affects people in such a genuine way, I 

hope we can make sure that there is more consultation.” I think that can be used, Mr. Minister, in any of 

the legislation we are bringing into Saskatchewan or into the North — that we should have as much 

consultation going on, but I believe the people should be consulted long in advance. I also realize at this 

point that the invitation had gone out to the northern municipal council some time ago to get involved in 

this, and they were not involved to the degree they should have been, I believe. But have more 

consultation with the local people — be they farmers or Northerners. 

 

I believe, Mr. Minister, that because of your lack of compassion for the people in the North, I also 

expect that the suggestion to make sure the LAC have people available who have the type of training to 

budget and to do long term planning that is going to be necessary to handle this type of administration, 

may not be listened to. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I said a few weeks ago, the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is pleased 

to see that the NDP is starting to follow up on some of our suggested policy for Saskatchewan. 

However, as I have also stated, it is one thing to try and adopt one of our policies, but because our 

policies are so foreign to the NDP philosophy of total control, this amendment is only another example 

of your government’s plan to try and fool the people into believing that you are their servant — when in 

reality, they have become the servants of the government again, and nothing has changed. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would encourage you to have a look into the ramifications of this Act; have consultations 

with the NMC, the LACs, the LCAs and the other groups in the north, and listen to their 

recommendations and try and work in harmony with the people in the North. I would also recommend 

an independent board be set up to study the 



 

April 6, 1978 

1132 

 

 

ramifications of this proposal, and to evaluate the long term implications, when this government goes 

through with this Bill. If you have decided, after listening to the NMC, to delay this Bill for a period of 

time until the new Bill comes in, we can use this interim period to ensure that each group in the North is 

ready to receive its responsibilities, and to be completely ready for the transfer of this responsibility to 

them. 

 

I believe this Bill is a step in the right direction. As long as you can assure this Assembly that it is not 

too sudden, because, as you have stated, the problem in the DNS are that you have moved too fast in the 

past, that you have never laid the proper foundations for long-range planning. Mr. Minister, we hope you 

have taken your own advice and are assured that this is not just another ‘leap forward’ only to miss the 

target, and end up by destroying the whole concept of local autonomy and local control in northern 

Saskatchewan, but most important of all, the destroying of the security and initiative and respect of those 

residents of Saskatchewan, who are now just starting to move forward towards local municipal 

government and local control of their affairs. If the DNS is sincere in giving local control to the local 

people, then I would expect that before you jump, listen to what the local people have to say, and help 

them to bring about changes at their pace. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have stated that this is a patch work amendment, you have said that the DNS have 

moved too fast in many areas without any long-range plans and not laying the proper foundations. You 

said that there were going to be greater changes and greater social upheavals in the North over the next 

ten years than there has ever been in the area’s history and that unprecedented change would come to 

northern Saskatchewan within a decade because of the enormity of the change and the speed with which 

it would come. You said there would not be time for long debate, general analysis or consensus and you 

stated that decisions would have to be made regardless of whether or not they meet widespread 

acceptance. 

 

Mr. Minister, I do hope that because of the ramifications of this Bill and this amendment, you will learn, 

as I stated before, from your own mistakes and listen to some of your own advice and consult with the 

residents of northern Saskatchewan before you introduce any legislation that is going to affect the 

ordinary citizen in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I suggest at this point, Mr. Minister, that if you are certain that there will be fewer problems by 

implementing this amendment and if you can assure this Assembly that all the equipment and training 

necessary for the transfer of the powers from the northern municipal council to the local LACs and 

LCAs will be available, then you are making a step in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Minister, I hope that you will consider some of the recommendations and suggestions that I have 

just laid out before you because, like yourself and many others in this Assembly, I am very concerned 

about the social development in the northern administration district. 

 

I believe that if your government will consult and work with the people of northern Saskatchewan before 

bringing in any legislation of this type, we can be assured that any other development that takes place in 

the North will go ahead with the blessings of the Northerners and, without doubt, the friction that has 

been seen towards many of the projects this government has brought into the North in the last four or 

five years would 



 

April 6, 1978 

1133 

 

diminish. 
 

Mr. Minister, in closing I just want, once again, to urge you to make sure that your department has done 

everything possible to assure full co-operation and consultation with the Northerners and that you are 

sure the amendment of this Act, for good reason, must be brought in at this time, and the northern people 

will have a fair input and fair consultation and adhere to their views while the consultation is going on 

up there. 
 

Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I have just a few comments. I have had the 

opportunity to meet with some of the people involved in local government in northern Saskatchewan 

and, to say the least, they are not particularly pleased with the approach that particularly the Minister for 

the Department of Northern Saskatchewan has taken with respect to funding of local governments in 

northern Saskatchewan — the menace of northern Saskatchewan, I suppose would be a more 

appropriate title than the minister. It is safe to say that there are some very legitimate concerns being 

expressed by the northern municipal council, that does not necessarily agree with the approach taken by 

the government in principle but rather is extremely disturbed about the method by which DNS 

(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) is going about altering the payment to local governments in 

northern Saskatchewan. 
 

I would like a chance to develop my arguments a little more fully before I place them before the 

Minister of Northern Saskatchewan because I know that at the best of times he has considerable 

difficulty understanding anyone on this side of the House. I would like to be sure that my comments are 

placed as clearly and simply as possible before him so that he might better understand some of the 

concerns the people of northern Saskatchewan have. At this time, I would like to beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — Department of Health — Vote 32 
 

Item 17 agreed. 
 

Item 18 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — Just one little question. There is a tremendous increase in other expenses here, 

$700,000. Can the minister indicate what that jump is? And it’s not for personal services or other 

expenses. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The other expense increases can be broken down. I’ll give you a breakdown — 

for medical services $83,000. This is as a result of the new psych unit that has been opened up at the 

Swift Current Hospital just about two weeks ago. The big item is hospitalization $342,000 because of 

the new arrangements that are being worked out with the federal government with regard to order in 

council psych patients and the institution that they are building in Saskatoon. There is $24,000 for an 

update of the present system. The other big item is miscellaneous grants $110,000 for such things as 

Regina Society for Autistic Children, development of group homes and so on. 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — One more question. I don’t want to prolong this vote unless anybody else . . . I 

want to ask you just exactly what input the Saskatchewan psychiatric branch of the Department of 

Health have in relation to the new psychiatric 



 

April 6, 1978 

1134 

 

correctional institution now being built in the city of Saskatoon? Will provincial correctional centres be 

able to refer patients to that particular psychiatric unit? Will it be completely under the denomination of 

the federal department of corrections? Will we as a provincial government have any input into what 

happens there, any responsibility in that regard and most important, can we refer patients there? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The authority for the decisions is vested in the medical director who is jointly 

appointed by the university and by the federal government. The province has access to certain bed 

allocations; 10 beds to the Department of Health for the order in council kind of patients. I think you 

know what I mean by that, and the Department of Social Services for its correctional people 22 beds. So 

on a contractual basis, there is a contractual arrangement with the federal people and the province. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — This is a question of personal interest, Mr. Minister, under this particular item. 

 

I have had some experience with the local detachment in the way of court orders and so on, the person 

being taken to the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. My question deals with this as a matter of 

personal interest. It seems that when after receiving a court order, taking an individual there, the 

presiding doctor has somehow the right to dismiss the person at any time at his discretion. So often it is 

within a few hours or within a day or two then the procedure is taken all over again with the subsequent 

arrest and so on. The question which I am asking you is, can you tell me the amount of power or the 

amount of discretion that the presiding doctor can have in the way of a patient after they have through 

the court order been admitted to the hospital? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — There are two cases. I’ll just briefly mention both of them — two types of 

situation. One, in the case of an individual facing a criminal charge that is referred for assessment by the 

court. When the assessment is made and it is made as expeditiously as possible, he is referred back to 

the court so there is no authority for discharge in that kind of a case. The other category is that if there is 

an individual in the community who is referred to because of some difficulties, psychiatric difficulty, to 

the unit, the assessment will be made and he will not be discharged until he has been declared to be 

medically ready for dismissal. You are right, in that case the medical director can and does make that 

kind of a decision at the present time. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Thank you, it’s the latter part that I was interested in. I understand the first part. It 

seemed to me that there is some difficulty mainly with the police in this area. Do you have any statistics 

at all to show you the repetition, the recurrences. You know, I personally was involved in a couple of 

cases where we provided everything and the admittance and in two days he was back on the street to the 

same thing again and that was the problem which has been expressed to me by members of the RCMP, 

by the attachment corporals and sergeants, without identifying them; they over and over again have 

expressed that as a distinct problem that they have. That’s why I asked the question, Mr. Minister. 

 

Item 18 agreed. 

 

Items 19 to 22 agreed. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1135 

 

Item 23 
 

Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Chairman, a question to the minister here. We note that — could you give me an 

explanation why the number of posts, is this because it is an independent body to itself? There are no 

positions listed under this item. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I guess you are right in a sense. It’s because this is a grant to an organization 

rather than an appropriation to a department. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Well, I have a few questions here, please. You don’t list the number of posts because 

you are giving a grant to a group, a commission. Do I understand you by not listing that then, that you 

do not control the number of members in that particular commission or do you make the appointments 

and if so, how many are there in the commission at the present time? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — They have an establishment like any other department. They are controlled in that 

there is a budget allocation and when the Alcoholism Commission comes before the Treasury Board 

through the Department of Health, they request funds for positions and they request funds for 

programming and so on. And that is all taken into consideration. So, to that extent they are indeed they 

are controlled, they fall under the Public Service Commission regulations and so on. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Can you tell me how many are involved please? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well 74 for 1977-1978. 1978-1979 the same thing. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Mr. Minister, just a few questions on this, once I find them. Item 23, the education 

division. Can you tell me what the budget was for 1975-1976. I just don’t have it. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — You asked for 1975-1976? We’ll be able to work it out. We don’t have it that far 

back handy but if you want it, I can get it over to you, O.K. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — If it is the intention of the Alcoholism Commission to cut back on the work in the 

education department or division of the Alcoholism Commission, as the figures that are shown on page 

14 of your annual report, shows that the work has been cut roughly in half in many of the areas. In the 

programs the audiences that attended, the pamphlets distributed and that they, a lot of it has been a cut 

back and I was just wondering if this is the plan you are going to cut back in the education field? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It is not the intention by the Alcoholism Commission to cut back. In fact since the 

time the member talks about there has been a position added and it is the intention of the Alcoholism 

Commission to indeed expand that aspect of its programming. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Can you tell me what the break-down is for the education division in this budget? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — For the education division for this fiscal year, that we are considering, it is 

$214,190, budgeted, appropriated. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — O.K., Mr. Minister. In the rehabilitation division, and looking at the breakdown from the 

last year’s chart, Saskatoon area received $604,000. Regina area 



 

April 6, 1978 

1136 

 

received $351,000 and yet in your statistics for the year 1976-1977, the Saskatoon area appears to have 

done about better than double the amount of work. Is there any plan to get the payments to the 

Saskatoon area or Regina area on the percentage of work that they do or how do you figure out the 

budget allocated to Saskatoon and Regina when Saskatoon is doing about twice the work that Regina is 

doing? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think that kind of an analysis doesn’t necessarily portray what indeed is 

happening. Just because the amount of work done doubles doesn’t mean the amount of money needs to 

double because you get the economies of scale. There are certain aspects of the program where even 

though there is some additionally, it doesn’t necessitate the same amount in percentage terms of 

additional money, so you shouldn’t interpret that to mean that there is a slowing down to any extent. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Can you tell me how much money (and it might be in here — I may have missed it) the 

MAC centres got in Saskatchewan last year? What was the allocation from the total budget for the 

Alcoholism Commission and what is the allocation for this year? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The 1978-79 appropriated; the ‘76-‘77 and ‘78-‘79 if you have it. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — O.K. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — ‘77-78 — $202,900; ‘78-79 — $226,450. There is an increase there of $23,005. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — O.K. Have you got an idea of how many people, patients as they call them, your statistics 

here, went through the MAC centres last year? And where were these MAC centres located? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The centres are in Regina, Saskatoon and Prince Albert. The last year that we 

have up-to-date statistics on for ‘76-‘77 the admissions in Regina were 327; admissions in Saskatoon — 

308; admissions in Prince Albert — 296. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Have you got the breakdown of the allocation of moneys to the three areas? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — For the current year, Regina — $172,640; Prince Albert — $103,590; Saskatoon 

— $103,990. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Could you give me Regina again, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — $172,640. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Mr. Minister, on the grants chart here (your expenditure chart) you had $457,277 for 

grants. What were the grants given to, what area did they go into? Who got them, what organizations? 

 

If there are too many to read out, Mr. Minister, maybe you could send me a copy of the breakdown. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let’s do that because they are all in the annual report by the way, if you look on 

page 21, you will find it. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1137 

 

Item 23 agreed. 

 

Item 24 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I want to address a subject to the minister in relation to the medical 

care insurance in relation to the computer. 

 

I have in here a rather interesting editorial or news release from the Toronto Globe and Mail as of March 

31, 1978 “Ontario Pays Expert to Study Possible Computer Sabotage”. Now that may sound very 

intriguing and all sorts of devious implications for the province of Saskatchewan or for Ontario, but it 

goes on to talk about the fact that computers in the province of Ontario were available at night and 

technicians went and started to play around with them and ended up with all the names of all the people 

in Ontario who contracted syphilis and venereal diseases; a lot of names and personal information about 

people suffering from syphilis. The discovery that confidential medical tapes were not safe from the 

government’s own computer programmers promoted the Ontario health minister to call in the provincial 

police and computer security experts. 

 

I do not think that I have to tell the minister that we are living in the age of computers. All of a sudden 

everybody’s — my personal life, your personal life, the personal life of pretty well everyone in the 

province of Saskatchewan — much of it is now contained in a computer in the Government of 

Saskatchewan. How much of that information is available to people across this province and to the 

members of the government. I am not sure. I do know that there was a tremendous kerfuffle raised 

across Canada when the RCMP were given specific medical information about security risks in the 

Dominion of Canada — a real kerfuffle, in fact, two national inquiries. We have also, as you know, in 

the federal government, recently passed an Act. The Act, of course, is called The Protection of Personal 

Information. Because of the growth and the expansion of computer information, of computer banks 

contained in various government departments, contained by the Government of Saskatchewan as well as 

the national government, where all of a sudden various government departments now contain banks of 

information about individual Canadians across the country, all of a sudden the federal government, in its 

wisdom, thought it was about time to provide some protection for the citizens of Canada whereby they 

had to publish, on a periodic basis, for example, a list of the information banks contained by computer 

services in the federal government. They also had a law which stated who had access to this particular 

information; it also gave the past sections of the Act which said that before certain aspects of this 

information could be used and provided to other government officials, they had to have the consent of 

the individual, and I could go on and on. All I know is that, today, Canadians and citizens of 

Saskatchewan have every aspect of their life bared to the computer and to those members who are 

programming computers. 

 

I wonder if, in the province of Saskatchewan — I would like to ask the minister two or three questions. I 

would like to ask who has access to the information of the Medical Care Commission and other 

Department of Health information? I am thinking about venereal diseases; I am thinking about the 

Alcoholism Commission, individuals who have gone through the program; people who have gone to the 

psychiatric wing with the Department of Health in the province of Saskatchewan; and people in various 

aspects related to health and other aspects in the province of Saskatchewan. Can the minister indicate to 

me, first of all, who has access to that information? For example, one day the Premier stood in the House 

and said that he checks the records of the Medical Care Commission monthly to find out who is coming 

and who is going in 



 

April 6, 1978 

1138 

 

 

Saskatchewan. Now, I am not suggesting that he went into depth but it did appear that certain statistics 

were made available, perhaps only on a general basis. I would like to ask the minister, who has access to 

medical information in the computer system that the Department of Health uses at all information banks 

within the Government of Saskatchewan. Can the minister tell me that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I must say that I know the member will recall when he was in the Treasury 

Benches and probably will agree with me from his perspective at that time, but we really although we 

share the concern that you mentioned, the growth or computer crime if you want to call it that, it’s here 

and I think we can all show examples across the continent and maybe even beyond that where there have 

been leaks and where there has been tampering and there has been access to information that there 

should not have been. Nevertheless the procedures in this province has been over the years and continue 

to be, extremely strict. My officials tell me that over the history of the records that have been kept they 

can’t recall of an incident where there has been a leak of any kind. I will give you an example in 

response to a question on who has access to, by using the Medical Care Insurance Commission. The 

only people who have access to the records of the Medical Care Insurance Commission are the officers 

of the commission and I think the commissioners. They have access to them. The only other person who 

can have access is an individual who may request, in writing, information that pertains to him 

personally. Beyond that there is no other access to those records. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I appreciate what the minister is telling me and I think I just want to have an open 

and frank discussion for a moment. Can you tell me . . . now he says that the only ones are the Medical 

Care Commission and the commissioners themselves. For example, Mr. Featherstone in the province of 

Ontario, who is the general manager of the health insurance for Ontario, said there is no way to prevent 

a disgruntled employee from leaking or misusing confidential information. He goes on to say that 

nobody will ever know this until you find a $150 a week employee driving a Rolls Royce and of course 

going on talking about computer crime and sabotage. 

 

Can the minister tell me, does the Minister of Health, or does the Premier of Saskatchewan have access 

to the medical records of the Medical Care Commission in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t, as the Minister of Health, the Premier doesn’t as the Premier. Indeed, I 

am told the commissioners can’t ask for a specific profile and so, therefore, that does not take place. I 

can ask for total numbers, the total registrations, have they changed? That’s probably what the member 

is referring to when he talks about an indication the Premier made. That we can, but on individual 

profiles — no. That’s the simple answer. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — You mean to say, no one. No one in the province? For example, if the RCMP came 

to the Medical Care Commission, the commissioners and asked for a profile on somebody that they 

considered to be a dangerous psychiatric patient, there is no one in the commission that has the authority 

to draw a personal file? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The only time the RCMP could have access is, if they had a court order and if it 

was for the purposes of a judicial procedure. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Can you tell me, has the Attorney General access to a personal file? 



 

April 6, 1978 

1139 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — No. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Same thing. O.K., we have established that only the commissioners have access 

and they can’t even draw a personal file? That is correct if I have that right. Now can the minister tell me 

. . . apparently what has happened in other jurisdictions particularly in Ontario and in the federal 

jurisdiction programs, people who work on computers have been able in time, in slack periods, to fiddle 

around with the computer and so forth and draw information that is confidential information, 

particularly confidential medical information. Can the minister indicate to me what security precautions 

are taken by the province of Saskatchewan in relation to the computer system and the computer records? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I know that there is a procedure that’s used — I can’t explain it to you and neither 

can my officials because it is the Systems Centre that has the procedures, which we contract with the 

Systems Centre department. But my people tell me that there are procedures, but if we were to try to 

explain them to you precisely we couldn’t do it. It is not under our purview. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — What the minister is trying to tell me that there are some extraordinary, special 

precautions for the computer system or the Computer Centre System that are different that, for example, 

the Department of Vital Statistics and the Department of Health, or the general administration building. 

There are some specific, extraordinary measures taken to protect the computer’s information? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t know whether precisely, the words you use apply, but there are special 

procedures, yes. To the best of our knowledge anyway, and I think that is a pretty safe assessment 

because of no incident happening. I think it is an indication of some proof that the procedures are really 

pretty effective. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Now, I want to warn the minister it is only coming to attention now, this is only 

becoming a matter of general concern and what happened in the past, we are not sure of. Can the 

minister tell me under what section of the Act that the minister is denied access to a medical file and that 

the RCMP are required to have a court order? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Section 34. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Section 34? Is my memory correct in this? Was there not a time when certain 

records were found in the waste paper basket from the computer? I am ask that. You do not have any 

recollection? Can you tell me this. Is there any security check or programmers who use the computer for 

the Medical Services Commission or programmers or any government programmers within the 

government? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The management in Sask Comp of course, will determine whether the person is 

competent among other things. The other point is that all government employees do take a certain oath 

of office and in this case there is no exception. So to that extent, those sort of preliminary or initial 

precautions are taken. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I’m not going to prolong this. I want just a couple other general things. There is no 

way in which the citizens of Saskatchewan are informed as to what information is stored by the 

Government of Saskatchewan in its computer system about themselves, is there? In other words, is there 

any list of information banks that is 



 

April 6, 1978 

1140 

 

available to Cy MacDonald to find out whether you, the Department of Health, or you the Government 

of Saskatchewan has information about me, Cy MacDonald? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — None at all. As a matter of fact, you know, you will recall, I remember I recall 

when I was first elected to this House, there was some debate over confidentiality of mailing lists and 

this sort of thing. That is considerably tight as well. What there is for senior citizens or whichever 

category. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — All right. May I ask the minister, the Government of Saskatchewan has spent 

something like $7 million on studies and surveys and everything about how to wash your teeth, how to 

swim in the pool, etc., etc. What I recommend to the minister that the government consider very 

carefully a study by some independent agency, with top security, to provide information about all the 

information banks that the Government of Saskatchewan has about its own citizens, number one. 

Number two, that it consider carefully the introduction of legislation in Saskatchewan for the protection 

of information about individuals in the province of Saskatchewan and who has access to that 

information. Number three, that it not only provide protection for the individual but also makes 

information about an individual available to himself so that he has a knowledge. Now, for example, this 

is becoming an accepted thing in the world. I think Saskatchewan should get into it as soon and as early 

as possible. You may have information about me that may be erroneous. It may have a very serious 

implication about what happens to me at some other time in the future whether it be in relation to job or 

health or whatever it may be. I should know, have the right to know what information you have about 

me. I should also have the right to correct any errors in that information. So I would like to suggest to 

the Minister of Health, and I do not know if this is the proper place to do it, and maybe we should be 

doing it under the computer system. But certainly, the Department of Health has the most sensitive 

information about citizens of Saskatchewan and people of Saskatchewan. This is now becoming a 

general concern of people who are interested in human rights, the privacy and the protection of 

information available. There is no one in the Dominion of Canada like the governments that have 

information about its citizens the way governments do in the new computer age. I would like to 

recommend that the government consider carefully a study to set up a complete knowledge or list of all 

information banks contained by the government and make them available to the public. Number two, 

introduction of legislation for the protection of information about individuals and, number three, 

providing consent for information to be given about any individual before it is dispersed and who it can 

be dispersed through. And I think if we do that and start now before we get into problems because every 

day we are now getting on SGIO, went on to the computer, what, a year ago. All of a sudden, there are 

driving records there. And mine is not so good. All of a sudden, we have, VD is becoming more of a 

problem in Saskatchewan. That is on the record. There are all kinds of things that are now being put on 

the computer about people and citizens of Saskatchewan that all of a sudden they don’t even know 

about. I want to urge the minister to take this suggestion and this recommendation seriously and take it 

back to the Treasury Benches because I think human rights will demand that this will be done in the 

very near future. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, the member will get no argument from myself or I think from most 

members of this House about the importance of the confidentiality of records. Also, we are not going to 

avoid computerization. It is here; it is a technology that makes things possible that have not been 

possible and when you get growing volumes it is a pretty important piece of technology. 

 

I, personally, want to assure the member that I have had, and continue to have, a 



 

April 6, 1978 

1141 

 

particular interest in this question and certainly as one individual, will continue to look at what further 

steps might be taken. So I can certainly take what the member suggests under consideration. I also just 

want to conclude, because I don’t want to spend a great deal of time talking about the item unless there 

is a specific question. Again, what I said earlier, any information that an individual may want, for 

example, from MCIC, he just has to request it and it will be provided. That is available now and always 

has been as far as I know. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I am going to conclude by merely saying, Mr. Minister, that citizens of 

Saskatchewan don’t know what information you have got about us. That’s the problem. Therefore, that’s 

why it is important that the Government of Saskatchewan, if they are going to compile information on a 

computer about its citizens, you should let the citizens know what that information is. 

 

Item 24 agreed. 

 

Item 25 
 

Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Chairman, can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how much 

money was spent on the would-be freeloaders out of Alberta from the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 

Plan last year? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We don’t know, not yet. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, is there any portion of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

estimates for this year earmarked for the Alberta, so-called Alberta freeloaders in Saskatchewan this 

year? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — No. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, are there in fact any Alberta freeloaders in Saskatchewan last year or 

this year? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t necessarily agree with the member’s terminology. He can 

use what he likes. There are, in fact, cases that have been discovered through inquiries by SHSP of 

Alberta residents who have taken out Saskatchewan hospitalization cards and, therefore, one can only 

assume, have taken advantage of a far superior medicare program in the province of Saskatchewan over 

that which is provided in the province of Alberta and there is no doubt about it. There are those people, 

they have been discovered. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, would you agree with Mr. Clem Reid, who is quoted as having said, 

“A pretty accurate listing of all beneficiaries by field representatives ensure all applicants live in 

Saskatchewan and this is part of the registration process.” If those words are to be true, it would be 

virtually impossible for us to have Alberta freeloaders on our Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. 

Those aren’t my words, they are in the headlines. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m not going to agree to a statement that the member reads out of a press 

clipping. I’m going to say, and Mr. Reid would substantiate that, that he indeed did say that there is 

some abuse of the system. The evidence is there and it cannot be denied. As a matter of fact there are 52 

cases where benefits have been terminated; that speaks for itself. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1142 

 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — You say there are 25 cases where benefits have 

been terminated, 52 cases where benefits have been terminated. Were any benefits granted to those 52 

cases before you ascertained that they were not eligible for hospitalization? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s the part of it that is now under investigation and I can’t give you the 

answer to that at this time. That’s the follow-up that’s taking place as a result of the identification of 

these cards in the hands of people who weren’t Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Malone: — How much money is involved? Have you made any investigation on that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — No. 

 

Mr. Malone: — All right. What’s your position in connection with the people getting benefits that 

aren’t eligible for them? Will you be seeking to attempt to regain from them whatever money was spent 

for their health care? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — First of all, the fact that they had a card does not necessarily mean they got 

benefits. Like I said, also, we are pursuing that question now. If it is found that that is the case we then at 

the same time be exploring what options are there and what procedures we might want to follow up 

with. Whether there is some procedure where there may have to be a fine, whether there is some 

procedure where there may have to be a claim on any expenditures that may have been made on behalf 

of the individual while he was not eligible, that will have to be considered. But we are not at that stage at 

the present time and, therefore, I can’t give you a specific answer. 

 

Mr. Malone: — How are you pursuing this investigation? Are you interviewing doctors, are you 

interviewing the people who are involved? Are you checking the MCIC records, what are you doing? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — As far as SHSP is concerned and that’s the main area, there will be a check of the 

records of discharges from hospitals. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Are the records of SHSP treated with the same confidentiality as the records of MCIC 

and if so, how do you get access to those records? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan has available to them the records of 

intake and discharges from hospitals. They provide that. 

 

Mr. Malone: — In fact to MCIC as well. Are you checking for benefits that were bestowed to doctors, 

that is doctors being paid out of MCIC? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The health number which we all have can provide the services that have been 

provided either through SHSP or MCIC. 

 

Mr. Malone: — You told us a moment ago when we were questioning you about the accessibility to 

those records, that nobody could get their hands on them except members of the commission. Now are 

the members of the commission using their powers to get their hands on those records, and if they are, 

surely investigation will take about one minute — you just draw the records? 



 

April 6, 1978 

1143 

 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me explain. If it is determined that for a certain number there ought not to 

have been services rendered for obvious reasons, that number would be referred to SHSP or MCIC and 

they would then determine whether for that number there were any services rendered. 

 

Mr. Malone: — When did this first come to your attention that there were these abuses taking place? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The concerns that came to me were first brought to my attention in the fall, 

October or November. Then I think it was in January when these inquiries began to take place, resulting 

in what we are discussing now. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Just a second. You say this came to your attention last fall. Now that’s some months 

ago. Then you started doing something in January. Is this the first time that to your department’s 

knowledge that there were abuses of such a nature, and if it is not the first time, what practice was 

established to pursue these matters when they came to your attention? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am informed that over time periodically there has always been, in each year, a 

monitoring done because of the change over of annual cards and this sort of thing. 

 

From time to time periodically in that monitoring it has shown up, not in great numbers that some 

people were no longer residents of Saskatchewan, and for all we know may not have been residents of 

Saskatchewan, and there has been an automatic cancellation of the card and the number. Because of the 

concern brought to our attention in, I find out now that it was November, it was decided that we would 

do a more intensive kind of a follow-up. I guess if you are looking for the exception, that was the 

exception to the rule, that there was a more intensive survey done in a particular area to determine 

whether, in fact, those allegations that were brought to our attention had any validity or not. 

 

Mr. Malone: — I would ask you to do two things for me. 1. To report to this House as soon as possible 

as to the result of these investigations and if it turns out that there were not these suspected abuses, as 

you have indicated, then perhaps we can then endeavor to have the Minister of Highways apologize for 

his remarks of recent days. 2. Would you give us your undertaking, firm undertaking, that if you find 

that there are abuses that you will pursue those people in the civil courts and get the money back that has 

been paid by the Government of Saskatchewan for the benefits that were conferred on them? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Our course of action will be determined in due course. We are pursuing that now 

and we do not, at the present time, know what we will be following. We want to follow up precisely on 

the cases that we have identified and the course of action we will then pursue will be determined after 

that. 



 

April 6, 1978 

1144 

 

 

Mr. Malone: — I am not . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order! Might I remind the hon. member that I believe he rose in his seat and the 

member for Souris-Cannington relinquished his position so that you could take your position. I have 

allowed you up 12 times now and I just think in all fairness that you had your question answered there. 

All right if it is in agreement, O.K., but I am trying to be fair with all of you. 

 

Mr. Malone: — I don’t understand why you can’t give us some undertaking, today, as to what position 

the government will be taking in this regard. Surely, it is not something that is a very difficult problem 

for you to give us a determination right now? If there are abuses why would you not be pursuing those 

people to get the money back that was spent on them? If there are no abuses why would you not come to 

this House and indicate that the investigation has shown no abuses? What possible reason is there that 

you can’t give us the government’s position on this at this present time? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I thought I made it quite clear, Mr. Chairman, that we, indeed, are pursuing it and 

when the results of our pursuit and our inquiries are known, I certainly will have no reservations about 

letting the member opposite or any other members know what those results will be. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, this is just a follow-up, briefly. You said there were 52 to date of these 

would-be freeloaders in Alberta. Have there, in fact, been benefits paid to any of these 52, or do they 

just hold the card? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I answered that a minute ago and that is precisely what we are examining now. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — You don’t know then if there has been one penny paid or not? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We feel that something has been paid, but I am not prepared to say precisely that 

we have, until we have made the review — so that I can respond to that kind of a question with facts that 

I have. 

 

Mr. Berntson: — The Minister of Highways then, seems to know more about how much has been paid 

by the Saskatchewan Health Services Plan than does the Minister of Health when he says that there are 

just as many Albertans taking advantage of our health plan as there are Saskatchewan people taking 

advantage of the cheap gas in Alberta. I think that these are very serious allegations and I think the 

Minister of Highways should, indeed, be compelled to apologize to this slight that he’s made against 

Albertans. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Minister of Highways has a right to his opinion as much as the member 

opposite has a right to his opinion and I’m sure that he can speak for himself. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — I understand all of these investigations were taking place in the Lloydminster area. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. That’s where the accusations, if you will, came from. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Would the minister tell us just what type, you know, is it a certain group of people? I 

know along the border there’s a problem often defining a person as 



 

April 6, 1978 

1145 

 

to whether or not he’s a Saskatchewan resident or an Alberta resident because he’s living in 

Saskatchewan a portion of the year and he’s living in Alberta a portion of the year and often it becomes 

questionable as to whether he’s really a resident of Saskatchewan or not. Is this the situation that we 

have, people who own farmland in Saskatchewan living on the Alberta side of Lloydminster in the 

winter? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am told that the real area of confusion is in the case like Lloydminster where 

you have the city straddling the border. You can have possibly a person who lives on one side and has a 

post office box on the other side, you know whether it’s for convenient purposes or whether it’s for a 

good reason. I guess it’s irrelevant. I’m also informed that that kind of difficulty should not be very 

prevalent in your kind of situation where you have sort of a spread and we do not anticipate that there 

will be that great of a problem in that case. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — Question . . . is there some sort of a formula or number of days residence requirement 

that you have before you establish whether the person is a Saskatchewan resident or not a Saskatchewan 

resident? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. You become eligible on the first of the third month. Up to then, I believe 

you’re covered by your province of origin. 

 

Mr. Stodalka: — I don’t think the minister quite understood the question. I mean people who are 

moving back and forth each year from one province to another. Do they have to live in Saskatchewan 

one-half of 365 days or what? What do you use to determine as to whether they are Saskatchewan 

residents or Alberta or Manitoba residents, or whatever may be? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — To continue to get Saskatchewan coverage, you have to live 183 days in the 

province. 

 

Mr. G.N. Wipf (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Minister, the other day I asked you about the 

parental monitory equipment that was requested. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Prenatal. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Paranatal . . . prenatal . . . monitory equipment that was requested in one of the hospitals 

in Prince Albert, and I do know that you have been consulting with these people. Have they got this 

equipment, or does the government still feel that they do not need this type of equipment up there and 

they should be going to Saskatoon. What is the status on that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am informed that we have never had a request from the hospital in Prince Albert 

for that unit the member mentions. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Mr. Minister, I have here a letter which was sent to me and was addressed to the former 

Minister of Health. It is probably a request. It is from a doctor who is the chairman of the Regional 

Prenatal Mortality Committee, and they had stated that Prince Albert had set up a regional advisory 

committee, the idea was to do some educating. However, they found out, it says, that the medical 

nursing and auxiliary staff know what is needed but unfortunately, government funds are not 

forthcoming to put these improvements into effect. They were very concerned up in that area, because 

that hospital has 1,000 deliveries a year, and almost 25 per cent of these are high-risk pregnancies. They 

are concerned, because they are forced to operate on such a limited 



 

April 6, 1978 

1146 

 

budget. For instance, at night time last summer, there was only one RN and one CNA on duty. What 

they were asking for at that time was that proper arrangements and financing be provided as a matter of 

higher urgency they said to provide a more qualified staff and the necessary equipment to render the 

process of parturition a safe one. 

 

It goes on, “There is not a Clutsen unit in the area, and we have no residential medical staff. Therefore, 

we rely on the expertise of trained nursing personnel for the adequate monitoring of patients while in 

labor. The level of staffing must be such that the nurses can do this and also have sufficient time for 

continual educational upgrading and in-service instruction”. The last paragraph goes on to say that, 

“Despite the fact that we are working under such short staffed and hazardous condition,” their prenatal 

figures are amongst the best in Saskatchewan, and given adequate staff and equipment, they could 

probably have the best record in the province. I wrote you some letters on it, Mr. Minister, and I was just 

wondering if anything developed where the Department of Health has gone up to the hospital in Prince 

Albert to discuss with them whether they are going to get this equipment, just what is the status on that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I think the member ought to know, and he quotes from a letter 

written by an individual that the member ought to know that the doctor does not speak for the hospital. 

Doctors do an outstanding job in their field of service but the hospital board speaks for the hospital. I 

thought I made it quite clear a minute ago, and I would not want the press or this legislature to 

misinterpret otherwise, that there has never been a request from the hospital for such a unit. Had there 

been a request or if there is, indeed, a request, we will consider it. Indeed. But the fact is, there has not 

been a request. So I don’t know what the member opposite is talking about, other than reading from 

somebody else’s letter. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — O.K. Mr. Minister. You say there has never been a request from the hospital. I had taken 

that this man had written on behalf of the hospital. There have been copies sent out to the Board of 

Governors for the hospitals and, O.K. maybe you are right. And you say if there is a request that comes 

in from that hospital you will consider it and they will get their monitoring equipment up there that they 

are asking for? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I do not know how the member can possibly interpret that individual writing on 

behalf of the hospital. I am sure that there is an administration in the hospital and an administrator and a 

board who would be doing the communicating with the department on behalf of the hospital. The 

concerns of the doctor certainly are of interest, but we cannot act on his individual request. That is the 

function of your board and your administration. I said if there is such a request made in the wisdom of 

the hospital, we are prepared to consider it. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — O.K. then we will see what we can do to get a request for you from that hospital board in 

the very near future and you’ve indicated that you will give it your consideration and I hope that 

consideration will be that to get the equipment in there. There is a great concern. I do know that because 

of some of the correspondence that we had, Mr. Minister, that the hospital up there has now received 

two extra nurses for the pediatric ward up there. The other question I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is 

in the case of regional and smaller hospitals. How do you assess how many nurses are needed in 

regional and smaller hospitals in comparison to how you assess how many nurses are needed to the 

larger hospitals? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The determination is based on ratios of paid nursing hours, 



 

April 6, 1978 

1147 

 

eight nursing hours per patient day and it varies from about four to six hours. This ratio is developed and 

has been developed over a long standing experience in both Canadian and Saskatchewan hospitals 

depending on the complexity of the services that the hospital provide. That ratio will be adjusted if you 

have a regional hospital that provides very certain more extensive kind of services, obviously that would 

have to be recognized in determining that ratio. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — You have a nursing consultant working with the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

that goes around to the different hospitals is that right, and assess the number of nurses that they are 

going to have in the hospital whether the hospital agrees whether that is the right number of not? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, we have a nursing consultant that will provide that service. 

 

Mr. Wipf: — Her job then, is to go in and assess how much staff is needed in the hospital? It’s not up to 

the hospital board itself then to assess the number of nurses that we need in each hospital? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The nurse consultant will go either on the request of the hospital or sometimes at 

the initiation of the hospital services plan to look at the arrangements that are made and will provide 

advice to the hospital based on her findings. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, just a brief comment. First of all I’m going to ask rather than drag 

this out, I have brought up this business of hospitals, non-unionized hospitals being paid less in hospital 

grants than union hospitals. I want to ask the minister if he will provide for me a list of all hospitals in 

the last three years. Whatever you say, Mr. Chairman. Would the hon. minister provide for me a list of 

hospitals that have received less hospital grants because of the fact that they are not unionized for the 

past three years? Would the minister do that for me? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, it is public knowledge and I will get it for you later. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Will you do that? You don’t have to do it today. The second thing you were going 

to provide for me was a list of Dr. Skoll’s expenditures overseas. You are going to do that? O.K. 

 

Now I have one other point. I have five minutes to bring up and I want to talk for a couple of minutes. 

One of the things about the MCIC report that bothers me and I think it bothers the members of the 

medical profession is listing their receipts in gross terms or gross figures, which is completely 

misleading to the public of the province of Saskatchewan. In many cases it puts Saskatchewan doctors in 

a very bad light or Saskatchewan physicians in a very bad light in relation to their individual patients. In 

other words, their gross receipts (and I know that it is not easy to provide net figures) but surely then the 

Medical Care Commission, if it doesn’t have an honest assessment of what the real earnings are — I 

don’t think there is any other business or any other profession in the world where you turn around and 

say that a man earns $65,000 before you take off his expenses — the least they can do is to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan what percentage the average doctor has in overhead. When they look at 

somebody who earns $100,000 they say, my God, why should that doctor earn $100,000 when I only 

earn $25,000 or $30,000 or $15,000? In reality the doctor may only earn $40,000. I give you a good 

typical example the pathologists, as I understand, 



 

April 6, 1978 

1148 

 

are all on salary. Is that not correct that the pathologists are on salary? All the lab tests that they are paid 

for . . . 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The private practice ones. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Aren’t all the pathologists’ lab tests in their lab, the payments for the lab tests 

themselves also funneled through the pathologist to the individual himself? 

 

All I am saying is that the MCIC reports of the gross earnings of a medical practitioner in the province 

of Saskatchewan are grossly in error of the real earnings of the medical profession in Saskatchewan. It 

has the danger of causing real friction, first of all between the commission and the physicians because 

the physicians really resent it. The members of the commission know it because the medical profession 

has discussed it with them on many an occasion. That’s number one, friction between the commission 

and the physician. Second, it has danger of causing real friction between the physician and the patient 

and the general public in Saskatchewan because they see it in gross figures. 

 

I wonder if the minister would comment on that. I know it is difficult but I think it is grossly unfair to 

provide those kinds of figures. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have heard the argument and the member is not unique in making it but I want 

to point out that in the MCIC report there is some care taken in that on two occasions — on page 30 

under Item 1 and on page 52 which is the last page, the precise same words are used to clarify, which I 

think is a pretty good clarification. I will read: 

 

Represents gross payments for commission from which the practitioner must pay overhead costs 

which may be high in specialties, such as radiology, pathology. The commission payments 

should not be taken to represent total professional incomes since practitioners may receive 

payment from other sources, e.g. from other private, public or private agencies, from patients 

requesting services not covered by MCIC. 

 

So the qualification is there and it is made there on purpose to point out that the gross statement does not 

necessarily mean that that is the total income for the individual barring the taxes and whatever else. I 

just want to make that qualification. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Once again, I’m going to point out — look at that, a pathologist $277,000, 

$345,000, $303,000. That kind of figures are grossly misleading. They are inaccurate, they are not 

honest. I know they said they would put the gross payments, but they are inaccurate when you talk about 

the medical rates. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 


