


























































Hansard: March 08, 1978


49 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 
March 8, 1978. 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Regina North West):— Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce to all 
members of the House, about 50 Grade 12 students from O’Neill High School in the constituency of Regina 
North West. They are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery and I understand their teachers, Mr. H. Berezny and 
Mr. Hudson are with them. We plan to meet with them later on. The members I am sure, join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
On behalf of all members, we are pleased that they are interested in the proceedings and we hope that their 
stay here with us today is informative and educational. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services):— Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Premier, I have been 
asked to introduce two young people who have joined us in the House today. They are seated in the 
Speaker’s Gallery I believe, Fay Allerly, who lives at Alice Minto’s Family Home on 8th Ave., and Wes 
McKay, who lives at the Montreal Crescent Group Home, are a part of Ranch Ehrlo’s operations in the 
Regina area. 
 
Fay and Wes are part of the hard working staff that produces the magazine called "Ehrlo", and I think 
everybody is familiar with it. They have just recently returned from Vancouver where they interviewed Peter 
Gzowski of "90 Minutes Live", and Edmonton, where they interviewed the Attorney General of Alberta. 
 
I am sure that you will want to join with me in welcoming them here today. I hope that they enjoy their visit 
with us. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Cable TV 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— I would like to direct a question to the minister responsible for Cable TV 
hardware. There seems to be some conflict in the statements made yesterday. You indicated in questioning 
by myself that there had been one or two prototypes of converters that they are not 100 per cent satisfactory, 
and I see a press comment today which would indicate from the General Manager of Sask Tel that in fact, 
the converters are expected to be supplied commencing April 1. 
 
First of all, would you give us the following information about the converters: the costs to be paid by Sask 
Tel which will subsequently be passed on, the guaranteed life span of those converters, and the source of 
those converters and who is supplying them, and when will the application for approval be made to CRTC? 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

50 
 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Environment):— Mr. Speaker, when approval was given to the CPN 
to become a competitor for this type of service it was known that a converter would have to be developed. 
Sask Tel has made (inaudible) with a number of firms but they are working mainly with one firm that we 
believe has the most expertise in this business and it is a firm in eastern Canada. I don’t have the name of it 
at my fingertips. That firm has manually produced a number of converters. At the present time Sask Tel is 
testing five or six of the prototypes that have been hand produced for this purpose. They will have to be 
approved by the Department of Communications before they can be used. We are reasonably satisfied at this 
time that they will be satisfactory. They are being tested for a number of technical matters. The company 
making them has agreed to deliver to Sask Tel by the 31st of March or very early in April 300 handmade 
converters. If these prove to be satisfactory the company will need some time to gear up production. If they 
do prove satisfactory the company expects that in the initial stages they could produce in the order of 500 a 
week gearing up to production levels of approximately 1,000 units per week. 
 
In addition to this, Sask Tel has also arranged with SED systems to design a filter that, if successful, can be 
attached to a conventional converter that is already on the market. Therefore, at present the prospects for 
obtaining converters or filter converters from at least two sources looks very promising. 
 
With respect to the cost for converters it will be in the range of $60 per piece and it will be borne initially by 
Sask Tel. Cost will be borne initially by Sask Tel and the cost will be recaptured in the monthly rates which 
CPN will be charged by Sask Tel for carrying the CPN service. 
 
With respect to the guaranteed life span of the converter, I am not able to give the hon. member that 
information. I really didn’t expect that he would expect to receive it because a satisfactory converter is still 
in the process of being developed. All efforts are being made to develop a converter that will . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! 
 
MR. BYERS:— . . . that will permit the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order, order. One supplementary. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’):— My question was originally very short I might add, Mr. Speaker. By way of 
supplementary, you have indicated that in fact the converters and the filters are of a highly speculative 
nature, that in fact there is nothing certain about the government’s position with CPN. Can the minister 
advise us that if the 45-day deadline which was granted for CPN or for the converters and filters to be 
installed, if the 45-day deadline is not reached that in fact Sask Tel will honor its agreement with the 
conventional cable operators to give channel capability on channels 2 to 13 and in fact force CPN off the air? 
Will you support that move and in fact force CPN and get out of this whole cable mess that you are causing, 
which looks a mess based on some pretty poor planning on the part of your government? 
 
MR. BYERS:— Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the hon. member for Qu’Appelle and all members of this 
House that Sask Tel and the government of Saskatchewan is sparing no efforts to contact the best people in 
the business to develop a converter magic box and I suppose that is what upsets the hon. member for 
Qu’Appelle, to attempt to provide 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

51 
 

converters and filters that will be necessary so that both cable television and CPN service can be provided to 
a great number of people in Saskatchewan at the earliest possible time. We will continue all our efforts in 
that regard regardless of the frustrations and the smoke screens which the hon. member for Qu’Appelle may 
cast about from time to time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

More CPN Hook-ups than Cable Regina 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— In the hope to expedite a little time I am now going 
to direct a follow-up question to the Attorney General. Mr. Speaker, I would like to pursue this matter as 
quickly and briefly as I can because there is a great deal of confusion. Would the minister or the Attorney 
General tell me who is responsible for this negotiation? Is it a fact that there are approximately between 
3,000 and 4,000 hook-ups in the city of Regina with CPN and approximately 2,000 with Cable Regina? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— I don’t know either figure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Would the minister then follow up? Would the minister also admit that CPN now is 
only operating on one channel but their contract was signed for five channels and that only some of them 
have been hooked up since October? The only charge that they are able to make, they cannot now issue a 
monthly charge because they don’t live to their contract and therefore the only charge they have made is the 
initial hookup and the one month advance and they have not had a monthly charge since that time because 
they are not able to live up to their contract. Is that a fact? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, the contract that the hon. member refers to made reference to a sampler 
channel for CPN’s operation, which sampler channel is the channel that CPN has been using now for some 
several weeks and some several months. It so happens that on the conventional cable there is fair capacity 
even given the CRTC licence and extra channels. There is an accommodation as between the two parties. 
 
The subject charges that are to be taking place are something which are to be determined or has been 
determined by the contract. I don’t have it in front of me. As between Sask Tel and CPN on the one hand and 
Sask Tel and the conventional cable operator on the other hand. 
 
MR. MacDONALD:— Let me ask the Attorney General a further question. Supposing the 45-day 
agreement whereby between the accommodation in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and the pirating that is going 
on in Regina by CPN over Cable Regina, suppose now the filter or the converter which have not been tested, 
not been perfected, are no longer available, or not available at that time? Will the Minister indicate whether 
or not, in order to prevent the piracy of CPN over Cable Regina or the conventional operator, that the 
government will withhold the funding of $2.6 million until there can be some assurance that the taxpayers’ 
money will be protected and can he tell me what is the liability of Sask Tel, who signed agreement with two 
operators and is unable to provide the service for one and he is permitting the piracy of the other? 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Speaker, with respect to the liabilities I make no comment other than I am sure 
that Sask Tel is fully familiar with its legal liabilities and is fulfilling 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

52 
 

the obligations and responsibilities according to the liabilities as it so determines. If that is in error then 
either of the parties or both the parties have the full option to take Sask Tel to court and liabilities will be 
determined in that regard. 
 
With respect to the $2.6 million guarantee and on the assumption that the equipment isn’t available in 45 
days or some reasonable time after the end of 45 days, that, Mr. Speaker, is a totally speculative question. I 
am confident, as the member in charge of Sask Tel indicates, that we will have the hardware in place in order 
to provide two alternative services, something that the opposition parties don’t want. I realize that, but I am 
confident that the hardware will be there. If it isn’t we will come to that bridge and cross it when we get 
there. 
 

Personal Income Tax Cuts 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Finance, since I am sure that the Premier is fully 
aware of all of the information that the Minister of Finance presented to this Assembly yesterday, certainly in 
the main. 
 
Would the Premier not agree that when the Minister of Finance stated yesterday that there will be a personal 
income tax cut of $52 millions in his speech, that in the Estimates which indicates the government’s 
assessment of the anticipated revenues from personal income taxes, that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
would have to pay $13 million more? Would the Premier not agree that those two statements are 
diametrically opposed? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— I would not agree that they are diametrically opposed nor would I 
agree that the member for Nipawin has properly quoted the Budget Speech. I recommend that he get 
someone on his side who can read and who will be able to point out to him that the minister says that 
compared with the tax structure which was there the year before, the cuts amount to a cut of $52 million over 
what would have been paid had the old structure remained. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order. I will take the next question. 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— If you could bring about order, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to direct a question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Finance and I wonder if the 
Premier has with him the estimates for 1979. I would like to direct the question in connection with the 
revenue to accrue to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. The Premier will note that some $461 million is 
expected in that fund this year and my question is, does that amount include the amount that remains at this 
time within the old energy fund and if so, could the Premier give me an approximate figure as to how much 
that amount is. I may say that I have been trying to get this information from the Minister of Finance’s office 
for the past few days, however I have been unable to obtain it. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— I am sorry to say that I do not have the breakdown of the figures of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund with me and I can only ask the hon. member to put the question on the order paper. 
 
MR. MALONE:— Supplementary question then, Mr. Speaker, would the Premier not agree with me that 
without the details, he can still answer the question in a general way, that what the government has done in 
this year’s budget is taken from the energy fund 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

53 
 

the amount of money that is remaining there and putting also into the Heritage Fund all moneys that accrue 
through oil, gas, potash taxation, and stripped away from those moneys that were to accrue in an energy 
fund, the sum of $293 million and put those moneys into general revenues. At the time when the energy fund 
was originally established it was always assumed that that money would be used for energy purposes or for 
long range purposes. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I have to point out that the payment of dividend to consolidated fund of 
$293 million which the member refers to is out of the gross budgetary revenues listed on page 112 of the 
estimates. That includes very significant sums; let us say $108 million as an estimate for potash, which never 
was in the energy fund; significant sums for uranium, perhaps not so large but between two and three million 
dollars which never was in the energy fund. It also includes significant sums for oil, namely regular royalties 
and bonus bids which were never in the Energy Fund. The only money which is going into the Heritage Fund 
which went into the Energy and Resources Fund is the Bill 42 money, and as all hon. members will know, 
the members of the Liberal Party caucus feel that that money should never have accrued to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and if they had had their way, the amount of money which would not have accrued to the 
Energy and Resource Development Fund, because Bill 42 would have been repealed, was $545,617,000. 
 

Power Increase — Recreation Centres 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister in 
charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Yesterday in this House it was mentioned that there were 
some guarantees given, and because they originate from your department, I direct this question to you, Mr. 
Minister. It was mentioned there would be no increase in natural gas beyond 8 per cent to private residents or 
private dwellings. At that particular time, no mention was made to institutions. Mr. Minister, there’s one 
institution in which I’m particularly interested and my question is that of the curling rinks and skating rinks 
across Saskatchewan, and there are hundreds of them, maybe into the thousands of recreation centres. Mr. 
Minister, can you at this time ease the peoples’ minds out there, who are operating these institutions with a 
great deal of difficulty with these increased rates, where the biggest cost is power and natural gas — can you 
guarantee them this time that they too can be considered as part of the protection of not more than an 8 per 
cent increase to the community skating rinks and recreational centres across Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, in the Budget Address yesterday 
assured that there would be no increases beyond 8 per cent to residential customers, the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation has not at this time determined what the increases may be to other consumers of gas in the 
province of Saskatchewan but I would like to remind the member that this government has already 
undertaken to ease those increases for such institutions as he identifies, curling rinks and other community 
centres like that. The Department of Culture and Youth now has a very significant sum of money that it 
provides in the way of grants to offset or ease those increases that, even though they are legitimate, are less 
than those that are going on outside the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BAILEY:— I’m sure that your answer, Mr. Minister, will follow very sadly on the ears of many people 
out in rural Saskatchewan. As a member from rural Saskatchewan, are you not aware that many of our 
recreational centres, curling rinks, skating rinks in those towns of 300 will be closing their doors next winter 
if they’re going to face an increase 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

54 
 

in power in excess of 8 per cent? Are you not aware of that? 
 
MR. MESSER:— Let me tell the hon. member what I am aware of. I’m aware that in the provinces of 
Manitoba and Alberta, probably the richest energy resource province in Canada, has higher rates. If I may 
convey to him, for example, in Red Deer, not only for electricity but for natural gas and there is no such 
program in that province, that Conservatively governed province, to offset those increases to the instances 
that he made mention of. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Heritage Fund 
 
MR. MALONE:— Mr. Speaker, again on the Heritage Fund, would the Premier be prepared to say to me 
now, is there any portion of moneys that are still remaining in the Energy Fund, and is there to be any 
proportion of moneys collected this year that would normally go into the Energy Fund if it was to continue? 
Have any of these moneys been transferred into general revenues, into the consolidated fund, and if the 
answer is yes, can the Premier tell me approximately how much? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I doubt whether this is the time to enter into a long and detailed 
discussion of the Heritage Fund but the facts are that on page 113 you will note that there is $116 million 
more going into the Heritage Fund than will come out of the Heritage Fund this year; i.e., that is the amount 
by which the Heritage Fund will increase and that is approximately the amount by which the Energy and 
Resource Development Fund was increasing in a given year. There is no significant difference in the amount 
of money being out of resource revenues for budgetary purposes, at least in percentage terms. 
 
A look at page 8 will indicate that last year we took out of resource revenues, for current expenses or 
budgetary expenses, $234 million. This year we are taking out $293 million. I concede that to be a 
significant increase, but on the other hand the money coming from oil and some other resources is also 
increasing significantly. 
 
I think we can sit down and work out all of these to show you that in each year, last year for example, we 
took in perhaps $350 million from resource revenues to $375 million and we put $234 million into current 
revenues and $100 million plus into the continuing Energy and Resource Development Fund. This year we 
are going to take $293 million for current expense and leave $116 million to grow with the fund. Those are 
the figures. We can discuss them at length somewhere else, but there is no substantial change in philosophy. 
We are still taking the resource revenues into a pool. We are pooling them all instead of just oil. We are 
taking out a large portion, perhaps three-quarters in all of the funds for current revenues and we are leaving 
perhaps one-quarter of the gross for ongoing capital expenses. 
 
MR. MALONE:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Finance has arrived and perhaps he would 
care to answer this question if the Premier does not wish to do so, but is it not correct that after the end of 
this fiscal year, ‘79, there will be less money left in the Heritage Fund than at the present time remains in the 
Energy Fund? That is, according to your Budget, $116 million will remain in the Heritage Fund. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY:— Nonsense! 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

55 
 

 
MR. MALONE:— I am just asking a question. If you would just let me have the floor for a minute I would 
appreciate it. Is it not true there will be less money in the Heritage Fund after the 1979 fiscal year than there 
is now in the Energy Fund, and is it not also true that in a desperate attempt to try to balance your budget you 
have robbed the money out of the Energy Fund and the Heritage Fund, and that the money instead of going 
to be used to buy potash mines as in the past is now going into ongoing government expenses so you can try 
to balance your budget? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance):— The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party):— A question to the Minister of 
Finance. Can he justify to this Assembly, the apparent discrepancy in the statement made on page 12 of his 
Budget Address by which he says, and I quote "Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay $52 million less than in 
1977," and on page 8 of the summary of estimated budgetary cash inflow he says, "Saskatchewan taxpayers 
shall pay $13 million more in 1978 than 1977." 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, that question doesn’t surprise me. It exposes the depth really of the hon. 
member’s knowledge of revenues and expenditures and the taxation structure. Now, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
the hon. member that in fact this year after the cut in taxes we are going to be using last year’s base. There is 
a cut of 17 per cent. Now the truth is that the incomes of people have risen in the province . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— If people’s incomes have risen they will be paying less income tax in percentage terms; 
the fact is that we will still be collecting more revenue. I think it’s a good thing. It shows the prosperity of 
the province of Saskatchewan, the higher levels of income the people are getting. I believe it’s a good thing. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:— Order! I think the minister is debating the issue rather than answering the question. 
 
MR. COLLVER:— I have a supplementary. Do you not agree that either we do not have a $52 million tax 
saving for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan or we have an additional $52 million to add on to his $40 million 
deficit? We can’t have it both ways. Either $52 million is not saved or it comes off the revenues. We can’t 
have it both ways. Would the minister not agree with that? 
 
MR. SMISHEK:— No, I would not agree with that. 
 

Heavy Oil Plant at Lloydminster 
 
MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley):— I have a question for the Minister of Mineral Resources with 
respect to the potential development of a heavy oil plant at Lloydminster. I would like to know in view of the 
fact that this government feels that the development of that industry would create a facility which could 
process 100,000 barrels of heavy crude a day, if the minister could give me some indication of where he 
expects that supply of heavy crude oil to come from? 
 
MR. MESSER:— The former Minister of Mineral Resources says, "out of the ground," and that is probably 
the short answer but I’m sure that will be a surprise to the member 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

56 
 

for Kindersley. Mr. Speaker, let me say that the 100,000 barrel capacity of the proposed upgrading facility 
has always been a concern not only to the province of Saskatchewan Department of Mineral Resources but 
the federal government and the private industry that may be involved. It is a very significant quantity of oil. 
We certainly don’t have the means of recovering that capacity at this particular point in time. It would only 
be attained by increasing the tertiary cover levels very considerably. We have a $16.5 million project under 
way, shared jointly between the federal and provincial governments trying to improve the technology in 
regard to tertiary recovery. We also through Saskoil are undertaking to enhance or improve the primary and 
secondary and tertiary recovery means through that Crown agency. We, therefore, have talked and I have 
conveyed to the members of this House and the general public about an upgrading facility perhaps which 
would work on a tandem concept in that it would start off with a 50,000 barrel per day upgrading facility 
with the infrastructure designed for 100,000 barrels plus. That way we would have some greater confidence 
in that we wouldn’t have a facility that wouldn’t be able to acquire the product in order to make it operate at 
its maximum. 
 
MR. McMILLAN:— Supplementary question. In view of the fact that your potential goal at this point then 
is only a 50,000 barrel a day facility and the current maximum production in Saskatchewan per day is 
between 40,000 and 50,000 of heavy crude, I would like to ask the minister at this time what percentage of 
that 50,000 barrels a day current production have you received in commitments from the private companies 
or Saskoil, that you are apparently trying to enter into an agreement with, to form this heavy oil plant? 
 
MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, let me correct the member, it is not the target or the figure of 100,000 
barrels per day, it should not be interpreted to mean that is the barrels of production set by the government of 
Saskatchewan, that is what the industry has introduced to Saskatchewan as a target. Further, he should be 
corrected in assuming that our target is now 50,000 barrels. I am saying that we are working on a tandem 
concept which would start phase one with perhaps, it has not been finally decided, with perhaps a 50,000 
barrel per day upgrading facility with provision for a 100,000 barrels per day plus at some later date. It is 
further obvious that all of the oil will not be coming from the province of Saskatchewan. Some of that will 
have to come from the province of Alberta as well even though Saskatchewan has 65 to 70 per cent of the 
type of oil that the facility would upgrade. I think that it would be inappropriate, Mr. Speaker, at this time, to 
undertake to convey to the House the barrels committed by the various interested parties. 
 
MR. McMILLAN:— One final supplementary to the Minister of Mineral Resources then. In a more general 
sense, I would like to ask you what percentage of fiscal involvement your government hopes to enter into 
with respect to this heavy oil consortium at Lloydminster? Do you intend to take a minority role with respect 
to the three major partners, private industry, provincial government and PetroCan or the federal government 
representative or do you intend to try to achieve a majority financial share of that operation? 
 
MR. MESSER:— It is not our intention to undertake to achieve a majority interest in the undertaking. We 
have said that we would be willing to involve ourselves directly in the upgrading facility. There are a number 
of potential partners, I believe six or seven in number at this particular point in time. It is a case of first 
coming to an understanding with those parties and then deciding what level of participation the government 
of Saskatchewan should involve itself with in regard to that facility. I might also convey to 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

57 
 

the hon. member that the federal government has also said that they would undertake to participate and to 
this point in time we don’t know what level of participation they will finally decide on either. 
 

Government Priority To CPN 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Sask Tel. In light of the cable TV and 
your particular problems in trying to prop up CPN, will you admit that in fact you are giving a priority to the 
hookup of CPN subscribers to the detriment of conventional cable subscribers in the province of 
Saskatchewan; and will you in fact withdraw your orders to try and prop up CPN by giving a priority to their 
hookups, as I say to the detriment and would you also explain how a situation so duplicitous as yours can 
arise when you give Sask Tel agreement giving channel capabilities two to thirteen to the conventional and 
then at the same time make an agreement covering the same things to CPN to try and prop them up in a 
temporary period of time? 
 
MR. BYERS:— Mr. Speaker, the situation whereby separate wires, inside wires are needed for CPN and 
conventional operators was certainly not of our doing. That was a ruling of the CRTC. Sask Tel is 
proceeding to hook up both CPN and cable customers on as near to an equal basis as possible. There is no 
priority being given to either group of customer. The cable operators do have some expertise in installing the 
inside wire and in some cases they are acting as the contractors for Sask Tel to install the inside wire for the 
cable operators and therefore the assumption of the hon. member that somehow there are favorites being 
played is simply not correct. 
 
With respect to the accommodation or the temporary shared use of the VHF spectrum as it is known, the 
cable licensees in both Moose Jaw and Saskatoon have agreed to let the CPN continue operating one channel 
of service on a channel in the VHF spectrum because it is not required at this time by that licensee. It is fully 
understood that this is a temporary accommodation. I am told that the CRTC is aware of the terms of this 
temporary accommodation and Sask Tel has been advised by CRTC that it is entirely acceptable to the 
CRTC and therefore I fail to see the basis for the great concerns expressed by the hon. member for 
Qu’Appelle. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 1 – An Act to amend The 
Infants Act. 
 
He said: The main thrust of this bill, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that the Courts in this province shall 
have regard only for the welfare of the child in determining who should have custody of a child in case of a 
dispute. A second feature of this bill is that it removes certain — in our judgement — discriminatory features 
of the present Infants Act as it is set out. 
 
I’ll deal first with the issues relating to the custody of children. The Law Reform Commissions of Canada 
and the provinces have given much time, study and thought to the question of custody. For example, the Law 
Reform Commission of Canada undertook a major review of custody laws and in 1975 published its report 
entitled ‘Studies on Divorce’ which in a large part, deals with the custody of children upon divorce. I might 
mention in passing that the co-author of this report is my present Deputy, Dr. Richard Gosse, and he has had 
a major input into this aspect of the problem and of course, a major input into the preparation of this bill. 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

58 
 

Right now, the provisions of The Infants Act relating to custody, in our judgment, need revision. Besides 
being discriminatory, which I shall discuss later, the statue law does not reflect the law developed by cases to 
award custody according to the best interests of the child, or according to the welfare of the child only. Quite 
obviously, this must be the paramount concern of the courts and of our society. We considered the issue 
important, in fact very important, important to be enshrined in legislation. In addition, it is felt that the 
decision to award custody is such a difficult one that guidelines should be developed to assist the courts in 
making the very important decisions involved. At the outset, the bill provides that the Court of Queen’s 
Bench has the power to make an Order regarding the custody, care and upbringing of an infant. Clearly, this 
ensures that the court must consider the care of the whole child, not just the placing of the child. 
 
The bill directs the court, in making a custody award to have regard only for the welfare of the infant and 
only for that purpose consider the physical, psychological, social and economic needs of the infant. The 
guidelines in the bill direct the court to consider: 
 
1. The quality of the relationship that the infant has with the parents to whom custody might be 
awarded. 
 
2. The personality and character and emotional needs of the infant. 
 
3. The capacity to be a parent of the person seeking custody, the home environment he can provide and 
the plans that he has for the child’s future. 
 
4. The preference of the child, depending on the age and the maturity of the child. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what remains paramount is the welfare of the child. The other ways in which this bill 
changes present statute law relating to custody are as follows: 
 
1. After an application has been made to the court, a judge of the court may make an order providing for 
the interim custody of the child, pending the final disposition of the matter in court. It is intended that this 
should be done as expeditiously as possible. Therefore, the procedure is by way of Notice of Motion or, in 
the discretion of the court, by an ex parte application. 
 
2. The court is also given the power to provide for the division and sharing of parental responsibilities. 
In effect, the court can award joint custody where the situation warrants such an award. 
 
3. This bill also ensures that the court may alter, vary or discharge a custody order only where there has 
been a material change of the circumstances. 
 
4. The bill also clears up the law with respect to whether a putative father can apply for custody of a 
child. Subsection (10) of section 2 provides that the court has jurisdiction to hear an application whether or 
not the parents were married to one another when the infant was born. 
 
5. It is also made clear by this bill that a child who is committed to the Minister of Social Services or 
who is the subject of proceedings in that behalf cannot be the subject of proceedings under this act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that these provisions significantly clarify some of the problems 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

59 
 

which have related to the question of awarding of custody. 
 
I would like now to deal with some of the discriminatory features of The Infants Act that are removed by this 
amendment. 
 
I would like to advise that the removal of the discriminatory sections is proposed as a result of a 
recommendation made by the office of the co-ordinator for the status of women to the Minister of Labour 
and it is a further fulfilment of this government’s commitment to ensure that as best as possible our 
legislation is nondiscriminatory. 
 
The basis of the discrimination to which this amending act addresses itself is sex. Subsection (1) of section 2 
directs the Court of Queen’s Bench to consider "the wishes as well of the mother as of the father." This, by 
implication, recognizes the right of a child at common law to the custody of his children and is untenable in 
a society that recognizes that it is the suitability of a person to be the parent which governs and not the sex of 
the parents. 
 
Sections 7 and 47 purport to preserve the common law right of the father of an infant to determine the 
religious faith in which the infant shall be educated. This is not only an arbitrary rule which discriminates 
against mothers, but it also prevents a court from dealing with religion according to the welfare in the best 
interest of the child. 
 
Subsection (3) of section 22 provides that in the absence of a written agreement and of an order to the 
contrary, the mother of an infant shall have custody until the infant reaches the age of 14 and thereafter the 
father has the custody of the infant. It assumes that custody can be determined on the basis of the sex of the 
parent and assumes inherent child-raising ability according to the sex of the parent. This subsection has also 
been a source of confusion in the law of custody and, also I think, a source of dissatisfaction in this province 
in that numerous counsel have seen fit to argue that this rule creates a rebuttable presumption that custody is 
determined according to the age of the child. 
 
Finally, at common law, a discriminatory doctrine exists which dictates that the custody of a child of tender 
years should be given to the mother of that child. This principle, sometimes harmful not only to the child but 
also the father, is gradually being whittled away by the decisions in the courts. There is an evolution in the 
law by the court decisions as slow as it may be. However, to ensure that there is no doubt that this amending 
act does not countenance the tender years doctrine or discrimination on the basis of sex, subsection (4) of 
section 2 forms part of the amendment and provides that "no presumption shall exist as between parents that 
one parent should be preferred over the other on account of his or her status as a father or mother." 
 
Quite clearly if the major principle of the bill is to consider the welfare of the child then whether the 
obligations of raising the child should fall on the father or on the mother must be left to the discretion of the 
court based on the evidence which is submitted to this court in such a dispute. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my department understands that this bill is a very important bill and we have undertaken 
discussions with some of the leaders of our church community and social welfare community and child 
welfare community to obtain their impressions of the proposed amendments. For example, we have 
consulted with the Right Reverend Michael Peers, the Bishop of Qu’Appelle and the most Reverend Charles 
Halpin, the Archbishop of Regina, who, I believe, have given their support to the thrust of this 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

60 
 

legislation. 
 
In addition, the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan is considering the whole issue of children’s 
rights with a view to recommending changes in the law relating to all aspects of children, not just those 
aspects with which we are dealing with today. 
 
The Law Reform Commission will be considering such issues as representation for children in custody 
disputes; the role of psychiatrists; counsellors and social workers in custody cases and the overall reform of 
children’s law. It is felt that it is necessary to move now with amendments which appreciably change the law 
of custody to ensure that the benefit of the study that has gone into custody law is received at this particular 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to sum up, I wish to advise that this bill in addition to removing sections of The Infants Act 
which discriminate upon the basis of sex, ensures that where there is a family breakdown it is only the 
welfare of the children that matters in determining who should have responsibility for their custody, care and 
upbringing. That’s the very genesis, the very thrust of these amendments, concern for the welfare of the 
child. Such a legislative statement, I think, will be welcomed I hope by members of this House and by the 
general community; also by those individuals who are especially concerned with the condition of the family 
in preserving as best as possible the condition of the family in modern day society. I move second reading of 
this bill. 
 
MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— I want to make some preliminary comments and I’ll come back at 
a later stage if I have leave to adjourn to make some additional comments. It has always been the law in the 
province, I remind the Attorney General, that in respect of the issue of custody of children, the welfare of the 
child has always been the paramount consideration in those applications. This law is not about to change 
anything in that respect. What you have here is a bill, Mr. Speaker, that I suggest to you is drawn in again in 
a vacuum. It is drawn by people who have a theoretical appreciation for the facts in these issues but who 
have precious little appreciation for the practical situations that arise. 
 
Always we see in pieces of legislation of this kind a drift in this direction and all members on that side of the 
House seem to welcome it so often and that’s a kind of neutralization of the sexes, as though you can 
somehow sterilize some differences that do exist in the sexes. A mother has very different instincts to 
children, especially in their tender years, than a father. The law, as it now stands, gives to the child, his 
welfare or her welfare is the principle matter is these issues of custody. But the law currently gives to a 
mother an edge in respect of an application for custody up to the age of 14 years. After the age of 14 the law 
tends to give an edge to the father in respect of the custody of the child, but always with the welfare of the 
child being a paramount consideration. 
 
Now the Attorney General suggested in his speech it is a desirable end to kind of neutralize the sexes in this 
maternal respect, as though a father had the same maternal instinct of consideration for children in tender 
years as the mother does. I put to you that while I may sound old fashioned in that respect that that is not the 
fact. I believe that the law to be that a mother, when the child is of very tender years ought to have a bit of an 
edge in seeking the custody of the child, all the while the welfare of the child being the principal concern. 
 
What I want to come back to is some other aspects of the bill, it is silent in respect of the interests and 
concerns and appreciations of the parents. You will know that the court is 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

61 
 

not to take into account the wishes of the parents. The parents are totally excluded. I think that that’s a 
principle that is wrong. The welfare of the child should be, as it has always been, a paramount concern. The 
interests of the parents in the question are very much germane to the question and the bill is silent on what 
role the parents are to play. It doesn’t give the court the power to take into account the interests of the 
parents. You will see that in the bill. 
 
Another aspect of the bill is it does not give to the court a power which the court has always had and which I 
suggest to you it should still have and that’s to take into account the religion of the child. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— It does! 
 
MR. CAMERON:— It does not. The bill is silent in respect of the religious upbringing of the child. 
 
What it says is is that the child’s physical circumstances, psychological circumstances, social circumstances 
are all to be taken into account. But it doesn’t refer specifically to the religious upbringing of the child. 
That’s a question which arises in a vast majority of custody cases and that consideration should remain in the 
law and I’m sad to see that this bill removes it and I will be making more of that at some later stage. 
 
Now with those few introductory comments, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate Adjourned 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) moved second reading of Bill No. 2 – 
An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act, 1974. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and honored to move second reading of the Bill No. 2. 
 
Amendments to this act I believe, is a testimony to the significant developments which have taken place in 
northern Saskatchewan since the formation of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Most hon. 
members are aware that the northern part of our province has had physical and economic development 
standards which were far below those acceptable in southern Saskatchewan and I suggest that that is still the 
case. 
 
We set out in 1972 to improve the northern housing conditions, to provide employment, to change the 
transportation systems, to improve the communication process and to establish local government, and to 
ensure that northerners had a role to play in the economic development of their part of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments deal with two important areas. Firstly, providing legislative authority and 
secondly, the additional funds required so that we may continue with the progress which was started in 1972. 
This act will allow the Department of Northern Saskatchewan to respond to the ever increasing demand for 
cottage lots in northern Saskatchewan while at the same time and for the first time, the allocation of the 
developmental costs to the recreational property user will be in such a way that that cost of development can 
be allocated to that user. This past year there was a draw for 109 recreational subdivision lots in the Whelan 
Bay subdivision. At the time, 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

62 
 

over 900 applications or individual persons applied for those 109 lots. This is not only true with respect to 
Whelan Bay, it is also true in virtually all of the recreational subdivisions that have been opened to date. For 
example, in the Weyakwin Lake subdivision, (I believe it was 120 some lots in the first subdivision that was 
opened there), there were more than 900 applications for those. Before the subdivision was finally opened, 
another 80 or so lots were added to it and the final applications I believe, exceeded 1,200 persons. 
 
When we opened La Ronge for individual recreational leases and lots on some of the islands in that area, 
there were again something over 1,000 applications for those recreational leases. Up to this point in time all 
capital improvement costs incurred by the government for surveying these recreational subdivisions, for 
building access roads into them, for the development of streets and other facilities, could not adequately be 
reflected in the charges for lease rental fees. In other words the lease rental fees which would be collected 
from those who would go into those recreational subdivisions could not adequately reflect the costs that the 
lessees would reimburse to the government. Therefore public funds were subsidizing a very select few who 
were fortunate enough to be drawn from a large list of recreational lease applicants. 
 
With the proposed amendments provided for in section 4 A subsection (5), the department may now recover 
in a more reasonable time period, the development costs from those who benefit the most, the lessee. It is 
one of the places where the user-pay concept is valid. 
 
The new northern awareness and the recreational potential is resulting in an increasing public demand for 
more recreational development throughout the North. 
 
The amendments to section 9, subsection (3) — increasing the economic development advance account — 
provide the department with an ability to respond more adequately to the demand which is being placed upon 
northern activities. 
 
I am sure that all members understand that the Statutory Advance Accounts are a revolving operating 
account and represent an advance on working and operating capital only. Mr. Speaker, these amendments 
will not only provide for the additional construction of recreational cottage lots and the charging back of 
actual costs to the producer, but additional employment in this sector of our economy. The increase in the 
Economic Development Advance Account will not only provide the funds required for the development of 
additional cottage lots in northern Saskatchewan but it also needed to help meet the increased demands of 
the Economic Development Loan Fund. I think it’s doing well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this program was established a number of years ago there have been 493 loans approved 
and dispensed by the Economic Branch of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, totalling $5.2 million 
dollars or slightly over that. These loans have created over 500 jobs in northern Saskatchewan for northern 
people. The demand for additional funding continues to increase as northern people develop economic 
opportunities for themselves. At this stage of development we cannot expect northern people to utilize the 
traditional economic system when only three communities in northern Saskatchewan have the benefit of 
banking facilities and very few have the usual kinds of collateral required for bank-type loans. 
 
One could ask then where these people are expected to secure the capital which they will require to get 
involved or establish themselves in small industrial-type 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

63 
 

developments. This government has recognized and foreseen this problem a number of years ago and took 
action to ensure that the residents of northern Saskatchewan would have a means through which they could 
secure the funds needed to allow them to participate in the development of their region. Mr. Speaker, this 
amendment will provide additional funds to the loan program so that we can continue to respond to what we 
believe to be an important need. 
 
The purpose of the amendment to subsection 4, Section 9, is to allow the department to make payments to 
the consolidated fund for losses which may occur in the Economic Development Advance Account during 
any fiscal year. In the year following that in which losses were incurred, members are aware that surplus 
funds in the advance accounts that may have occurred at the year end are recovered by the Treasury and it is 
often difficult to have the accounts properly assessed so as to make adjustments before the year end. 
 
With the requested increase in the Economic Development Advance Account and the resulting increased 
activity it will be necessary to allow for the payment of losses from one fiscal year to the following fiscal 
year’s allocations. This adjustment brings the regulations for the payment of loss in line with those used in 
the Northern Construction Advance Account and in the Northern Housing Advance Account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our attempt to ensure that northern people are involved in the development of their region has 
not only taken the form of providing certain grants to northern people, but our government has adopted a 
policy of providing employment opportunities within the public service to qualified northern residents. One 
area where we have been most effective in executing this policy has been in our Capital Construction 
Program where we have often had over 50 per cent, and at times over 80 per cent, of all employees being of 
native northern ancestry. Mr. Speaker, over 90 per cent, the member for Athabasca says, and on some 
projects I believe that’s true. Mr. Speaker, the amendment to subsection 3 of Section 20 provides an 
additional $20 million for the construction of housing in northern Saskatchewan. It will not only allow us to 
continue to improve the quality of housing to northern people, but will also allow for the continued provision 
of employment opportunities in this very active sector of the northern economy. 
 
The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has spent a great deal of time providing training to northerners in 
various aspects of the construction industry and at this point in time I’m proud to say that over 575 new 
homes have been constructed in northern Saskatchewan through the DNS Northern Housing Program and 
that negotiations have been completed with the CMHC for the construction of an additional 300 homes over 
the next two years. That’s a far cry from the days when 20 or 30 houses per year were all that could be 
mustered. The hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, however, says that we are spending too much 
money in the North. He’s quoted in the paper as saying that, and I’ve never had the member answer, 
although I asked him to do so: I really never had the answer of whether he said that we were spending too 
much money in housing or not; but I wouldn’t mind him giving the Tory position with respect to that. Mr. 
Speaker, subsection 3 of Section 15 is amended to increase the Northern Construction Advance Account by 
$7 million. The purpose of this amendment, as the others, is to ensure that the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan has the resources needed to continue with the development of public services in the North, as 
we have done up to now. 
 
I would like to review, Mr. Speaker, just some of the activities which have been 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

64 
 

undertaken through the use of this fund since 1973. 
 
In 1973 a total of $154,000 was expended for the construction of air fields at Beauval and the repair of an air 
field at Buffalo Narrows. 
 
MR. WIPF:— .... 
 
MR. BOWERMAN:— No, they were flying in the other way, according to the member for Prince Albert-
Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf). In 1974-75 an expenditure of $267,000; 1975-76 $360,000 and in 1976-77 an 
expenditure of $487,000 which provided airport facilities in Ile-a-la-Crosse, in Cumberland House, in 
Portage Laloche, in Camsell Portage, in Patuanak, in Wollaston Lake and Stony Rapids and major 
improvements to other areas. 
 
Members across the way seem to make light of the proposals and the efforts to bring to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan some of the amenities of life which we consider for ourselves to be necessities and 
they continue to do this. Again, I would like the members opposite, when they have the opportunity, to stand 
up and exactly tell this House where they stand with respect to development in northern Saskatchewan. They 
are anxious to get on their feet when they can’t. They always do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this work represented over 800 man-months of labor in northern Saskatchewan and the figures 
for road construction from this Advance Account system are also equally as impressive. Let me comment on 
them. 
 
In 1973-74 an expenditure of $791,000 for 17 miles of all-weather road and 50 miles of various other kinds 
of roads; in 1974-75 an expenditure of $2.6 million for 55 miles of all-weather road and 23 miles of various 
other roads; 175-76 construction costs of $3 million for another 48 miles of all-weather roads and another 26 
miles of various other kinds of roads in the North; 1976-77 .... 
 
MR. McMILLAN:— Corduroy roads! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN:— Even corduroy roads are better than the ones that you were able to build from 1967 
to 1971. In 1976-77 another $3 million for 100 miles of all-weather roads and 18 miles of various other 
kinds of roads in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that represents 220 miles of all-weather roads and 117 miles of other kinds of roads and it 
represents over 6,000 man-months of employment in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
What the objective of the exercise has been is to have provided for the North some of the access to those 
communities which have been isolated since the beginning of this province, for the people in those 
communities to have access to the remainder of the province and to have the opportunity for goods and 
services to come into those communities at a cost, which is reasonable and acceptable, to be borne by them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the record speaks for itself with regard to that. Not only the record, but the 
evidence of what has taken place in those communities, for anyone who has been closely associated with 
them over the past number of years will know that in fact a great and considerable amount of work has been 
done. 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

65 
 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on but I will just summarize a few of the other activities which have been 
undertaken through the Northern Construction Advance Account. 
 
In addition to the air fields and road access which we have provided, and I believe it is true to say now that 
with exception perhaps of one of the communities — Dillon — on the south side of Peter Pond Lake, all 
other communities will have road access by the end of 1978. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOWERMAN:— I think this is commendable not only for the government and its determination to 
succeed in this area, but I think it is commendable for the persons who have been involved as members of 
the staff. 
 
With regard to the Northern Construction Advance Account, I want to indicate, as well, the efforts to expend 
funds through this Economic Development Act has provided not only facilities and services and 
communications for people in the North but indeed it has provided for them, in their own communities, 
many of the amenities which most communities of equal size in Saskatchewan would accept as being 
necessities. Municipal facilities, for example, between 1973 and 1974 and 1976 and 1977 over $3.4 million 
worth of activity was undertaken, which provided about 1,200 person or man months of employment for the 
building of fire halls, community halls, municipal offices and community centres. Mr. Speaker, in public 
utilities, from April 1, 1974 until the end of 1976-77, $9.5 million were expended on public utilities; sewer 
and water systems, the incorporation of high-line electricity or electricity being taken in by overland for the 
development of lagoons. 
 
I want to repeat this. In communities of 2,000 population where there were absolutely no facilities for a 
sewer and water facility for fresh water or for portable water, drinking water, no facilities whatsoever, $9.5 
million were expended on public utilities. Included in this cost of the establishment of the utilities we 
additionally provided for 5,328 man months of labor in an area where the response to social services was 
extremely high, where unemployment ranged up to 70 per cent, 80 per cent in some communities. The 
money involved in the establishment or providing of public utilities also provided for a large number of man 
months employment. 
 
With respect to educational facilities, it hasn’t been that long ago, Mr. Speaker, that we observed press 
reports and statements, public statements being made by teachers and by local citizens in the various 
communities throughout the North, statements and criticism about the educational facilities in the North. 
There is no question about the fact that their statements and their criticisms were valid; absolutely no 
question in fact that they were valid. If one wonders and one has to wonder, living in Saskatchewan as long 
as most of the people in this Legislature and to recognize and comprehend the fact that where you have a 
community of 600 students or 400 students or 200 students, the school facilities were just totally 
unacceptable; absolutely totally unacceptable. In the wintertime, the overflowing of septic tanks, for 
example, would back up underneath the floor of the school and heave the floor in the school, that kind of 
situation did exist. We have heard criticism from across the way, particularly from the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf) criticizing the expenditure of funds. Maybe he’ll tell us whether he criticizes 
the expenditure of funds with regard to the improvement of the educational facilities in the North. I hope he 
will when he stands up. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, for the same period of time from April 1, 1974 to the end of 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

66 
 

the 1977 fiscal year, over $11 million were expended on educational facilities in northern Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, this represented close to 6,000 man months of employment with regard to the construction of 
schools. Not only did it provide employment but it has provided for a standard of educational facility in the 
North which more equally and favorably compares with what we are doing for ourselves in the southern part 
of the province. 
 
At least in communities now where there are 400 or 600 students they do have facilities for recreation. They 
do have facilities for classroom services. They do have some of the kinds of classrooms in terms of their 
home economic classes, in terms of other kinds of classes which are special that never before in the history 
of the province were they able to have. 
 
May I make this additional comment. The record will show that those who dropped out of school because of 
the very poor kind of system which functioned in the North are now being found to come back to school 
because they want to improve their educational level. Indeed it is a compliment, I believe, to the program of 
the government as well as it is a compliment to those students who, in fact, are preparing themselves for 
better jobs and a better future in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on for the list of improvements to the public and private facilities in northern 
Saskatchewan is almost endless. In no other province or in no other territory in this country have such 
substantial improvements been made in such a short period of time. Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the work of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the approval of these amendments will ensure that the 
necessary funding and the authorities will continue with this development program into the 1980's. It is 
evidence of this government’s continued commitment to the people of northern Saskatchewan. I therefore 
move second reading of this act, An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act, 
1974, with pleasure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake):— Mr. Speaker, I was interested to hear the minister on his 
brag sheet speaking and I would like to clarify a few things for you, Mr. Minister, and that is — or challenge 
you — to show me at any place that I have ever criticized the housing in northern Saskatchewan, the road 
building in northern Saskatchewan, the education system in northern Saskatchewan or the building of 
airfields in northern Saskatchewan. These I have never criticized. However, I have come out and criticized 
the waste and mismanagement and inefficiency that operates within your department. As an individual who 
has spent ten years in the North myself, I realize and recognize that a lot of things that you said here today 
are true. We needed better roads up there. We needed a better education system up there. We needed better 
housing in the North. However, I believe that there is a vast amount of money being wasted in the North, and 
mismanagement, and that the people are not getting the employment that should be getting the employment. 
 
The member said there were 90 per cent of the local people employed, I believe on one job. There are 
probably other jobs Mr. Minister, where 90 per cent of them come from out of the northern administration 
district territory. They come in from Alberta, from Manitoba. I believe the DNS concept when it started was 
good. Get the northern people working, get them to do something for themselves. Last fall when you came 
up with a statement in Prince Albert that the outfitters association were telling the 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

67 
 

northerners to hang onto their hats because you are going to have more social upheavals in the next ten years 
than they have ever seen in the history of northern Saskatchewan. These are planned social upheavals. I 
believe that you have got to have a look at that area and let the people know what you are planning, include 
them. You have set up a committee, a ministerial advisory committee, and you are supposed to be listening 
to them. However, in the next statement that I read in the paper that you make is that some things have 
happened too fast, there won’t be hardly any consultation and hardly any debate with you over some of the 
plans that are going to come in. 
 
As I said last spring, the DNS is a good concept up there. We have always backed that concept. I have 
backed that concept. But I don’t back the mismanagement and the inefficiency of your department. I think 
through the Budget Debate we will reveal some of the inefficiency and maybe some of the graft or whatever 
you call it, the rip-off or whatever it is. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— How about the flying gravel? 
 
MR. WIPF:— The what? The flying gravel, the flying gravel to that school with the rolling hallways. Right. 
 
I was a little surprised when you admitted that your lease rental fees were not realistic for the cottage owners 
that were up there and that you have started to believe in the user/pay concept. Maybe it would be a good 
idea if you start using the user/pay concept a little more in the housing and the heavy subsidies that we have 
for the people who are working for the DNS, making a decent wage and we are subsidizing those housing 
projects. I don’t talk about them in La Ronge alone, in the housing, in the apartments and in the trailers. We 
will be bringing some of that out probably later on. 
 
There are, as you know, some cottage lots there. But some of the residents who have been there for a long 
term are having rouble getting long term leases. We have referred back and forth and I’d hope to see that this 
area gets cleaned up a little bit in the near future. 
 
I asked you a question you wouldn’t answer when you were on your feet. You mentioned that communities 
with a population of over 2,000 which have received sewer and gas, how many communities in the .. or 
sewer and water, well sewer makes gas .. well you know that is pretty common up there. How many of those 
communities do exist in the North with over 2,000 population? Were you referring to a town or a large 
community, which was it? The only ones I can think of are probably La Ronge and Uranium, City — 
Creighton. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN:— That shows you how familiar you are . . . 
 
MR. WIPF:— Maybe you can write them out and I’d ask you to write them out and tell me which other 
towns up there have 2,000 people in them or more. I would be pleased to hear that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER:— Tell us how . . . 
 
MR. WIPF:— Well that will be easier for the member from up there to answer because I believe that right 
within your family are the people who clean out the sewer and water tanks. You talk about overflows and 
stuff like that. There was a little bit of a problem with the health department in Buffalo Narrows or Ile-a-la-
Crosse last October. 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

68 
 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Was that a government contract? 
 
MR. WIPF:— Yes, a government contract. Because of overflows the health nurses were complaining. 
Under the Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Advance Account, section nine, this started out 
at $5 million in 1974 and it has increased to $15 million. Now, you want $15 million. It has increased $10 
million in the last several years and it changed the original bill here that shows the way the money was spent 
in the following year’s financial report by the Minister of Finance and not in the same fiscal year that it was 
spent. 
 
You talked about the loans and the question I would like to ask, we asked it last year, how is the repayment 
of some of these loans doing up there? Are you still writing off $200,000, $250,000 and $20,000 and, of 
course, we will get around to that probably in Budget too where you can tell us how you are doing in that. 
 
The other area in northern construction advance account, it started out at $12,000, in 1976 it moved up to 
$21 million and now you are up to $30 million. I realize that the DNS has a large volume of construction 
equipment at this time and if some more of this construction work, I feel, was tendered out we would see that 
we wouldn’t have to spend so much of this money. It wouldn’t be so expensive to do. We wouldn’t be able 
to probably drop cats in muskegs and just write them off and carry on, we wouldn’t have this money tree 
sitting out there. 
 
Last fall I read into the record here a report on how the DNS handled their equipment and even the writers of 
the letters that I read were DNS officials and they were a little upset at this. I believe if they were concerned, 
these senior personnel of the DNS, then we should all be concerned about this, the lack of training and the 
lack of knowledge, I suppose, in this. The lack of care for the equipment. 
 
The other section in the Northern Housing Advance Account, this went up dramatically. You are asking for 
$45 million there in the advanced account for housing. At the average cost up in the North it would probably 
cost you $80,000 per home. That advance account itself could build you 562 houses and I challenge that you 
wouldn’t be doing that, you haven’t done it. In those last three years you only built a few more than that. But 
there is an extra $45 million that you are asking for and I use an average cost in the North of $80,000 a 
home. You could pick yourself up 562 right out of that advanced account there. I have never been against 
northern housing — try and twist, Mr. Minister, it doesn’t work. We are against pork barrelling. I think one 
of the reasons that you need a big advance account is because of your cost over-runs. I asked about these last 
fall in a question and I didn’t receive it and I can imagine why he didn’t give me an answer, because he 
didn’t want to show the cost over-runs. Yes, I’ve got it on the paper again. You refused to answer it the last 
time so we’ll put it on again. (... interjection...) That’s right. 
 
In 1974 — the Attorney General says I’m a muckraker it’s all fine and dandy to spend the taxpayers’ money 
and have cost over-runs doubled as far as the government is concerned and the Attorney General is all for 
that. It doesn’t matter about how much tax money you’re spending. I think it is our job to kind of watch if 
you guys aren’t watching. In 1974 these total advance accounts were $25 million, today we are asking for 
$90 million. Mr. Minister, I wouldn’t be so concerned about these things if there were not so many over-runs 
and so much mismanagement and inefficiency. And if your budget did 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

69 
 

take $60 million, $70 million, $80 million and you did $60 million, $70 million, $80 million worth of work 
and produced something for it, we would be all better off. We have an advance account here now of $3,000 
per capita in the North which isn’t too bad, it’s not too bad I guess. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, last year you had in the advance account at the last session, your advance account asked 
for $51 million and today in these three advance accounts we have an additional $40 million or $90 million 
which works out to roughly an 82 per cent increase and again I say if there wasn’t so much mismanagement 
and inefficiency as your own people have put in literature which I have read into the Legislature here, we 
could probably support that budget but it is just too much and once again I say that if you had more 
efficiency and not so much inefficiency it would be easy to support this but as it is I just can’t support this 
bill at this time. 
 
MR. McMILLAN:— Mr. Speaker, my comments will be brief before adjourning debate, it may not be so 
brief during Estimates at a later time. I am sure not nearly as temperate as they are liable to be this afternoon. 
 
I would like to only state that after being in the Legislature even for as little time as I have and been 
associated in this indirect way with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, one cannot help but get the 
impression that each and every amendment or piece of legislation that comes in with respect to the DNS is in 
fact a simple attempt to place another small jewel in the crown of the emperor for northern Saskatchewan. 
When I read these amendments and the explanatory notes that go with them and then listen to the rational 
and just comments of the member to my left, I can’t help but think that that in fact is the case, that every step 
that is being taken with respect to work in the DNS in the last few years, every legislative regulative step that 
has been taken has been done in many instances with little financial discretion and little care taken to see that 
the taxpayers’ money was well spent. That, of course, becomes our main concern when dealing with 
amendments of this type which, in effect, allow the Minister for Northern Saskatchewan to spend more and 
more and more money and apply more and more of our financial resources in Saskatchewan to the North. 
 
I would be, I think, particularly interested in talking to some of the Minister’s close personal friends from 
northern Saskatchewan, former members of the Northern Municipal Council and certainly some of the 
present members, who I am sure he holds very dear to his heart. I can’t help but think that they would have 
some enlightening comments about not only this specific amendment as it is coming into Legislature, but 
activities in an overall way in northern Saskatchewan. I want you to know that there is absolutely no truth to 
the rumor that your nomination will be contested by the likes of Lawrence Ewe? And Frank Batete? And the 
list could go on and on and on. I want you to know I don’t, on a regular basis, rely on them to provide me 
with any of the information or ammunition that I like to bring up in this House to give the public an 
indication of just how poor a job you are doing as Minister for Northern Saskatchewan. However, this time I 
may not be able to resist the temptation to contact these gentlemen and get, at least, their informed opinion 
about the amendment that is coming before the House so that I might be better prepared to try and give you 
some of the insight that you will need in the next few years if you are to clean up the mess in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I look forward to the opportunity to respond at greater length to this bill and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

70 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill 4 — An Act to amend The 
Agricultural Societies Act, 1966. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, The Agricultural Societies Act was designed to provide for the formation, 
organization and authorization of agricultural societies in Saskatchewan. 
 
In essence, the agricultural societies exist to encourage improvement in agriculture and agriculturally related 
activities and have long been an integral part of the fabric of rural society. 
 
In keeping with this government’s commitment to preserve and strengthen our rural institutions, a number of 
amendments to the agricultural societies is proposed. Each of these amendments has been approved by the 
Saskatchewan Agricultural Society Association, which is the umbrella organization for agricultural societies 
within the province and by the director of agricultural extension in the University of Saskatchewan, who is 
responsible for the administration of the act. 
 
The initiatives for such amendments has come from the Saskatchewan Agricultural Society Association. 
This organization has expressed concern that the act is badly out of date and that a number of items relating 
to administration, authorized activities, organization and liquidation require updating. 
 
Basically the proposed amendments are of a housekeeping nature and serve to bring the wording of the act in 
line with presently accepted standards of practice and programming respecting agricultural societies. 
 
Specifically these amendments legitimize sponsorship of programs such as farmers’ markets, establish a 
minimum geographical proximity of a new society to an existing society, eliminate minimum numerical 
requirements for farmer numbers and reduce the minimum age for membership in a society from 18 to 16 
years. 
 
A number of agricultural societies, many of which were established more than 70 years ago, no longer 
possess their original certificates of organization and copies were not retained by either the Department of 
Agriculture or the University of Saskatchewan. Agricultural societies have requested documentary evidence 
of their original organization and continued existence in order to qualify for certain tax exemptions to which 
non-profit organizations are entitled. A new certificate has been drafted for this purpose. 
 
The insertion of a new subsection will provide that a minimum of 30 miles distance is maintained between 
agricultural societies to help ensure their viability while providing a better geographical distribution. 
However, the minister will be able to exercise discretion in circumstances where the organization of a new 
society within 30 miles of an existing society is not unreasonable. 
 
An amendment reducing the age at which a person may become a member of an agricultural society from 18 
to 16 is designed to provide for the involvement of younger and more active individuals. Deleting the 
requirement that 75 per cent of members of the families of bona fide farmers and residing on farms, results 
from the unenforceability of such a provision and a recognition that the willingness of individuals 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

71 
 

to establish an agricultural society should be the primary consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other housekeeping amendments which I will not go into. I simply 
believe that these changes are necessary and I urge all members to support these amendments. Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of this bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend 
The Agricultural Incentives Act, 1973. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of addressing somewhat lengthy remarks when this bill was 
introduced at the last session. However, since the House was prorogued before the bill received final assent, 
it is again being introduced for your consideration. It is not my intention at this time to repeat much of the 
detail that was put forward at that time. I will simply restate some of the more pertinent facts for your 
consideration. 
 
Since the inception of The Agricultural Incentives Act or Farm Start as it is known, in 1973, almost 3,000 
farmers have taken advantage of this program to increase their livestock enterprises or to undertake new 
enterprises. The total dollars approved to these individuals is over $77 million. Of this amount over $55 
million has been disbursed in loans and almost $12 million in grants. With this money these new and 
expanding farmers have purchased approximately 100,000 head of beef breeding cows, 9,000 dairy cows and 
12,000 breeding sows. As well as being involved in such varied enterprises as PMU sheep, poultry and 
beekeeping. 
 
The interest rates for those loans are now tied at 3 per cent below prime for the first five years and 1 per cent 
below prime for the remainder of the period, which has meant an effective rate of 7 per cent and 9 per cent, 
respectively, in the past year. In the last couple of years loan activity has dropped off somewhat mainly due 
to a lack of optimism in the beef sector. However, that activity is beginning to pick up and Farm Start 
estimates that there will be at least 550 expansions this year. Because of its unique design, Farm Start has 
been able to accommodate some of the severe economic stress in the beef sector. The act provides that in 
years of inadequate returns part or all of the payment may be postponed until such time as revenues become 
more adequate. Under this provision many clients have taken advantage of payment schedules as low as 40 
per cent of regular payment. This feature has helped to sustain many hard-pressed producers. It is 
encouraging to note that although these terms were offered to all clients, 40 per cent met their full payments 
according to their contracts, while 50 per cent opted for the minimum payment. We are confident that as 
prices for livestock improve the largest percentage of these loans will again be paid on schedule. 
 
Another indicator of success is in the hog industry. In April of 1977 Farm Start had 276 active hog 
producers, many of which were substantial units; these are not the inners and outers in the industry. Twenty-
five of these were established to market over 1,000 hogs per year per unit. The Hog Marketing Commission 
figures show that only 52 farms in the province produced over 1,000 hogs annually. This indicates that Farm 
Start is having a major impact in maintaining the numbers of hogs in the industry. 
 
Loans and grants are also being made in the irrigation district; 40 per cent of farmers have received some 
assistance from Farm Start. As you know, Farm Start has also 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

72 
 

administered under The Agricultural Incentives Act other programs that the government has asked it to 
assume. In 1974 it gave out almost $35 million in advances to cow-calf producers who were reeling under 
the impact of disastrous market prices for beef. In 1975 it gave out almost $42 million in advances in a 
renewed cash advance program. In 1976 a total of 29,000 cattlemen received a total of over $80 million in 
assistance from Farm Start, almost $50 million of which was in the form of loans, while $30,874,000 was in 
the form of outright grants. Certainly these grants were appreciated by the farmers at that time. 
 
I think you will agree that it is important to have the legislative authority to continue to provide assistance 
under the long term loan and grant program and also to be able to handle emergency programs such as the 
beef industry assistance program. 
 
Section 29(1) of The Agricultural Incentives Act limits the amount of borrowing powers of the corporation 
for all capital purposes to $150 million, principal outstanding. It is now estimated that by 1982 the amount 
outstanding under loans on a long term loan and grant program may be $150 million in loans, and that it will 
top $200 million by the year 1986. In 1979 the amounts outstanding in loans on the long term loan and grant 
program is estimated to be approximately $87 million. With the roll over provision under the cash advances 
from the 1976 beef industry assistance program the total outstanding under The Agricultural Incentives Act 
may be dangerously close to the $150 million limit. Now is the time to make the change. I recommend that 
we make the change now to increase the capital constraints under The Agricultural Incentives Act 1973 from 
$150 million to $225 million. This change will enable Farm Start to continue to deliver the high degree of 
service expected of it by our rural population and to handle emergency programs that may from time to time 
prove necessary. I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the House give this program unanimous 
support. I move second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse):— Mr. Speaker, possibly some of the remarks which I made in the previous 
session apply again as well to some of the remarks I am going to make today in regard to the re-introduction 
of this particular bill. At the conclusion of my remarks it is my intention to ask for leave to adjourn debate, 
much for the same reason that I asked for leave to adjourn the debate in the previous session. There are a 
number of questions which I asked regarding Farm Start loans throughout the province of Saskatchewan. I 
have yet to receive the answer to those questions, with the conclusion of my remarks on this particular bill in 
second reading until I have had an opportunity to have a look at the answers to the questions which I posed. 
 
The main idea of this particular legislation as I understand it from the Minister of Agriculture is to provide 
more dollars to extend the Farm Start program. The basic concept of Farm Start, I can agree with the 
minister, is good. I think possibly where we disagree is in the philosophy in which the Farm Start program is 
handled. The government has decided to use taxpayers’ money, government money in order to facilitate the 
Farm Start program, which, if they intend to continue on with the program, requires a bill such as the one we 
have before us today to increase the amount of taxpayers’ dollars available for the program to $225 million. 
Our position has been and it still remains the same, we feel that our credit unions and our banks throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan can better and just as well serve the goal behind the Farm Start program as 
does using taxpayers’ money. Our feeling is that the government of Saskatchewan can put its credit behind 
each and every individual farmer, using the same regulations and criteria as set out under The Farm Start Act 
to allow that individual to obtain a loan through the government, allowing those same criteria to 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

73 
 

apply if the individual applied to any bank or credit union in the province, and thus enable that individual to 
obtain those funds because they do have the backing of the government of Saskatchewan as a co-signer to 
that particular note. 
 
Grants could still be made available to each and every individual and a subsidy program could be made 
available to the banks directly and not to the individual farmer in regard to a reduction in the interest rates. 
Part of our reason for this is that we do have the financial institutions available in the province. We believe 
that it is not up to the government of Saskatchewan to be in the money lending business, when that money in 
other words could be used for a much better purpose. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN:— You want to support farmers? 
 
MR. WIEBE:— Yes, we want to support farmers as the member for Northern Saskatchewan asked, and if 
he was listening and not asleep he would have realized that the first five minutes of my remarks clearly 
indicated our support for the farmers in this province and it varies not one iota from the policy established by 
the members opposite. The only difference is that we would apply a free enterprise philosophy to the 
application of that program as compared to the members’ opposite philosophy in regard to that program and 
both programs, Mr. Speaker, would accomplish the same, if not more than what this present program does. 
 
First of all it would enhance the business presently being enjoyed by our credit unions in the province of 
Saskatchewan to allow them to handle the financial facilities of the farmers in this province instead of the 
government handling those financial facilities. Let me point out where we would differ in regard to spending 
$225 million. Instead of tying up that kind of money and that kind of interest, that kind of operating cost in a 
program that could be handled by our banks and credit unions in this province, that money could much better 
be directed towards increasing the amount of dollars that this province spends on research in this particular 
province. One only has to look at what is happening to the College of Agriculture and he can realize where 
the dollars in this province are needed. We could accomplish both goals, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Member for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan by taking the philosophy of our party in regard to the 
application of these funds. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the member mentioned loans and grants to irrigation. Loans and grants to irrigation 
apply only under a loan for this particular Farm Start loan, it does not apply in terms of grants to all people 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. I had hoped that in the Budget which we heard yesterday a fairly 
substantial amount of money would be available to farmers outside of the Outlook area for irrigation grants 
and programs. Again the government is only paying lip service to that particular request. As well, to 
emphasize the need for dollars at our universities in regard to research, one only has to look at what the 
Budget said yesterday for agriculture in regard to research, very, very small, a drop in the bucket. And yet for 
some reason the government opposite is proud of that Budget. An increase of a little over $3 million. 
 
Let’s look at that Budget for example, a little over 3 per cent of our provincial budget is being spent on 
agriculture, 3 per cent, and yet I think something like $250 million — pardon me — $215 billion of 
agricultural products were sold in this province last year. Compare that to the amount of money — and I will 
be dealing with this further when we debate this particular Budget next week on how the government is, in 
effect, shafting 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

74 
 

the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. The farmer, in effect, contributes a much larger percentage of 
the dollars towards this provincial government and receives very few in return. Pardon me for diversing a bit 
from this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. I would like now to get back to Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 
Agricultural Incentives Act, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The member opposite also talks about a hog subsidy. A subsidy for the hog producers in Saskatchewan. 
Now, I don’t know whether that came under the Agricultural Incentives Act or whether it didn’t. Mind you, 
my hogs graded so high that I didn’t receive much of that particular program. I got it out of what I produced. 
While we are talking about a hog subsidy program, let me say as well, that that particular subsidy program 
was put in for one reason only — for one reason only — and that was not to help the hog producers in this 
province. That, Mr. Speaker, was put in because we are drawing close to an election. The government 
members opposite realized that if they didn’t do something to cushion the blow to hog producers in 
Saskatchewan, their compulsory Hog Marketing Commission would have possibly elected much fewer 
members than we see over there right now. 
 
But, in the same breath, let me say, Mr. Speaker, that the present program which was introduced by the 
members opposite, I must congratulate them on it and say it is a much better program than any kind of 
handout which they gave to the hog producers in this province prior to that. It’s an insurance program. It is 
based somewhat similar to the Grain Stabilization Bill, which means that hog producers are buying an 
insurance premium to protect their particular livelihood in the future and it is not going to be a drain on the 
taxpayers of this province. But I must reiterate that the only reason why that subsidy program was given to 
hog producers in this province was two-fold. One, because the Hog Marketing Commission was rammed 
down the throats of hog producers in this province. Secondly, because we are drawing close to a provincial 
election and something had to be done to cushion the possible effect that may happen in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am talking much longer on this particular bill and areas surrounding it than I had expected. I 
beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in proposing amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974, 
which will further limit the activities of non-residents of this province in the market for Saskatchewan 
farmland. The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974 was designed to limit the amount of Saskatchewan 
farmland which could be owned or acquired by non-residents of the province and by non-agricultural 
corporations. Non-residents are presently limited to the ownership or acquisition of a maximum aggregate 
landholding valued at $15,000 for municipal assessment purposes. Non-agricultural corporations are limited 
to the ownership of 160 acres of Saskatchewan farmland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this act was originally passed it was felt that these limits would provide an effective 
deterrent to the non-resident investor-speculator and to the large non-agricultural corporations. I am pleased 
to report that the act has provided that deterrent to the large non-agricultural corporations. On the other hand, 
Mr. Speaker, 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

75 
 

three years of experience in administering The Farm Ownership Act have shown us that non-resident 
interests have, and continue to purchase, large tracts of Saskatchewan farmland in spite of our act. 
 
Let me give you an indication, Mr. Speaker, of the magnitude of non-resident purchases up to the end of 
September, 1977. In the 1976 calendar year, individuals residing outside of Saskatchewan purchased a total 
of 173,773 acres of farmland in this province. From January 1, 1977 until the end of September, 1977 non-
residents purchased on additional 122,000 acres. Mr. Speaker, in the period from January 1, 1976 until the 
end of September, 1977, non-resident interests gained control of 295,864 acres of farmland in Saskatchewan. 
These figures clearly indicate that the limitations of The Farm Ownership Act were no longer providing an 
effective deterrent to the non-resident investor-speculator both because of the high maximum limits of the 
act and because of certain loopholes which made it possible for individuals and groups of individuals to 
circumvent the provisions of the act. 
 
As an example, let me refer to a situation which arose last year in the Cupar area where a group of Toronto 
individuals acquired approximately 4,500 acres of prime agricultural land. This was accomplished by having 
each of several individuals acquire title to land holdings just within the $15,000 limitations. Given the facts 
of the situation it became obvious that these individuals were accomplishing exactly what the act was 
intended to prevent. This also points up the fact that the problem of absentee ownership is no less serious 
because the owners happen to be Canadians as opposed to being non-Canadians. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, non-residents, predominantly West German interests, have also acquired 
approximately 7,500 acres of good farmland in the Riceton-Lajord area and there are further indications that 
some Italian interests are moving into the Carnduff area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the demand for farmland by non-residents was obviously on the increase. Combined with the 
increase in non-resident purchases in Saskatchewan another factor came to light. Both Manitoba and Alberta 
have now introduced restrictive legislation. Alberta has placed a 20-acre limitation on foreign individuals 
and foreign-controlled corporations. Manitoba has placed a 160-acre limit on non-Canadian residents and a 
640-acre limit on non-farmers. In the absence of a more consistent limitation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
legislation in our neighboring provinces would surely have channelled, particularly the foreign demand for 
farmland, into this province. 
 
I am very disturbed however, Mr. Speaker, to hear that the new Tory Government in Manitoba is seriously 
considering the removal of this very vital protection from the farmers of that province. It appears once again 
that they are going to throw the valuable farm lands of that province open to the land speculators and non-
resident investors whose unrestrained bidding will force prices of the limited land resource of that province 
far beyond its productive value. This will make it even more difficult for young farmers in that province to 
obtain an adequate land base. One should not have been surprised at that reversal of policy however when 
one looks at the composition of the task forces being set up in that province by their Tory government to 
redirect that government’s policies. Almost to a man, Mr. Speaker, these task forces are made up of 
executives of investment companies, insurance companies, real estate companies and multinational 
corporation executives. Not much room there, Mr. Speaker, for farmers and workers to determine their 
future. 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

76 
 

Mr. Speaker, given the obvious trends towards increasing non-resident ownership of this province’s most 
valuable resource, it is little wonder that the people of rural Saskatchewan have voiced their concern. In 
August of last year I had the opportunity of meeting with the representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the United Grain Growers, the National 
Farmers’ Union and the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture to discuss the question of farmland 
ownership. These organizations were unanimous in recommending that the provisions of The Farm 
Ownership Act should be amended to further limit the activities of non-residents in the market for the 
Saskatchewan farmland. In response to the pressures from the major farm organizations and in response to 
the increasing demand by non-resident interest and in response to the passing of more restrictive legislation 
in Manitoba and Alberta, I am proposing that the provisions of The Farm Ownership Act be amended as 
follows: 
 

1. Effective September 15, 1977 non-resident individuals who are not closely tied with the farm 
operation or farmland as a result of being born or raised on the farm, or have parents or brothers and 
sisters or aunts or uncles who are closely involved with the farm operation, would be limited to the 
ownership or acquisition of an aggregate landholding of 160 acres or one-quarter section, whichever 
is the greater. 

 
2. All exemptions and exceptions provided for in the original Farm Ownership Act will still 
apply in the new amended act. 

 
3. The maximum level of fines for violators of the Act will be substantially increased to provide 
an additional deterrent. 
 
4. The amendments will provide the Farm Ownership Board broader investigative powers in 
order to ensure that the provisions of The Farm Ownership Act are being complied with. 

 
5. The amendments will provide The Farm Ownership Act with the authority to grant 
exemptions to non-agricultural corporations which acquire land for farming purposes where the 
acquisition is not inconsistent with the intent of the act. For example, where a shareholder has more 
than one occupation but intends to make farming his principal occupation at some time in the future, 
or where a religious or an educational institution acquires land which it will not otherwise be 
permitted to acquire. 

 
6. A new section 20A places the onus of proving whether a person or a corporation is a non-
resident person, or a non-agricultural corporation, or it does not have a land holding in contravention 
of this act, upon that person or corporation. In many cases where contraventions are suspected proof 
is difficult or impossible to obtain because a non-resident person or agricultural corporation is 
outside of provincial jurisdiction. This clause will place the onus of proof on the land holder 
concerned in any action or application brought before the courts. 

 
7. The balance of the amendments are basically housekeeping in nature and provide exemptions 
to all rural and urban municipalities, as well as a five year exemption to non-agricultural corporations 
which acquire land in excess of the 160 acre maximum by devise or through a will. 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

77 
 

An amendment to The Land Titles Act soon to come before the Legislature will require the disclosure of the 
names and permanent addresses of all persons, including a disclosure of the extent of their interest in all land 
transferred in the future. This will provide the Farm Ownership Board with a much greater capacity to 
determine situations where persons are attempting to contravene the intentions of this act. There are those, 
Mr. Speaker, who would have you believe that there is no need for this kind of legislation to restrict land 
ownership to legitimate Saskatchewan residents. One needs only to look at what has already happened in 
parts of the United States to realize how quickly farmers can lose control of their own destiny. In a recent 
trip to one mid-US state I was amazed to discover that well over 50 per cent of the farmland of that state is 
not held by local farmers but by large land development companies, insurance companies and oil magnates 
or other corporate interests. In many cases these corporations hold vast amounts of land which are managed 
by management teams whose job it is to make all the major production and management decisions. The 
resident farmer merely does what the management team directs. He does not own the land or control 
production, he is a pawn to the owners and the managers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that some members of the House may have had an opportunity last year to look 
at the John Deere Furrow, that nice green corporate corporation . . . 
 
MISS CLIFFORD:— Watch what you say about John Deere! 
 
MR. KAEDING:— Okay. If you’ll remember the front page of that particular issue, it showed a beautiful 
farmstead. It had a nice barn in the background and a house. It had three mailboxes in front. The top one was 
labelled, the owner. The second box was labelled, the manager and the third one was labelled, the farmer. 
Then inside that glossy publication it showed the tremendous value of that kind of a structure where the 
farmer didn’t have to buy his land, he didn’t have to worry about finances, he didn’t have to worry about 
management because somebody was managing the farm for him. All he needed to do was put his crop in and 
go on vacation. They were trying to indicate in four or five very well chosen pages of words what a very 
good kind of life this was for farmers. Now I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that this is not the future I want to see 
for our farmers in this province, nor is it, I am sure, the kind of future supported by our farm organizations. 
But without the kind of legislation as outlined here, we would certainly be facing that same kind of corporate 
pressure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the province was conceived we have grown and prospered through the hard work and 
determination of our farmers. Our agricultural land base was broken and cleared by people who had a stake 
in this province and who are committed to the development and maintenance of rural Saskatchewan. The 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, 1974 re-affirm this government’s commitment to 
the promotion and maintenance of a healthy and vibrant rural Saskatchewan based on a agricultural industry 
which is owned and controlled by the agricultural producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the revised terms of the amendments being proposed here were announced in September 
of 1977, there are indications that some real estate companies and individual land speculators are attempting 
again through various subterfuges to evade the intent of this act. We have attempted in these amendments to 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

78 
 

leave enough room for non-residents and corporations to limited purchase in this province to meet what 
often are legitimate needs. However, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if these offending speculators and 
real estate companies continue to play games with the intent of this act, this government will not hesitate to 
take further steps to further restrict their activities with the full knowledge that they will be supported in this 
action by the farm organizations of this province. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this 
bill. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— Mr. Speaker, replying to the remarks made by the Minister of 
Agriculture regarding the amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, I would like to remind 
him that if he had been listening he would be aware that the Progressive Conservative Party had a major 
concern regarding the loss of Saskatchewan farmland to the non-residents. It doesn’t take long I see now for 
me to get the Attorney General riled . . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW:— . . . . Kissing them good-bye. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK:— Yes, I’ll be coming around to that, Mr. Attorney General. You seem to be very easily 
sucked in these days. I don’t know what’s happened, you had too long a recess or something. 
 
Anyway responding to the Minister of Agriculture. The loss of land from Saskatchewan to non-residents is a 
primary concern to the Conservative Party and we were making recommendations to you, as you were aware 
that some changes would have to be made. Some of the land that more recently was lost you mentioned the 
Cupar area, is in the Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency in the seat of the Minister responsible for 
Municipal Affairs, and knowing the Minister quite well I would be very certain in my mind that he had a lot 
to say to you regarding changes that were required to this act. It wasn’t until that particular part of land was 
lost to Saskatchewan that it was announced by you, as Minister of Agriculture, that some changes would be 
introduced. For that I think that maybe we have to give a lot of credit to the Minister and the member for 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. It’s too bad that you, as Minister of Agriculture, could not have seen this 
happening and introduced those changes yourself. 
 
The problem that we have had in Saskatchewan has been very simple. In terms of land and land use the 
maintenance of rural Saskatchewan has been left to very few, in particular the farmers. You can mention all 
kinds of programs and dollars that were spent on maintaining farmers, if you like, in their areas of 
production, whichever they were, livestock, grain, but more important I still maintain that you have not 
directed your attention to those rural areas in a more diversified way, in particular in the maintenance of 
schools and hospitals and those services that rural Saskatchewan has got to have in order to survive and to 
exist. That burden, in my opinion, has been placed squarely on the shoulders of those few individuals and 
that’s the farmers in the rural areas. 
 
Now I have to question whether you really are concerned about the individual landowners, the people of 
Saskatchewan. You were doing quite well in your presentation in speaking on the second reading of this bill, 
but then you did something which is not very becoming of you as an individual and that is that you had to get 
political. You mentioned Manitoba, and I don’t know why you’d want to do that because you are introducing 
a bill for which you want to have acceptance from the opposition side of the House; or at least you should 
want to have acceptance but we’re not going to oppose it. You would like us to oppose it because you know 
that whether we oppose it 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

79 
 

or don’t, you haven’t enough members to outvote us on any piece of legislation. For that reason, at this point 
in time, you can be very safe in being political because you don’t really need our support from this side of 
the House. I wouldn’t be so sure of myself, Mr. Minister. You may very soon find yourself in a position 
where you may not be on that side of the House but you might be over here and an opposition member. You 
might like to see the government of the day wanting to get that support from the opposition side of the House 
and I’m telling you that you can’t get that support in the fashion that you present your case. 
 
Now then, for that reason, to suggest what Tory Manitoba is doing or Tory Ontario, I know it’s are Tory 
Alberta. I know there are a lot of provinces with Tory governments but you won’t have to worry about it. It’ll 
be Tory Saskatchewan soon. What it amounts to, Mr. Minister, is that you’re more concerned with your 
political importance. When you get political like that, then you are with the individual in this province. Now 
if that were not the case you wouldn’t have mentioned Tory Manitoba because, after all, this is 
Saskatchewan, this is an act that pertains to Saskatchewan. It really hasn’t got anything to do with Manitoba. 
 
There are some other things that you’re going to have to just take a look at and understand and I don’t think 
it’s too difficult to understand that land is a fixed commodity. There’s always going to be a surplus of 
prospective landowners. I don’t think we can ever change that. Hopefully we’ll have some people coming 
back to Saskatchewan when the government is changed at the next election and we’ll have more numbers of 
people; therefore we’ll have more people wanting this fixed commodity of land in Saskatchewan but 
nonetheless we’ll resolve those problems without much problem, I’m sure. 
 
Another thing that you mentioned is this corporate ownership of land that you see all this land in the United 
States being purchased by people other than the individual farmers, big business, agri business, I don’t care 
what you call it, the multinationals is your favorite terminology. But surely the question has to be what is 
worse, or is it any different, to have big government ownership on the one side of this fixed commodity, our 
land, our province, or big business and multinationals on the other? I don’t see that one or the other is any 
better or any worse. I am sure my support lies very simply behind the independent members of our society, 
the people of this province. I stand behind the producers, the landowners that we have in this province, never 
mind those two extremes on the left and the right. 
 
Mr. Minister, the intentions of this amendment I believe are very well intended; they are good intentions. 
There are questions here that are raised as to the means that you are proposing to achieve these good 
intentions. I want to get further into those in some more detail, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend 
the Production, Manufacture, Sale, Purchase, Transport and Inspection of Animals and Animal 
Products. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in introducing this legislation I would first of all like to provide a brief overview 
of the importance of the Saskatchewan livestock industry to which it applies. 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

80 
 

 
One of the major policies of our government is diversification as one method to improve farm income. Grain 
production, notably wheat, is the principal type of cropping in Saskatchewan. Increased levels of livestock 
and dairy production offers an excellent alternative to straight grain production and provides opportunities 
for increased farm income within the present farm enterprise. A large number of farms in Saskatchewan are 
in livestock production. In 1976, 60 per cent or 41,000 farmers reported having cattle and calves. There were 
another 1,000 primary dairy producers. In 1976, 1,350,000 cattle and calves were marketed in Saskatchewan. 
Income from the sale of cattle and calves was $328 million and for milk and cream almost $38 million. This 
combined income of $366 million accounts for 80 per cent of the total cash receipts of $455,348,000 
received for all livestock and livestock products. 
 
In terms of the significance of livestock and dairy receipts income from cattle, calves, milk and cream 
accounts for 16 per cent of the $2.28 billon in cash receipts from all farm products. 
 
The value of the processing industry is also very significant in relation to the number of jobs and dollars 
which it contributes to the provincial economy. In 1975 the figures for the processing industry reveals that 
sales for dairy products amounted to over $63 million. Mr. Speaker, 1,314 workers earned over $14 million 
by working at dairy processing and manufacturing plants. The sale of these products amounted to almost 
$350 million. The meat packing industry employs over 1,500 workers to earn a total of $16,800,000. 
 
The diary industry has experienced dramatic changes over the last five years. Prior to 1972 the processing 
sector produced primarily milk, ice cream and butter. In that year our government in co-operation with the 
industry embarked upon the establishment of two new dairy manufacturing plants in Saskatoon and Yorkton. 
As a result of new opportunities created by these plants some 500 farmers, many of whom previously 
shipped only cream, have now become manufacturing milk producers. Last year this expansion enabled the 
province to produce 6 million pounds of skim milk powder; 1.7 million pounds of cheddar and over 1 
million pounds of speciality cheese as well as other milk products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now wish to turn directly to the legislation contained in this bill. It is designed to 
accomplish several things. First, to provide for the introduction of a price incentive program which 
compensates dairy producers who produce high quality milk. Second, it provides for the establishment of an 
indemnity fund so that both those who are licensed to deal in animals or animal products and those who 
patronize the licensee may avoid financial loss, if a licencee defaults in payment for animal or animal 
products. Three, it consolidates the necessary regulatory functions which are presently contained in five acts 
into one act. This will simplify things for the public because all of the regulatory powers will be one act 
instead of in several. 
 
4. It permits a general upgrading of the legislation to facilitate modern and current day practices within the 
industry, including provisions for the metric system as it is adopted by various segments of the industry. 
 
Upon proclamation of this bill the following acts will be repealed: The Livestock and Livestock Products 
Act; The Dairy Products Act; The Margarine Act; The Stablekeepers Lien Act; and The Brand and Brand 
Inspections Act. 
 
While it may be somewhat contrary to custom in this House, this legislation and a bill 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

81 
 

previously presented in the last session, The Animal Identification Act, need to be considered as companion 
pieces of legislation. This is because many features which were previously contained in the five 
aforementioned acts have now been redrawn into these two bills. The Animal Identification Act provides for 
the registration of animal marks only, whereas the present Brand and Brand Inspection Act provides for 
brand registration and inspection for cattle and horses. 
 
To assist the various sectors of the livestock and dairy industries in meeting their potential, my department is 
involved in a number of activities for which authority is provided in this legislation. These activities are 
related directly or indirectly to the financial protection of producers or to ensuring that animal products 
which the consumer purchases are wholesome and safe from a health and sanitation aspect. My department 
licenses livestock dealers to assure prompt payment to producers. The department also licenses milk 
processors, bulk tank operators, testers and graders and fluid milk producers to assure payment to producers 
and to assure the consumer that only safe, healthful dairy products are processed for retail sale. 
 
My department is also responsible for a livestock inspection program to verify ownership of animals which 
have been transferred or sold. The major thrust of this program is to provide theft protection to farmers. We 
now enjoy the co-operative support of the highway traffic officers from the enforcement division of the 
Highway Traffic Board and members of the RCMP in assisting in routine surveillance of animals which are 
being transported. The inspection program is supported by a computer program to enable searches for 
missing or stolen animals. 
 
During the warble season from about March 1 to June 15 there are animal inspections for these pests. 
 
In the dairy industry my department is charged with responsibility for ensuring high quality in raw milk. It is 
also responsible for setting standards to maintain this high quality. For example, standards are established for 
the facilities of processors, manufacturers and producers and milk quality to help ensure the production of 
high quality dairy products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dairy industry is very conscious of its responsibility to maintain high quality in the 
production of milk. A year ago they were very disappointed to learn that no authority existed in the present 
day Dairy Products Act to permit the introduction of a price incentive program to financially compensate 
dairymen for the grade or quality of milk produced. The price structure in the industry permits two classes of 
milk. The fluid trade which is for bottling demands the most stringent standards. Milk for the industrial 
sector must meet the federal standards which are more lenient than those for fluid. The introduction of a 
quality financial incentive will encourage producers to attain as high a standard as possible. This higher 
quality will help extend the shelf life of retail products in the home and this is becoming ever more important 
as the industry strives to reduce costs by such measures as twice weekly deliveries. 
 
The present Brand and Brand Inspection Act stipulates the points outside Saskatchewan where livestock 
must be inspected. This requirement was legislated in the days when most livestock were transported by rail. 
Because trucks are now the order of the day this requirement is restrictive and needs to be abolished so that 
livestock may move freely to the most advantageous market outlet. The livestock inspection fee of 20 cents 
per head established in the present Brand and Brand Inspection Act was established several years ago and on 
the basis that most animals 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

82 
 

would be inspected at designated points. At that time revenue from fees covered the costs of the inspection 
program but this is no longer the case. Since that time the number of local livestock markets has increased 
very markedly until there are now approximately 40 market points in Saskatchewan. There is a considerable 
variation in the functional standards of these markets which relates to the efficiency and safety with which 
livestock may be inspected. The present act requires that staff provide inspection upon demand for anyone 
who wishes to transport or market cattle and horses. The mobility of trucks compared to rail transportation 
and the hours during which many trucks operate often necessitate off-hour inspections on weekends, 
holidays or at night. The magnitude of this off-hour inspection has added significantly to the overall cost of 
our inspection program. 
 
Because of the great expansion in livestock markets it has been deemed advisable to establish stockyard 
regulations to ensure that animals are handled in a safe and humane manner. It is now evident that 
considerable merit would result from grading livestock market handling facilities to reflect their safety and 
efficiency. 
 
Changes in the conditions under which inspections must be provided should bear some relationship to cost. 
It is becoming ever more evident that authority is needed to establish fees so that a portion of the extra cost 
associated with the regulatory inspection may be recovered. Fees at market shall also bear a relationship to 
the efficiency of the livestock handling facilities for livestock inspection functions preformed by livestock 
inspectors. 
 
The level of protection afforded to producers by the improvement in the electronic data retrieval program, 
greater scope for surveillance provided by law enforcement officers and the manifesting or permitting of all 
animals being transported or marketed, assures the producer a level of theft protection which has never 
before existed in this province. The higher cost for the program will still be excellent value for the service 
and protection provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another of the major concerns related to the marketing of animals and animal products is 
assurance that those who sell are assured of receiving full and proper payment. This is the major reason for 
requiring those who are in the business of dealing in or purchasing animals and animal products to be 
licensed. Traditionally the issuance of a licence to a person wishing to act as a livestock dealer or agent has 
been independent upon that licensee being bondable. 
 
Present regulations pertain to licensee livestock dealers requires a minimum of a $6,000 bond. The size or 
value of a $6,000 bond is totally inadequate under present day livestock values. For example, one load of 
finished steers now could be well worth between $15,000 and $20,000. Therefore, if a dealer defaulted in 
payment the present bond would provide negligible financial security to the seller. However, the cost to 
increase the size of the bond to cover present day marketing practices would be financially prohibitive for 
many livestock dealers. 
 
Some additional securities provided under a clause in The Horned Cattle Purchases Act enables the cattle 
producer and agricultural society within the meaning of The Agricultural Societies Act, or a 4-H Club to 
collect up to 80 per cent of a loss. You will note that there is no provision for a livestock dealer to collect 
under this clause. Furthermore, this was introduced as a temporary measure and was not intended as a 
permanent solution. 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

83 
 

The concept for an indemnity fund is being advanced by the Saskatchewan Livestock Market Association. In 
our present bargaining system livestock dealers are an integral part of the system. An indemnity fund would 
provide greater protection to all licensed livestock dealers against default in payment by another livestock 
dealer, as well as offering protection to producers offering livestock for sale to a licensed dealer. 
 
The association has recommended that payment to a licensee cover not more than 80 per cent of the loss so 
that a dealer is encouraged to exercise reasonable caution in the course of his business dealings with another 
dealer or packer. On the other hand the indemnity fund would provide total and full protection to farmers. 
 
Funding for the indemnity concept would be by way of a fee assessed on licensees in proportion to the dollar 
volume of their business. Once the fund was fully operational and at an agreed upon level, contributions 
would be stopped or reduced until such time as the fund needed replenishing. The government or taxpayers 
would have no liability under such a scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to inform the House that the Saskatchewan Livestock Marketers Association 
initiated the discussions respecting the concept of an indemnity fund. My department staff has worked very 
closely with the association over two years in refining the proposals and in developing a program to the point 
where legislative authority is being requested. 
 
Members of the association recently pointed out that the indemnity concept would provide significant 
financial security to the marketing phase of the livestock industry. For example, the lending institutions have 
recognized the added security available to livestock dealers through the indemnity fund whereby a dealer’s 
loss may be guaranteed up to 80 per cent of loss. Thus, the economic viability of a market outlet could be 
vastly improved. Judgments on the validity of claims against the fund will be made in consultation with an 
industry advisory committee. This group comprised partly of members of the Market Association would be 
invited to make recommendations on the validity of claims made against the fund. This mechanism will 
assure fairness in settling claims. 
 
I am very pleased that the Livestock Marketing Association supports the concept of an indemnity fund for 
protection in their segment of the marketing chain. 
 
Consolidation of present legislation is simply good housekeeping. One act will be much easier for the public 
to understand and deal with. It will also simplify administration by my department. For example, up to the 
present livestock inspection powers have been in the Brand and Brand Inspection Act; licensing of livestock 
dealers is under The Livestock and Livestock Products Act and licensing of milk processors is under The 
Diary Products Act. Consolidation will make for a more uniform and standardized application of 
administrative responsibilities. 
 
Many activities, like the printing and issuance of licences can be computerized much easier if a basic format 
can be developed for printing all types of licences. 
 
A range of powers also existed in the previous pieces of legislation. Consolidation of the legislation, which 
existed in several acts, will eliminate the differences. 
 
The powers of an inspector to enter and search private dwelling is being rescinded in deference to a concern 
for the right of individuals. 



 
March 8, 1978 
 

84 
 

The present Livestock and Livestock Products Act empowered an inspector to secure a warrant to enter and 
search dwellings and to break doors and locks. To the best of our knowledge this power has never been used 
but, importantly, it is the opinion of this government that inspectors should not have powers which enable 
them to invade one’s privacy. Some aspects of present day legislation need updating because of changes in 
the industry. For example, the diary industry is looking ever more seriously at the concept of utilizing solids, 
not fat, commonly referred to as protein grading, as one criterion for evaluating or grading raw milk for 
purchase. Metrification is being introduced into the livestock industry and dairy industries, as in many other 
industries. This bill simply provides for an orderly accommodation of the system as the industry decides that 
it wants to switch over. For example, the dairy industry is working towards a target date of mid-1978 for 
introduction of the metric measurements throughout the industry. The Record of Performance programs, 
which assess the genetic potential of livestock, have been using metric measurements for some considerable 
time. 
 
Present coverages under The Stablekeepers’ Lien Act are no longer adequate. The act was designed to 
protect livery operators. Nowadays, for example, many people are in the business of finishing cattle on a 
custom basis. These people are entitled to protection in recovering fees and costs for their services. This bill 
will broaden the scope of coverage so that any type of custom service could be covered. Mr. Speaker, please 
be assured that the industry and producers alike support and have much to gain by the adoption of this 
legislation, especially the opportunity for new and increased levels of protection through the indemnity fund. 
I am pleased to move second reading of the bill of The Animal and Animal Products Act. 
 
MR. WIEBE:— Mr. Speaker, I have a few brief comments in regard to this particular bill. I was rather 
astonished at the opening remarks made by the Minister of Agriculture in regard to the processing which he 
appeared to boast about that took place within the province of Saskatchewan. When one looks at the figures 
which he quoted in terms of dollars and manpower, it looks pretty good when you compare it to the province 
of Prince Edward Island. But when you compare it to any other province in Canada, or for that matter any 
other state in the US south of us, it is a pretty dismal record. It is a pretty discouraging record. When you 
look at our record or our history of processing the raw material, which we as farmers produce in 
Saskatchewan, and that raw material is all exported to a large extent outside of Saskatchewan and processed 
somewhere else; the jobs and the dollars and the taxes that accrue to that province are going to the benefit of 
Ontario, Quebec and to some extent Manitoba, but not to the province of Saskatchewan where it should go, 
in terms of helping the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and in terms of helping the producer who actually does 
produce that particular product. 
 
When I first saw the act back in the fall session on the order paper we of course just saw the title of the act. I 
thought possibly it was going to be legislation that was going to correct that situation in Saskatchewan, 
correct the situation where we, as producers of a commodity which is considered our basic industry in 
Saskatchewan, would soon be able to point to the fact that this government was recognizing the fact that it 
had not paid enough attention to the processing industry in Saskatchewan and was, in effect, introducing 
legislation to correct that particular situation. That is certainly not the case in regard to Bill No. 7 as all it 
does, what the minister stated, is amalgamate three or four bills into one with a few minor — and let me 
repeat minor — changes. When one looks at the act one is disappointed in the fact that it does not address 
itself to our major problem or one of our major problems in Saskatchewan and that is the lack of a 



 
March 8, 1978 

 

85 
 

processing industry or a meaningful processing industry in Saskatchewan. One has to look at the bill and say, 
okay, do you support it or do you not support it. In effect, it is amalgamating a number of bills together. We 
can support that aspect of it. 
 
We cannot, however, support certain powers which are given to individuals under the act. I refer to section 5, 
subsections (1) to (5) and also subsection (6). The minister mentioned that this act is somewhat different 
from one of the others in which it removes the power of the inspector to enter without warrant into an 
individual’s dwelling. I must commend the minister for that. However, it still leaves the substantial amount 
of power that that inspector has under his control, without warrant, to investigate the premises and buildings 
of livestock producers and other individuals throughout the province of Saskatchewan. I would have no 
hesitation to that particular kind of power being in the act if it applied to say, the RCMP or members of the 
Highway Traffic Board or trained inspectors; inspectors who knew and understood exactly what they were 
doing and exactly what the law and the rights of the individual were in the province of Saskatchewan. There 
is no guarantee for that kind of education or that kind of training or anything in the act that will allow the 
RCMP or the Highway Traffic Board to facilitate the job of an inspector. 
 
One can, in terms of the industry being busy, appoint a farmer to be an inspector with a half-day or half-week 
course in what his job is to do and to then turn around and give that individual such massive powers as to be 
able to search without warrant, I feel is something that we are going to have to look extremely closely at. I 
would like to mention at this time that we will be introducing amendments to, hopefully, make some 
corrections to those portions of the act and once so done if accepted by the government, I think that we 
would be in a much better position to not have to worry about supporting the act in principle in Committee 
of the Whole but supporting it wholeheartedly. 
 
Before I adjourn debate again let me go back to my initial remarks and urge the government of Saskatchewan 
to really take a serious look at what is happening to our processing industry in Saskatchewan. We are on the 
one hand trying to defend the crowrate in terms of the grain producer in Saskatchewan, which I think is 
commendable and which I think every member in this Assembly is in favor of maintaining, but we must also 
sit back and take a look at what that rate is in effect doing to other natural products which farmers produce in 
this province. I am talking about beef and I’m talking about rape, milk, butter and other products which 
because of that particular rate is affecting the processing industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:41 o’clock p.m. 
 


