


























































Hansard: April 24, 1978


1869 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fifth Session - Eighteenth Legislature 

April 24, 1978. 
 

EVENING SESSION 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. R. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
BILL NO. 7 — AN ACT RESPECTING THE PRODUCTION, MANUFACTURE, SALE, 
PURCHASE, TRANSPORT AND INSPECTION OF ANIMALS AND ANIMAL PRODUCTS. 
 
Section 1 
 
HON. E. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — I would like to introduce the Assistant Deputy 
Minister, Jim Webster and Bob May, Director of Animal Industry, and Harvey Fjeld, Livestock 
Administrator. 
 
Items 1 to 14 agreed. 
 
Section 15 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 16 to 20 agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

BILL NO. 5 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE AGRICULTURAL INCENTIVES ACT 
 
Section 1 
 
HON. E. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Chairman, in the second reading speech, you 
are asking what is the purpose of the additional money. In second reading speech I indicated that there 
was a need to provide additional money in the FarmStart program, in order for us to have continuing 
money to operate the program. 
 
MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Did you say FarmStart? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, FarmStart. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Chairman, during second reading I asked you if, with this 
additional funding, you would be considering raising from $15,000 to $20,000 the figure required, or if 
you would be considering allowing those individuals who are making $10,000 to $15,000 now who 
must quit their jobs before they can qualify. Will you allow them to be considered? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, at the present time the limits are $15,000 of income. There is no 
intention to remove that at present. We are looking at a provision whereby if a person had an income last 
year and who wanted to go into farming this year, we would accept him if he was not going to get that 
income next year. 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1870 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, the problem is, there is a figure (and I an not sure off the top of my head 
what it is) where you will qualify, but you must quit your job first before they would look at your 
application to see if you qualify or not. I think that is around the $15,000 mark. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, the new regulations will say that he will not have to quit his job until the loan 
is approved. But he must stop his job when the loan is approved. The reasons for that of course is, that if 
you are taking a large loan (as most of those FarmStart loans), you are really setting yourself up in a 
full-time farming operation, and there is no way you can have a full-time off the farm job and a full-time 
on the farm job. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, my concern is exactly that. I think we are on the same wave length now. 
People are applying, they qualify because they have enough land but you will not look at their loan 
because they are making that $15,000. But you say, quit and we will consider your loan. And they say, 
no, consider my loan, and if it is approved then I’m quitting and staying full time with the farm, and we 
sort of had that confusion. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — If he makes the commitment that he is going to go to full-time farming and quit his 
job after he gets the loan, then it could be approved. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Now one of your people in the, I believe it is in Rosetown — have you got an 
office in Rosetown or Kindersley? As well as North Battleford? Where are your offices? I now there is 
one in Battleford, it is either Rosetown or Kindersley and there is another one . . . 
 
MR. KAEDING: — There is one in Kindersley. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I believe they informed me that you are looking at moving to $20,000. Is that not 
true? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, I think that is not a fact. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

BILL NO. 6 — AN ACT TO AMEND 
THE SASKATCHEWAN FARM OWNERSHIP ACT, 1974 

 
Section 1 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Chairman, before we go any further in regard to this particular bill, we 
have suggested some amendments in regard to Bill No. 6. I noted that the government had decided to 
make some amendments to Bill No. 7. I’m just wondering. I have received no amendments as yet. Is it 
the intention of the government to move any amendments in regard to this particular bill? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING: — No, there are no amendments. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Section 3 



 
April 24, 1978 

1871 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — On this particular one, how long, anybody that has land now, have 
they got to dispose of it.? Secondly, can somebody come into Saskatchewan, buy a large tract of land, 
then resell it within 60 days and this is considered legal under this bill? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I think not. If he didn’t qualify under the act originally he wouldn’t be eligible to 
. . . there would be some legal complication. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Can a non-incorporated company in the province of Saskatchewan, come in since 
November 15, and buy land worth more than 160 acres? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I didn’t hear the question Ralph. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Can a non-registered company in the province of Saskatchewan come in and buy 
more than . . . a large tract of land and then resell it within 60 days? Are they covered by this act, or does 
this act stop it? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — It’s possible that could happen but if they did that, they would be in violation of 
the act and they could be subject to prosecution. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — There was piece of land that has changed hands in the last two months, 
approximately 60,000 acres, which is a large tract, which was sold to an Alberta firm and sold within 
three days to somebody else. Is that legal under this act? It has happened, I understand, in the last 60 to 
90 days. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — That particular item is under investigation by the department and we are aware of 
the fact that there was a real estate company which we think intervened in that and bought and sold but 
that is under investigation at the present time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, now that we both know the case we are talking abut, are you suggesting 
that what was done under the act in that case may not have been legitimate? I know that the people (the 
original seller) would like to cancel part of that to the speculator because of that, but they are not sure if 
they can or not. Now where do we stand? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, sir. This is the part of the thing under investigation but if it were a real estate 
firm working on behalf of a client, then the real estate agent did not actually purchase and he was just 
acting on behalf of the client. If he bought on his own behalf and then made a sale back, then of course 
he would be in violation. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — No, I am not a lawyer so maybe one of the lawyers, the hon. member for 
Riversdale or somebody, will chip in and help us out here. An open transfer, is that not a signed sale to 
that land company in question? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, we have asked the Attorney General’s department to give us a 
ruling on that. It is a new proposition to us and we have asked the Attorney Generals’ department to give 
us a ruling on that particular issue. 
 
Would you reconsider standing this bill until you get a ruling because, in this particular case, it can 
affect a lot of different dealers in this province? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well of course, Mr. Chairman, it will not do any good to stand the bill 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1872 
 

because the situation will still be the same. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Then you are suggesting to cover that loophole you will be bringing in 
amendments later. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I think that he is looking at a hypothetical situation and I think the act does give 
the board the power to deal with that situation but we have not got the ruling from the Attorney 
General’s department on that. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Would it be proper to ask the Attorney General when he expects a ruling on this 
particular case we are referring to? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I would suggest the Attorney General personally does not even know it is his 
department which is dealing with it. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Just a bit of clarification with regard to this particular section. It is my understanding 
that the section of the act which we are amending, which deals with the assessment of $15,000, has not 
been repealed, but that section 8A which will be added, which limits after September 15, 1977, the new 
restriction of 160 acres on non-residents will apply. Does the figure of $15,000, as I understand, still 
apply for any land which was obtained prior to September 15, 1977? If that is the case, my next question 
is, in regard to clarification, does that $15,000 of assessed value apply only at the time of purchase or 
does that apply from year to year. Now the point that I am trying to get at is that say, for example, that 
reassessment takes place. An individual or a non-resident purchased land in 1976, for example, met the 
requirements of the act, 1979, 1980 rolls around and that assessment is not longer worth $15,000 but 
may now be worth $20,000, is he required under the act to bring his total land holdings down to $15,000 
or, as I said earlier, does that apply only at the time of acquisition of that land? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that only applies as at the time he acquired the property, that 
would be the basis under which it is calculated. Any change would not affect it. 
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
Section 4 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 5 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make some comment here and I was going to 
introduce a motion to have the acreage in section 4 and section 8(a) and section 3 reduced down to 20 
acres instead of the 160. It is quite apparent that because there was no House amendment brought in to 
that effect that the government has no intention whatsoever of looking at our particular recommendation 
in this regard. I think it would be a waste of time of this House and this Legislature and of the taxpayers, 
money if we went through that procedure today and just have it voted down in the long run. I just want 
to say that I feel it’s unfortunate that our suggestion was not taken in this regard and the 20 acres limit 
was not imposed as against the 160 acre limit which is now in the bill. Other than that, that is the only 
comment which I wish to make in this regard. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I might note that in my discussion with farm organizations the 
question of levels was discussed and the general feeling was that 



 
April 24, 1978 

1873 
 

160 acres was an adequate level and only this morning in dealing with the Federation of Agriculture I 
asked them again what their opinion was of that and they thought that the level was sufficient for the 
time being. 
 
Section 5 agreed. 
 
Sections 6 to 9 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 10 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — I was up on section 10. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Can you talk into your mike please? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I don’t know but what the mike isn’t working but anyway no problem. I did want 
to make a comment with regard to section 10. Section 10, this is where we are concerning ourselves in 
the area of transfer of land in the family, members of the family, and it is going to be subject to the 
approval of the board. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, that is not true. I don’t think that has anything to do with section 10 here. 
 
Section 10 agreed. 
 
Section 11 (16) 
 
MR. WIEBE: — I have a bit of difficulty supporting subsection 3 of the new section 16 which has been 
introduced. That section in effect says that an officer, director or agent of a corporation could be liable to 
a fine of not more than $10,000 and six months imprisonment whether or not the corporations has been 
prosecuted or convicted. So in effect, even if the corporation may be found free of any convictions of 
any wrong doings, somewhere along the line a director or an office or an agent of the corporation could 
be found liable. It seems rather strange to me that an officer or director of a corporation should accept 
the liability of a company if that company in itself had not done anything wrong under the terms of this 
particular act. I would be in agreement with that particular section if the office or director were fined as 
a result of the corporation itself contravening certain sections of the act. But don’t you feel that this is 
rather a stringent penalty for a director or officer of the company? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, if you read the section it says, ‘Where a corporation has committed 
an offence against this act,’ so a corporation has then already committed the offence. Every officer, 
director or agent of the corporation who direct authorized, assented to or acquiesced or participated in 
the commission of the offence is guilty’ and that means that only if he has been part of the action part of 
the decision making, would he be liable for penalty. I might say that this is the same provision which is 
in many of the acts today, many of the consumer acts and so on. it is not a new provision. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Name one other act. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — O.K., you’ve got The Producers Consumer Products Warranties Act, The 
Community Cablecasters Act, The Labour Standards Act, The Business Corporations 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1874 
 

Act all of those acts. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — This provision, in every case, was opposed by the opposition. We think that 
you’ve set up a situation whether or not the corporations has been prosecuted or convicted. Once a 
charge has been laid then you can start going after the officers and everything else. You couldn’t care 
less whether somebody was ever convicted; you can still go after the individual officers or agents of the 
company, and it’s highly improper. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that those people in charge of a corporation 
are the people responsible for the acts of the corporation. The corporation itself can’t do anything. It is 
the people who are in charge of the corporation who are at fault because they had agreed to commit the 
offence. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — If you are going to have a criminal liability or a quasi criminal liability against 
the officers, directors or agents plus the company . . . why don’t you at least leave the liability of the 
individual until the company is definitely convicted? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, I would assume again when you read the act, that ‘Where a corporation has 
committed an offence against this Act.’ You cannot say that a company committed an offence under the 
act until they are convicted. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Oh, then let’s strike out the last line because that’s precisely what you’re not 
saying. You are saying that an offence in your opinion has been committed although the corporation 
hasn’t been convicted. It’s your opinion that an offence has been committed, so therefore you can go 
ahead and charge the director, agents or officers. It’s just contrary to what you have said. I suggest to put 
it in line with what you have just said that you strike out the last clause, whether or not the corporation 
has been prosecuted or convicted. That will clarify exactly what you are trying to say. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not a lawyer but I presume that this wording is identical to 
other wording and other acts which intend to deal with the same situation and I assume that that being 
the case, that this is the proper wording. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well you know if you’re looking for justification in other acts, you can go 
through any anti or sedition acts or anything else that have been held to be contrary to any standard of a 
Bill of Rights. Now that’s not justification and I think you know it. The fact is if you want to bring this 
act in line that you said that you don’t expect the prosecution against an agent, director or an officer 
unless the company has already been in fact, convicted before the courts. I think that’s a decision you 
have to make at that time whether you want to then pursue the ones responsible for the operation of the 
company. This act as it now stands allows you to go after the individuals whether or not the company 
has even been prosecuted, if in your opinion an offense has been made and that’s not what you said 
earlier. I suggest that it can be brought in line with what you said by striking out the last part of that 
clause. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not prepared to entertain that kind of an amendment and 
I would think that under the circumstances where a company is in violation and the principals of that 
company know that they’re in violation that there is good reason to apply a penalty to those people who 
are in violation and who have committed the offence in actual fact. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Whether or not the company is convicted? 



 
April 24, 1978 

1875 
 

MR. KAEDING: — Well I suppose if they’re in violation and if they have committed the crime against 
the act, then they could be subject to prosecution. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well I suggest to you. . . 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — I just sort of woke up a bit on this 
argument, but Mr. Minister, are you suggesting by this particular subsection that a director can be fined, 
even if a corporation has been prosecuted and found not guilty? Because that’s the way it reads. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, there could be in this particular kind of situation, an individual who has set up 
a number of false front corporations and that individual is the individual who is responsible for that kind 
of activity and yet if we didn’t have this kind of a penalty for him he (his corporation) could be 
penalized but he could never be penalized for undertaking that kind of activity. 
 
MR. MALONE: — That’s patent nonsense, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure who is advising you on that, but 
surely the offence here is a corporate offence and what you are trying to do is lift the corporate veil after 
the corporation has been prosecuted and then go after directors if that should be the way you choose to 
proceed. It may not be necessary to proceed in that manner. But surely the offence personally rests with 
the corporation and I suggest to you that for you to have a provision here whereby a corporation can be, 
in theory, prosecuted and found not guilty under the act and then allows you to then proceed against the 
director is odious to say the least. 
 
I think I know what you intend on doing and I’m not sure that we are not sort of arguing at odds with 
each other and both agreeing on the fundamental principle. But I don’t think we can give any approval 
to an act that provides, ‘whether or not the corporation has been prosecuted or convicted.’ I’m going to 
move an amendment to strike those last few words. 
 
I just ask you to stand this or reconsider it. what you are doing is something that I have never heard of 
before in law. Perhaps the member for Qu’Appelle has some examples or the Attorney General, but I 
have never heard of it anywhere in this Legislature and it is something that strike me as patently unfair 
and against the best traditions of British justice. 
 
So I would move, Mr. Chairman, that all the words after “imprisonment” in line 7 of section 16(3) be 
deleted, seconded by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Nelson). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We have an amendment before the committee. It is moved by the member for 
Lakeview, seconded by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. This amendment takes place on clause 
11: 16(3) and is as follows: 
 

That all the words after ‘imprisonment’ in line 7 of new section 16, subsection (3) be deleted. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Section 11 agreed. 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1876 
 

Section 12 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Mr. Chairman, some of the provisions of this section are completely 
unacceptable to anybody with a sense of justice and fair play, quite frankly. When we start having an 
agricultural gestapo like you are trying to set up on this particular bill, I find it shocking that you would 
appear before this Assembly for a government that hides and covers up SEDCO loans and refused to 
interfere and then has the right for a government investigator to go out and inquire into, investigate and 
examine negotiations. 
 
Into the lawyers office’s if someone wants — are you trying to breach solicitor/client privilege with that 
particular provisions, transactions, loans or borrowings? Have you got the right to go into banks now 
and credit unions and take a look at someone’s borrowing transactions, financial transactions? That’s 
what you have given yourself the right to do and I say that that is totally unacceptable to anybody with 
any sense of decency; you wouldn’t come before this house with that type of power. You are 
establishing, as I have said, an agricultural gestapo here to go around and check any transactions you 
want so that anybody’s transactions before their lawyers, their credit unions, are subject night or day, 
and that’s another area that wouldn’t be tolerated in the criminal law, night or day to go in and seize 
records and take any individual’s records, financial records. I say that that should be withdrawn totally 
and I think that you should redraft that whole section. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the act, if you go farther down, indicates that this can only happen 
if a judge issues a warrant authorizing the person conducting the investigation to enter and search the 
building, dwelling house, receptacle or place described in the order, by force if necessary, for such 
books, documents, papers, correspondence, records or things and to examine. That’ sonly if an issue is 
authorized by a judge. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — No, that’s not right. If you read that section, in fact, the investigation can be 
made and then you can go to the judge, you’ve got that in reverse order. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Section 3 says for the purpose of this investigation under this section, the board or 
the person conducting the investigation may upon proof of his authorization under subsection 1 and it 
goes on. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — What you have got if you have not read the particular, is that you can go out 
and authorize and have some proof of the authorization from the Farm Ownership Board, or whatever 
board you are going to use, to go ahead and make this investigation, then after you can go to the court to 
seize the records. You can go ahead and make the investigation in the first place. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, an investigator may investigate but if he is resisted his 
investigation, then he may go to the court, he may go to the judge to get that authorization. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well except that here you have got an investigator who is going to have some 
proof of identification. He is going to go up and he has got the power under that, as you have just 
admitted, to basically intimidate or browbeat someone to give them and someone, the innocent person 
may be sitting there, if I have to, I have to and give up all his records when in fact, at a law, you know 
the investigator, if there was a 



 
April 24, 1978 

1877 
 

refusal would have to go to the courts. Now what you have done is a highly odious piece of legislation 
and I can’t believe for the life of me that this bill was drafted by the Attorney General’s department, you 
must have got it somewhere else. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is identical, the same kind of section as is under the 
Securities Act, Section 27 and I think again, I think you have to think about the kind of activity you are 
going to deal with here. You are dealing with a situation here where if you are not able to get a hold of 
documents, if you are not able to get a hold of evidence, then how are you going to prove a case? 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well you can approve it, first of all find out whether there is a basic problem If 
you get some indication that one person has bought up all the land, you seemed to know it in the past 
when you announced some of the ones you have been critical of. You happen to know there without an 
investigation; you don’t need that power. You don’t need that provision because what you are saying if 
you are comparing it to the securities in my recollection that’s not quite the same thing as in the 
Securities Act .The Securities Act is done when there is a basis, an indication of fraud and this could be 
an innocent transaction. An innocent transaction, and you have your happy little investigator throwing 
his weight around under your guys and your auspices and then he can go in as I say to anybody’s 
financial records, any credit union, local co-op, anywhere and just take over that person’s records. He 
can go into any law office of any lawyer in the province and seize records and breach a solicitor/client 
privilege and that’s precisely the power that you have given. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, I think that this kind of activity would never be undertaken unless the 
investigator had good reason to believe there were documents there which he required. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What does he need it for? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, so you will have some power if you need it 
 
MR. MALONE: — What it says, ‘the investigator has to have reasonable and probably grounds to 
believe there is an offense.’ It’s not in there. It just says the board may authorize any person to carry out 
an investigation. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well the act says he has to be authorized by the board to make the investigation. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Right, and that is exactly the point we are trying to get across to you ministers. We 
don’t want the board snooping around in people’s affairs without some indication that there is something 
wrong! That is the point the member for Qu’Appelle is trying to make, that is the point the member for 
Morse is trying to make, and it is the point I’m trying to make. Any statute where you put teeth into it, 
you have to have some logical reason to believe an offense has been committed. Even under the more 
odious statutes that your government has passed — there has to be some genuine belief that something 
has gone wrong. In this particular subsection, all it says is that the board may authorize any person to 
investigate — any person. It doesn’t’ have to be an employee of the board — doesn’t have to be an 
employee of the Department of Agriculture — any person they want — to snoop around into the affairs 
of farmers! Now, I realize the problems this act gives you — you have to have teeth in it to make sure it 
works. The last act did not have teeth in it. We warned you about it at that time, we 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1878 
 

warned you about the possible abuses and all our warnings came to pass. But this is certainly not the 
way to enforce the act. It is not going to uncover illegal land holdings pursuant to this act, or whether 
deemed illegal in pursuant to this act. All it does is give the board powers that are far too wide, powers 
that I don’t believe any board in the province, any board in Canada has, unless they are involved with 
narcotics prosecutions or criminal prosecutions of some kind. So I ask the minister to stand the section 
and have another look at it to see if he can come up with a better wording, to give you the powers that 
you need to enforce the act but not make it so wide that every farmer in the province is liable to 
investigation by your board, if some lunatic on the board decides he is going to investigate a particular 
farmer that is involved. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I think one has to be a little rational when discussing these things, 
and I would assume the board has got more to do that simply want to investigate everybody in the 
country. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Well why do you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the act? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, simply the board has to have some authority to investigate contravention of 
the act, and if they don’t have the power to do that I don’t see how you intend to deal with the problems. 
 
MR. MALONE: — In any criminal act or quasi-criminal act, there is always a provision that says a 
police officer, a board, an agency, a tribunal where it has reasonable and probably grounds to believe an 
offense has been committed, or, it receives information that an offense has been committed or likely to 
be committed, can do certain things. But that is not in here. It simply says, the board on its own hook, 
without having any reasons to believe an offense has been committed, can start snooping around and 
finding out about the affairs of farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. And that is far too wide to 
enforce the provisions of this act. Now I ask you to show me in section 12, which amends section 19, 
where there is any obligation on the board to have this pre-information or reason to believe an offense 
has been committed. It is simply not there. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, if you would examine the existing act, the existing act has that 
power now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 
 
MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. We talked about the 
board may authorize any person to carry out an investigation and that is fair under this agriculture 
Gestapo that is being set up here. It goes on to say that it is not even necessary for the board to authorize 
each investigation. You said the board may do it. Would you take that out of there — that your 
investigator or your inspector whoever it may be, can go out and he can go and investigate any farmer he 
wants or anybody he wants or any transaction at any lawyers office if he wants to, without the board 
even knowing about it. Is that right? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sure, it is right in there. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, the board would authorize the activity of the inspector, but he does not have to 
get an individual authorization for each time that he is going to inspect. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, it says ‘the board may authorize any person to carry out an 



 
April 24, 1978 

1879 
 

investigation generally — and it shall not be necessary for the board to authorize each investigation.’ 
This is as I have said — your inspector or whoever is doing you investigation, can go out and get two or 
three farmers that the board recommends, get a hard time going down the road from another farmer and 
drop in and do a little investigation on him. Your investigator can go out and just hand pick whoever he 
wants to go after without you or your board knowing anything about it. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, again it says, for the purposes of investigation under this section they must 
show poof of his authorization — under that section. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Just read all of that. It has to show that there is proof he has been authorized 
generally by the board to conduct investigations. So, if he goes to farmer Wiebe, all he has to show 
farmer Wiebe is that the board has said, ‘you can investigate no suggestion that Mr. Wiebe has 
committed an offence there’s something that he wants to inquire of leave on. Mr. Minister, I suggest to 
you that this is an indefensible section. I think that if you took the time to look at it in more detail you 
would agree with the points that we’re making. Now once gain, I ask you to consider standing the 
section, bringing it in at a later time and if you’re still convinced that justice is to be done by this 
section, well, let it go, we’ll vote on it and you’ll vote us out of the ball park. I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that if you have a look at the section, if you talk to somebody in the Attorney General’s 
Department, Mr. Kujawa or some of the criminal investigators, they’ll advise you that these powers are 
far too wide. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure that they are. As you go on in the powers of 
inspector and the inspection proceeding you’ll find out that the person conducting the investigation must 
submit a report to the board, so he can’t . . . well, sure afterwards. You don’t submit it before. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — After you come into my office and steal all the documents then you make a 
happy little report. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, isn’t this just a little contradictory here where it says, ‘the board may 
authorize any person to carry out an investigation generally and it shall not be necessary for the board to 
authorize each investigation.’ Then you went on and said, ‘For the purposes of an investigation under 
this section, the board or the person conducting the investigation may: (a) upon proof of this 
authorization under subjection (1).’ Does this not contradict the other statement where it says he can go 
out and he can make his investigation without you knowing it? And it says a little further ‘upon proof of 
his authorization’; when he hasn’t even been authorized to do that investigation. 
 
MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I only want to make a little 
comment. I think the minister has received some very bad advice. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Section 19(1) which is not in the amendments says: 
 

The board or any person authorized by the board may conduct an investigation for the purpose of 
determining whether a person has land holding in contravention of this act. 

 
That’s what section 1 says. And these are ancillary thereto. 
 
MR. MacDONALD: — All I want to say to the minister is I think he’s had some very bad 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1880 
 

advice. He’s not a lawyer, he’s not a member of the Attorney General’s Department. And when the 
Leader of the Opposition and all the opposition members make a suggestion, it’s not the first time that 
any minister has stood a section until he’s gone back and checked it and got some legal advice on it. 
Maybe you’ll come back with the legal arguments which will justify the position. But you have 
certainly, by the looks of it, got some very bad advice from your department. Now, for goodness sake, 
sit it or stand it, go back and check with your legal advisors, check with your Attorney General’s 
Department and we can pass the rest of this act except that one section. You can come in here and then 
we’ll find out what the legal justification from the advisors that you had, and from the legal people in the 
Attorney General’s office. But don’t try and ramrod this through when you don’t even understand it 
yourself. You’ve had very bad advice. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, again, I think the misunderstanding stems from the fact that people 
haven’t related to subsection 1 of section 19. I think, if you relate back to that section it hangs the thing 
together. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — I’m just going to make one comment because you’re rather intractable in your 
approach. I hope you pass this because I’ll tell you that that’s going to every farmer in my riding. I’ll tell 
you what they’re going to do with your party when they see that. They’ve got enough concern. They’ve 
got enough concern with some of the powers that you’ve taken on already. And when you start flagging 
this around the province of Saskatchewan that you’ve taken upon yourself the right to appoint people to 
run out and, as I say, go to the lawyer’s offices and the credit unions and co-ops to take over the 
farmer’s records and the rural banks . . . I’ll tell you they’ll run you out of town very quickly. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well I might suggest to the hon. member that the farmers out in the country are 
quite concerned about the fact that there are people trying to evade the provisions of this act. And they 
are asking us to take the act up so that we can deal with some of these problems. These are some of the 
powers that are required. Again, I point you back to section 19(1), ‘the board or any person authorized 
by the board may conduct an investigation. That doesn’t say that anybody can go out and do an 
investigation. It must b somebody appointed by the board. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — You expressed this great need and desire for this piece of legislation. Are you 
going to use that investigator to investigate non-resident corporations wherever their headquarters may 
be to get their records? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, certainly we can’t do that outside of the province. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — It’s not agreed. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Chairman, I believe we’ve presented some very logical arguments to you as to 
why this particular section should be reconsidered. I don’t think anybody has gotten political, except for 
maybe the last gibe from the member for Qu’Appelle which, in my view, is entirely appropriate. You 
can persist in the attitude of ramming this down our throats but I suggest to you that you are just 
showing an arrogance that is unjustified for this particular section. 
 
Now you ask us to stand up and vote on this or to give our consent to this particular section. I can say to 
you and I am going to, I can say to you as well, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, that we are going to 
ask for a standing vote on it. because I want it clearly on record that the members of my part, the Liberal 
caucus, are not in any way in favor of 



 
April 24, 1978 

1881 
 

this type of police powers that you are authorizing under this particular section. It is far too broad. The 
member said Gestapo tactics. I am not sure whether that is not too strong but it really indicates, in some 
respect, the power you are giving to these investigators. They can walk into any house, any home, any 
bank, any law office, any place in the province of Saskatchewan and say, we want to see these records. 
We do not know whether farmer Wiebe or farmer Nelson or farmer Berntson has committed an offence 
but we are going to do just a little snooping around to see if they have or not. In particular, these 
members are members of the Legislature and it would sure be good for NDP friends to find out whether 
Wiebe maybe just has a little too much land or farmer Berntson has a little too much land. 
 
We say that these powers are inappropriate, Mr. Minister, and unless you are prepared to give us some 
indication you are going to stand the particular section, I am going to ask for a standing vote on it so 
everybody can see where the members of this party stand on this particular issue. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I am not particularly worried about whether he has a standing vote 
or not but I do agree that there may be some merit in looking at this section and reassuring ourselves that 
this is accurate and that we can substantiate the actions we are taking here; I think we can but I am 
prepared to stand this section. 
 
Revert to Section 13 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well now you have stood the section, giving yourself pretty well unlimited 
powers to take any records or documents that you need from practically any source within the province; 
notwithstanding all that power you have, you now say to the individual that the onus of proof of his 
being innocent — He has to prove himself innocent! Now surely that is unfair. You know, if you take all 
the powers you want and you cannot prove a case to be of criminal standard, standard of guilt, surely 
you do not deserve to win the case. To take all the powers you have of investigation and to gather all this 
evidence, and still require the party that is being charged to prove that he is innocent, is not right. Surely 
you cannot have it both ways if you want to have the reverse onus, then you can pull all your 
investigation powers out because you do not need them. It is then upon that person who is charged to 
prove that he is innocent. You do not need the investigating powers then. You cannot have it both ways. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, this particular section is in here to guarantee that if any 
non-resident who is outside the province does not wish to provide the evidence which we require, the 
onus of proof is on him to show that he is not in contravention of the act. We cannot go outside of the 
province and demand his books and accounts. It simply give us the power to require any resident or 
corporation outside of the province — it gives us that power then to say that you are guilty of the 
offence until you can prove that you are innocent. 
 
This is not new in our legislation. We have the same thing in the province of Alberta. In their Land Act 
they also require the same thing. It is required because if someone in Toronto is in contravention of the 
act and you cannot get the proof there is no other way except to put the reverse on a summons. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Well why not restrict it then to those situation where the non-resident has no 
evidence whatsoever or there is no record. Let me phrase it that there is no office in the province of 
Saskatchewan, no individuals in the province of 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1882 
 

Saskatchewan. I think you should keep in mind about the corporations for example that if they want to 
carry on the business of Saskatchewan they have to have one director here anyway. So they always have 
an office under the Companies Act that we passed last session. I don’t see any circumstances where you 
are going to need that because if you have done your investigations, you will have brought some records 
at least to the point of Land Titles and what’s available in the province if you use those awesome powers 
that you have earlier, then to turn around and say, we’ve got all your evidence, we’ve got all your 
documents, we’ve got all your records, we’ve got all your memorandums, briefs and everything else, 
now you prove to us that you are innocent, and that’s precisely what that section does. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well again, it says subject to subsection 4 of section 17 which says that where a 
non-resident or non-agricultural corporation fails to comply, you may take this kind of action, and again 
I point out to you that a non-resident may have all of his books and all of his records outside of the 
province and then how are we going to make him prove, how are we going to get proof that he is not in 
contravention of the act. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The member has asked for a standing vote on section 13. 
 
Section 13 agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 25 
 
Blakeney Mostoway Rolfes 
Thibault Banda Shillington 
Bowerman Whelan Vickar 
Romanow Kaeding Nelson (Yktn) 
Snyder Kwasnica Allen 
Byers Dyck Johnson 
Kowalchuk MacAuley Thompson 
Matsalla Faris Lusney 
Robbins 
 

NAYS — 15 
 
Malone Nelson (As-Gr) Birkbeck 
Wiebe Collver Ham 
MacDonald Larter Berntson 
Stodalka Bailey Wipf 
McMillan Lane (Qu’Ap) Katzman 
 
Section 14 agreed. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 6 
 

BILL NO. 16 — AN ACT OF CONSENT RESPECTING THE ADOPTION OF THE 
MANITOBA-SASKATCHEWAN BOUNDARY SOUTH OF THE TWENTY-SECOND BASE 

LINE AS SURVEYED BY THE MANITOBA-SASKATCHEWAN BOUNDARY COMMISSION 
DURING THE YEARS 1965 TO 1972. 



 
April 24, 1978 

1883 
 

HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — I would like to introduce 
my officials — to my right is the Deputy Minister, Mr. Art Hartwell, and behind him is Mr. B. 
Schwartz, controller of surveys in Saskatchewan. 
 
Section 1 to 5 agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

BILL NO. 26 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE RESEARCH COUNCIL ACT 
 
Section 1 is revised statute chapter 406, agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 6 agreed. 
 
Section 14 repealed, agreed. 
 
Section 19 amended, agreed. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

BILL NO. 31 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE SUPERANNUATION (SUPPLEMENTARY 
PROVISIONS) ACT, 1977 

 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, could I introduce the officials — George Todd, Chairman of the 
Public Service Superannuation Board immediately to my left and behind me is Ralph Gilbert who is the 
Chairman of the Public Employees Pension Fund. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I’m perhaps rising to permit some others, but the minister on numerous occasion 
has expressed a concern about pensions, superannuation, indexing of pensions and so on and I know we 
have had many private conversations about your concern and about what you think some of the solutions 
should be to the problems that I think all members will agree are facing us down the road unless 
something happens to the existing pensions set up in Canada, not just in Saskatchewan. I know those 
aren’t entirely related to the bill but I am giving the minister an opportunity perhaps to editorialize for a 
minute to indicate to us if anything has been done within your government to come to grips with this 
problem and whether you plan on announcing any legislation at this particular session? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, we are on the road of making some changes in respect 
to pensions but this has to be done on an evolutionary basis. What we are attempting to do is to move 
towards locked invested pensions. If you have matching locked in vested pensions then you know that 
individual will get pensions for each of their employed periods when they are pensionable. If we can’t 
get to that situation, we are in the peculiar situation where about 80 per cent of the people who 
participate in pension plans end up with either no pensions at all or totally inadequate pensions simply 
because they participate in pensions during their working lifetime, over periods when they leave the 
employ of that particular employer, they withdraw their own contributions to that fund and any 
unfunded liability on the part of the employer disappears. So, although we talk a great deal about having 
pensions moveable from one employer to another, it becomes meaningless, unless you have the 
implementation of non-forfeiture within the pension itself. So if Joe Blow, if he works and accumulates 
$500 a year and his employer was accumulating the same amount of money in his pension and he 
worked three years and then left, that $3,000 (that fellow 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1884 
 

might only be 24 or 25 years of age) will accumulate sufficient money even on relatively modest 
compound interest returns, until 65, sufficient to give that person a pension in the neighborhood of $400 
to $500 a month. 
 
We lose all of those things simply because people when they leave their employment, withdraw their 
equity and the liabilities of the employers disappear. In my view it would be much more sensible if we 
could get to the state where we could hire a person the person would be paid a salary, a certain 
deduction would be made from that person’s income with respect to pensions, it would be matched by 
the employer. That’s not a one-sided coin. The employer could argue quite logically that his cost was 
not $10,000 for that employee but may be $10,500 if he is contributing 5 per cent of this salary. But that 
only has validity if in fact that money becomes the property of that employee. 
 
Now the key is not just that bit of money. It’s what it may earn from then until that person is retired an 
that’s crucial. 
 
MR. MALONE: — I realize that that’s the minister’s position. You have given it in this House and I 
think you have given it publicly, but my questions ask you to go beyond that. Is this the direction you 
are moving with government pensions, wherever the government is involved in a pension and secondly, 
would the minister not admit that it is very difficult to get this type of plan across sunless it works both 
in the private sector within the province and indeed with the private and public sectors across the 
country? 
 
I’m asking you whether you anticipate any legislation at this session or the next session to bring this 
about within Saskatchewan within the private sector and secondly, what representations, if any, your 
government has made to Ottawa to have a national plan along the lines you have suggested? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I don’t think we have progressed that far, but I can say (and I am sure the member 
is aware) that we are in the process, again on an evolutionary basis in relation to the public service, the 
employees of Saskatchewan Power, Sask Tel, the Workers’ Compensation Board and the Liquor Board. 
We currently have, or had at the end of February, 983 employees in the new pension plan and we had an 
accumulation of $706,667 and that has not occurred since last October. There is a very rapid turnover of 
staff, not only in public service employees, but in the general private sector as well. In fact, if you look 
at statistics, you will find 16,129 persons resigned from the public service of Saskatchewan in the last 
ten years and that’s more than a complete turnover of the total public service in terms of number. It 
occurs much faster out there in the private sector. 
 
It’s an educational process. We must continue to alert people to the problem because of the demographic 
situation with respect to declining birth rates and increasing longevity of age. We are going to run into 
(and I think the member would agree) into horrendous problems down the road in relation to pensions. 
This is a move to attempt to get people to think seriously about that problem. We think we will prove to 
people over a period of time that this is the logical route to go and more and more people will follow 
that route as years go by. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Let me say in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, that I give the minister credit for 
recognizing the problem. I don’t give the minister credit for being able to persuade his government to 
move along these lines in the private sector other than with the 



 
April 24, 1978 

1885 
 

particular pension that they administer. 
 
I think that governments all across this country are going to have to face up to the problem whether it is 
in Ottawa with indexed pensions. whether it is here with pensions that become meaningless after a while 
because of the funds just being depleted. But let me say to the minister if he is genuinely sincere in his 
approach (and I know he is) I ask him to start putting some pressure on his colleagues in the government 
to face up to the problem and believe me, we can yell and scream on this side of the House all we want. 
Unless somebody on that side is willing to take it up and talk to Cabinet, talk to caucus, talk to your 
party colleagues about it, we are not going to get anywhere. I hope that the minister will undertake to do 
that. I know that he has in the past, privately, and I hope he will come out publicly and start doing it in 
the months ahead. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well frankly I think I have been doing it to some degree down through the years 
and I solicit the assistance of the hon. member in relation to changes in the MLA Pension Fund. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is the hon. member suggestion that the 1045 clause, which is in some pensions, 
be now passed through to, say from Day 1 and first year of service, that your pension will be held until 
pensionable age? Is that the suggestion you are making? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I am not sure that I have heard really what the member was getting at. If I am off 
the track he can refresh my memory or he can repeat the question. What I am saying is that I believe, 
and I believe most sincerely, that it is the proper approach in pensions to say to a person when he is 
hired, a certain percentage is going to be taken from your pay which will be matched by a certain 
percentage from the employer and that will be used for the purpose intended — pensions. 
 
The key is what that money will earn and I can give you some fantastic figures to prove that if you have 
any reasonable period of time in relation to the accumulation of those pension you will get some very 
substantial results. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I realize we are not talking about the bill. We are talking about the principle of 
pension money being tied up from the first time you start contributing so that it gather until you are 65, 
or retirement age. In that way these people will not work say, nine years, pull out their portion — the 
company’s portion will fall back to the employer into the fund itself to make it lack so to have an 
unfunded liability, if it is a percentage pension. But are you suggesting now that we should go back to 
the first job, so you are locked in from Day 1. And if you are suggesting that, how do you suggest we 
handle the mechanism for companies that fall by the wayside, go out of business, change. Are you 
suggesting now that a government monitoring agent will have to come about? I realize it is not the bill 
but come about so that these funds will beheld somewhere in trust for you at a later date? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I think it is fair to say, Mr. Chairman, that the pressure s that will come on pension 
plans down through the years will bring this about in time. I think we should be intelligent enough to 
plan ahead and accomplish it without being pressured by events. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I apologize for not having read this bill — the amendments. But are you 
suggesting, you are suggesting then that that will come by pressure, not by legislation? 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1886 
 

MR. ROBBINS: — I think essentially it will come through public education. 
 
Section 1:13 agreed. 
 
Section 2:18 as amended agreed. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Can I just ask one question on section 1, I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, with your permission 
to go back. It says for the purpose of this section where the superannuate has no spouse at the time of 
death he shall be deemed to have been predeceased by his spouse. If a man or a woman is legally 
separated or are not living together, say a legal separation you would take it as he had been predeceased 
by his wife? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, the payment will be made only to a divorced person or a single parent. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Just run that by me again. The payment will be only made to a — say it’s my case and I 
was divorced and I passed away, you mean my ex-wife would get it or would not get it? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, she would not. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well then, what about legal separation? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — But your children would. If you had children under 18 they would get the payment 
that would normally have gone to the spouse. 
 
MR. WIPF: — And it does not apply in legal separation. What about legal separation? It would be the 
same as a divorce? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No. 
 
MR. WIPF: — So, the wife then would get paid. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — In a legal separation, yes. 
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Sections 3 and 4 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 5 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, maybe I should just say one brief word on this one. I don’t know 
whether the members have read this section through but this is where we add the supplementary 
allowance. Admittedly it’s an ad hoc addition. I use again the examples I have used previously in the 
House. If you had three people pensioned one on a $3,000 a year pension, one a $6,000 and one on a 
$12,000 a year ago because of the depreciating value of those dollars, because of inflation, we pay each 
of those persons $420 additional if they had 35 years of service with the government before they retire. 
The person who was on the $3,000 per year income or the $420 increase got a 14 per cent increase in his 
pension. The person on $6,000 got a $420 increase or 7 per cent increase in his pension. The person on a 
$12,000 pension got $420 or 3.5 per cent. The theory is that obviously, the people at the bottom are 
suffering the most in 



 
April 24, 1978 

1887 
 

terms of inflation. This year we’ve upped those figures slightly. We’re now paying $490 on top of that 
$420 that was paid previously and on top of previous ad hoc payments that were made to those people. 
So that the person who, two years ago, was getting $3,000 in the form of a pension will in the current 
year around to the following year get $3,910. The total cost involved for the public service is about 
$618,000 and there is some $227,000 additional costs to power, telephones workers’ compensation and 
the Liquor Board. 
 
The key is that we use the flat rate approach. I did mention previously that some people do object to this, 
people on the higher pensions. Some claim that they would like to see a split on it and, perhaps, 
sometime in the future we will have to give a flat rate plus some percentage increase, because eventually 
the ones at the lower levels are getting considerably, in terms of pension, paid on those of the upper 
levels. 
 
Section 5 agreed. 
 
Section 6:43 amended agreed. 
 
Section 7:47 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, in the budget that came down from the federal budget there were some 
problems in there with annuities. Does this affect this part of the bill at all? You may know more about 
it. I phoned on it and I couldn’t get the understanding. There is some change in annuities that have come 
up under the federal government. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I think, Mr. Chairman, what the hon. member is referring to is in the federal 
regulations in the last budget, which hasn’t been passed as yet, they made a change whereby if you had 
built up equity in a registered retirement savings plan up until now you were at least required to put that 
money into a life annuity and you had to buy that life annuity from the insured or one of the insurance 
companies in Canada. 
 
The proposal is that that be changed. You are not required to buy a life annuity and you are permitted to 
take the payment of that sum of money, plus its accrued interest, over relatively prolonged period of 
time. You could start as low at age 60 and go to age 90, but presumably it is basically from 71, when 
you would have been required to take the registered retirement savings plan money and put it into 
annuities. That is the change that I think you are referring to. 
 
Section 7:47 agreed. 
 
Section 8:53 amended agreed to. 
 
Section 9 deleted. 
 
Bill No. 31 agreed to and read a third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

MOTIONS FOR INTERIM SUPPLY 
 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, I move: 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1888 
 

That a sum not exceeding $275,792,860 being approximately two-twelfths of the amount of each 
of the several sums to be voted as set forth in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
1979, laid before the Assembly at the present session be granted to Her Majesty on account for 
the twelve months ending March 31, 1979. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to her Majesty on account of certain expenses of 
the Public Service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1979, the sum of $275,792,860 be 
granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Committee reported progress. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved first reading of Bill No. 57—An Act for granting to 
Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending the Thirty-first day 
of March, 1979. (Appropriation Bill No. 2) 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a first, second and third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — AGRICULTURE 
VOTE 1 

 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Beside me is Jim Webster the Assistant Deputy 
Minister; Ken Johns, Executive Director of Extension and Rural Development; Ernie Spencer behind me 
is the Executive Director of Planning and Special Projects; Phil Polishchuk, Executive Director of C and 
LI (Conservation and Land Improvement) and Doug Grant, the Executive Director of Production and 
Marketing and Rick Knoll, Director of Administration. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): — It’s with a great deal of disappointment that we once again tackle what has 
become over the last seven years a rather disappointing performance in regard to the priority which this 
government holds towards its major resource, it’s major industry in the province, that being agriculture. 
 
It is disappointing, Mr. Chairman, because once again we are dealing with a budget that says to the 
people of Saskatchewan, we hold agriculture in such high esteem that we are only again going to 
allocate 3 per cent of our provincial Budget towards agriculture. 
 
There are many areas in which the government should be addressing itself to, to put agriculture back in 
the position which it so rightly deserves in a province which is basically considered the agricultural 
province in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
Again, let me say, it’s very unfortunate that this government’s priority towards agriculture only allows it 
to spend 3 per cent of its total revenue. In order for 



 
April 24, 1978 

1889 
 

Saskatchewan to catch up to the losses which we have encountered over the past seven years in regard to 
agriculture, one should have been looking at a budget of close to 12 per cent of our total provincial 
revenue for this year. 
 
There are many areas which this government should be tackling. We need a government, Mr. Chairman, 
that is prepared to realize the potential that agriculture does have in Saskatchewan and once they have 
realized that potential to find the resources that are necessary to implement that potential. 
 
I say that there is no doubt in the minds of everyone I this province, except possibly this government, 
that this budget does not adequately reflect the needs of agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to deal, Mr. Chairman, with four or five specific areas. Let us deal first with how 
agriculture is attacking the energy situation in regard to our farm economy. Let’s look at how they are 
tackling our education and research capabilities of agriculture within the province of Saskatchewan. 
Let’s look at well at how they are tackling irrigation, flood control as well a very serious problem which 
we will be facing in the years that follow and that is coming up with an adequate land use policy. 
 
There is basically nothing within this budget that addresses itself to these five areas of concern. 
Certainly they have make some token representation of providing small funds for a swine research 
station at the university, which I don’t think anyone will argue with. But, Mr. Chairman, does that go far 
enough? 
 
They are making some token recognition to irrigation in the province of Saskatchewan by announcing a 
grant of $35 per acre to a maximum of only 50 acres. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, this is a step in the right direction. At least they are beginning to realize that we do 
have some potential in this area, but why, Mr. Chairman, must they pay only lip service to something as 
vital at this and allocate in our budget a total of $50,000. Mr. Chairman, $50,000 is going to be 
providing for irrigation in Saskatchewan. All one has to look at to see the potential is to cross our 
borders towards the West. We will realize that irrigation in Alberta has done wonders in providing not 
only jobs, in not only providing more farm units (and this is a task that can be accomplished quite easily 
through irrigation) but also proves the industry the jobs for people not related directly to agriculture to 
take advantage of the irrigation development within the province of Alberta. We have that potential here 
in Saskatchewan and yet for the last seven years we have allowed that potential to lie extremely idle. 
 
What should have been done by the government is they should have said, look, we have set guidelines 
for irrigation at Outlook in terms of grass and maximum capabilities for that development but this 
government has refused to pass the benefits which farmers receive in the Outlook irrigation area to the 
rest of the farmers throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Energy as well is a problem which this government is going to have to tackle in terms of agriculture. I 
think that we have to realize that farm fuel operating costs and costs that are related to a petrol based 
farm commodity as a result of government action, not only the government of Saskatchewan but the 
government of Alberta, the federal government in Ottawa, is causing the most single dramatic increase 
in farm input costs of any other farm input cost that farmers now realize throughout Saskatchewan. 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1890 
 

Combine that with the drop of close to 5 per cent in realized income, combine that with an increase of 
15.5 per cent of realized expenditures and that leaves a difference of close to 18 per cent and the farmers 
in the province of Saskatchewan are suffering that, that cost-price squeeze at this point in time. It’s 
important to realize as well that the government at present in terms of energy is subsidizing our heavy 
industry in Saskatchewan. It is quite easy for them and they seem to appear quite justified to subsidize 
our larger industries in the province by lower gas rates. 
 
Let’s take a look at those industries. Those industries have got the benefit of that subsidy. On top of that 
they also have the benefit of being able to call the shot in terms of the price of the produce which they 
sell. They can pass their input cost on to the consumer and yet we in the provincial government, are 
saying to them, look, we want you in this province because of that we’ll subsidize your input costs, your 
energy input costs, why don’t they say the same thing to the agriculture sector, we want you to remain in 
this province so we are going to help you along with a cost reduction in regard to energy? 
 
I would have liked to have seen in this Budget instead the re-introduction of the farm fuel reduction 
program which this government had a number of years ago. The minister, when questioned in the House 
why the program was not being re-implemented, stated that the province would react in case an 
emergency arose. Well, where was the emergency when the government first introduced the farm fuel 
cost reduction program? If we go back we’ll find that that program was introduced in 1974 at the time 
when the government made its first dramatic increase in our farm fuel costs and the government of 
Saskatchewan is not the only one that should accept that responsibility but also the province of Alberta 
and our federal government as well But let’s look at the year. What was the emergency? In 1974 we 
were approaching very rapidly a provincial election in 1975. Was that the only justification they had to 
implement the farm fuel cost reduction program at that time? Was that the emergency? Was the 
emergency completely over with in 1975 and 1976 after they had won the election and they felt it was 
no longer required to place that priority on agriculture and might be looking at a re-introduction of the 
farm fuel costs reduction program next spring because another emergency will arise and that emergency 
will be the 1979 general election in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there is a slipshod way of treating agriculture in Saskatchewan and there is no doubt that 
the need is there. Again let’s look to our neighboring provinces, the province of Alberta, they have 
decided even though there is not an emergency of a provincial election coming up shortly they have 
introduced a farm fuel cost reduction program. It’s been in place for a number of year and it is one that 
will continue to be in place I am sure. They are saying to their farming sector in the province of Alberta 
and, I believe, in the province of Manitoba, look, we want you people to run as efficiently as you 
possibly can, we’re going to help you out I think that the agricultural sector in Saskatchewan has taken a 
long hard look at energy conservation. The farmers throughout the province of Saskatchewan have, 
indeed, said, look, we’ve got to cut down, we’ve got to cut down on our fuel costs per acre and they 
have done so. They have done so through the purchasing of more efficient machinery, larger cultivating 
equipment in order to cut that cost down and they have also changed many of their cultivation practices 
in order to enable some reduction in their total energy costs. And yet even with that participation by 
farmers and that reduction on their own it has still made only a very small dent in their total cost picture 
as related to energy fuel costs. 



 
April 24, 1978 

1891 
 

As I said earlier, what I would I like to see this government re-introduce or place in the Budget for this 
year is the farm fuel cost reduction program. They will remember by briefs which were presented to 
them by the National Farmers’ Union which they say is one of the major farm organizations in the 
province that they listen to. They, themselves in regard to their particular brief called for a 15 cent 
reduction, called for the re-introduction of the farm fuel reduction program. This morning as well 
Cabinet met with the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and they too in turn gave a large portion 
of their brief to the area of energy and farm fuel cost reduction. They in turn, I am sure, would support 
this government’s action to re-introduce the farm fuel cost reduction program. Even though there is not 
an emergency at this time which might be in the minds of members opposite, I would like to move, 
seconded by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Nelson): 
 

That this Committee recommends that the government of Saskatchewan re-introduce the farm 
fuel cost reduction program immediately. 

 
For the benefit of the minister for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan,. I’ll just read my 
amendment again, ‘That this Committee recommends that the government of Saskatchewan re-introduce 
the farm fuel cost reduction program immediately.’ 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We have a motion by the hon. member for Morse. I find the motion in order. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I was interested as always in the comments of the member for 
Morse. He finds it very easy at the present time to suggest that we should go to a farm cost reduction 
program. I recall some criticisms of that program in the past. I think it is a little difficult, Mr. Chairman, 
to suggest that we should justify subsidizing input costs on one item of farm expense. I know you can 
argue that farm costs have gone up substantially and income has gone down. I agree with that. It is not 
really rational to suggest that we should have a subsidy on one input of farming as opposed to a whole 
host of others which may very well qualify for the same kind of subsidy then. Why then would one not 
subsidize fertilizer or chemicals or many of the other major inputs in agriculture. It seems to me that the 
better way to handle the issue of farm income is to develop farm programs and farm marketing programs 
which provide some security to farmers in terms of market control whereby they can maintain for 
themselves a level of income which will allow them to pay the ongoing input costs which are continuing 
to rise through better stabilization program. I have to say in this particular instance that there are a 
number of stabilization programs now in effect, many of which we have worked with the federal 
government to achieve. We are glad that they are there. There are some pretty major inputs now in terms 
of stabilization programs which do provide for a farmer some security in providing a capacity to pay 
these higher input costs. Certainly we haven’t arrived at the ultimate in those kinds of programs but 
certainly we are getting closer to a proposition whereby farmers will have more adequate income to be 
able to compensate for higher input costs. For instance, if you will look at the marketing program which 
we have in the dairy industry and the egg and poultry at the present time they are able to put the input 
costs or part of their costs of production. Those input costs are recognized when they set their level of 
payments to their producers. It seems to me that that is a better way to deal with the income problem of 
farmers than to subsidize input costs. Because where do you stop subsidizing input costs? I would 
suggest therefore, that we would not support this motion and continue the debate. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, the amendment which the hon. member for Morse 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1892 
 

has introduced is in line with some of the questioning that we have placed on this side of the House in 
the question period. Will you re-introduce a farm cost reduction program? What you are saying in 
essence, Mr. Minister, is that you are not prepared to subsidize farm input costs at this particular level, 
and this is energy requirements. You must agree that you do in many other areas, in many programs 
which you have which you are in essence subsidizing the agricultural industry in areas where it may or 
may not require subsidization. Now if you are going to subsidize the agricultural industry in any area, 
surely you can’t be comparing energy requirements by farmers in this province with fertilizer 
requirements. Surely that is not a proper comparison. It is also in keeping with a question that I have 
been wanting to put to you, Mr. Minister, and that is, what kind of long range program do you have in 
mind for assuring farmers in Saskatchewan that their long-term energy requirements are going to be 
met? Now, when we look at . . . 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — They are independent. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, they are independent and they would like to be independent and quite 
frankly, they don’t want subsidization. They want the opportunity to make the profits that they have to 
have —enough profit to offset their input costs. 
 
You, in many areas do subsidize it. You are saying you are not about to subsidize them in this are. You 
did at one time. The member for Morse says it’s the only reason he can come up with and it’s the only 
reason I can come up with, why you introduced it and then withdrew it is because of an election. You 
can give us your justification, Mr. Minister, as, ‘well, we’ve got to draw the line somewhere, but to draw 
it on energy requirements is absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when you see a headline like, ‘Gas rationing Plan Ready if Need Arises’ — the 
federal government has contingency plans for gas rationing for Canadians. Now if we were to be 
hypothetical and I am being hypothetical, surely then we are not going to treat anybody differently — 
we are all going to be treated the same. Is that to say that production in Saskatchewan will be limited to 
the amount of energy that they can get, or are you going to assure in consultation with the federal 
government that the farmers requirements are going to be met? Now that is surely something that you 
have to put some thought to. What measures is your government going to take? Surely the rebate on gas, 
a farm cost reduction program in the province, is at least a temporary measure by which to offset some 
of those high costs — input costs related to energy. I am more concerned with the long-term policy. 
 
Now I don’t have your quotes here but when this was under discussion and I recall a conference I 
attended in Saskatchewan where we were talking about energy conservation in the field of agriculture. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I was there too. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, you were and you would recall that we were talking about using chemicals 
and not tilling the soil which could be a good idea — in many areas it is. We have been tilling our land 
and we should be taking some of the advice that Dr. Rennie has been projecting and has put before us 
for many years — I think about 12 or 13 years — that there are ways to conserve energy and definitely, 
we should look at those. But to come out right now when farm costs or farm net profits, rather, are 
declining, when the farmer is in a desperate need, is not asking for subsidization in every area, and you 
know right well that the farmers out there in rural Saskatchewan 



 
April 24, 1978 

1893 
 

would like to have a farm cost reduction program reinstated. You know that! What I’m saying to you is 
that your justification for withdrawing it is not strong enough — simply not strong enough. It is your 
responsibility as well to take a look at a long-range policy. What are you going to do if the federal 
government lays on a program like this? I as a farmer can only get so much fuel — the same amount as 
some person who is going out to the lake — 50 miles with his boat and whatever to rip around on the 
lake. What is more important than the production of food energy? It is the most important energy that 
we have. Surely, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Agriculture has a responsibility in this area. 
 
We can look at some other things — ‘Energy Rationing said, possibility.’ This was in January 4, 1978. I 
don’t have the date on this but it was in the neighborhood of a week or two ago and we are getting very 
much closer as you can see, to that reality that we are going to be looking at gas rationing. Now surely 
the amendment, the proposal that the member for Morse puts forth is valid; it is worthy of consideration 
and worthy of more discussion on your part than to simply stand and say, well we don’t feel that we 
want to subsidize the farmer in this area. That surely isn’t enough reason. When we look at statements 
by the Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources who said, ‘I do not wish to alarm you as to the likelihood 
of petroleum allocation in Canada but since agriculture is almost completely dependent on petroleum 
energy the industry should be aware of possible shortages.’ That’s agreed. ‘Agriculture should assume a 
leadership role in demonstrating a public willingness to reduce energy consumption,’ he said — a 
suggestion that received an enthusiastic response from the SFA delegates. 
 
Now then, agriculture, the number 1 industry of the province is being called upon to set the good 
example in this province. They are being asked to some way get the message to all the cars that are 
ripping up and down Albert Street or Victoria Avenue and producing nothing but pollution. They are left 
with that responsibility and I say that shouldn’t be their responsibility. 
 
The Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources goes on to say, ‘Given agriculture’s large dependence on 
crude oil, it would seem to me that the time has come for agriculture in Saskatchewan to bite the bullet 
on energy conservation.’ I say to heck with that. Why should our agricultural industry, our number 1 
industry bite the bullet on energy conservation? If we are going to provide energy for people in this 
province let’s provide it for our agricultural industry. How many times do we have to tell the people of 
this province, tell you of the government, that it’s number 1 and it deserves number 1 support from your 
offices and you are not giving it. 
 
In the last five year, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, you have had the golden opportunity to stand up tall 
and strong on behalf of agriculture in this province. You have not taken that opportunity that was before 
you at a time when agriculture needed a strong minister of Agriculture who was going to take action. 
Now you know, Mr. Minister, you can sit there and laugh if you like but you know that you haven’t 
stood out as others have. If you want an example look at the Minister of Agriculture in Alberta. He takes 
a proposal to the federal government for a domestic wheat price which will mean $32 million to Alberta 
farmers. No, but he is trying. He is trying. He is taking leadership. If you apply that same proposal to 
Saskatchewan farmers, it would mean in the neighborhood of $72 million to $76 million net income to 
the farmers of this province at a time that the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Moore, did in Alberta. 
Obviously you can’t take the leadership now as is being suggested from the opposition benches in terms 
of energy. We are asking you to. We don’t care who gets the credit. 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1894 
 

Our concern is with the farmers of this province. If you stand up and put solid proposals through on 
behalf of agriculture you can be guaranteed you are going to get my support, you are going to get the 
support of the member for Morse. 
 
This is a good sound proposal and I would like to hear you reply, reply to what I have had to say and 
give us some more reply to what the member for Morse has had to say on a very important subject to the 
agricultural industry, that being energy. Give us what you are saying in terms of temporary policy and 
also give us some of your ideas, if you have any, as to what your long-term policy is going to be if such 
proposals as energy rationing are to be introduced, something that our Saskatchewan farmers may have 
to face. Or are we just going to tell them that, well when they go to the edge of the field to get a couple 
extra bags of fertilizer or a cold drink on a hot day they are going to have to shut their diesel tractors off. 
That isn’t enough in terms of energy. And as was suggested to Mr. Minister at that conference in 
Saskatoon, possibly we could use chemicals and we could even take a bunch of cattle and graze them 
out there; they would be fertilizing it and keeping the weeds down at the same time. Who wants to go 
back in the industry? We are not going ahead very fast in terms of your budget; you have increased it by 
some $4 million. Considering the inflationary rate and the costs of money it is actually a decrease. So, 
Mr. Minister, very simply, I am going to support the amendment; our party is going to support this 
amendment. I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that you for once in this area take some leadership and 
support it. 
 
MR. R.E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to say just a few words 
on this motion It’s a farm fuel rebate and it is certainly not a subsidy as the minister claims. Certainly all 
it would be doing would be returning to the farmer some of the rip-off that the Saskatchewan 
government has been putting into the Energy Fund to spend hundreds of millions of dollars on potash 
mines. It is time they started thinking about the agriculture industry in this province and not waste these 
millions of dollars like they have been doing. 
 
He mentions fertilizer should be, could be subsidized. It has nothing whatsoever to do with fertilizer. 
There is a definite tax being taken on this fuel and it has been put in the coffers of the provincial 
government and it should be returned to the farmers. The farmers are in the tightest possible cost-price 
squeeze they have ever been in and the minister should realize it by now. All he needs to do is probably 
look at his own income tax form and he will know it. Fuel is certainly one of the largest expenditures a 
farmer has and he has little or no control over the gallons he uses if he wants to farm efficiently. 
 
Now the Premier made some foolish statement some time ago that the reason this was taken off was to 
encourage conservation. That’s absolute nonsense. I think the minister wants to take a serious look at 
this resolution and he should also be thinking about home heating fuel and other fixed costs that should 
have a rebate on it. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose you could make all of those arguments, you could make 
that same argument I suppose for many other industries in the province of Saskatchewan. Agriculture, 
although an important industry, is not the only one. There are other industries who could well claim that 
they are also important to the province of Saskatchewan and they should also them get a subsidy. 
 
MR. NELSON: — This is not a rebate. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, you argue that this is not a subsidy. Now I don’t know what else 



 
April 24, 1978 

1895 
 

you could call it. You are saying a rebate. I don’t know what difference there is in that name. Certainly 
there is no tax now, so if you are going to reduce the price it has to be a subsidy on petroleum. 
 
It’s interesting to note that when we had the rebate program on many of the farmers were indicating that 
it was a very inadequate program. It was, at that time, $11 million and that was a lot of money. At that 
time farmers were saying it was inadequate. In most cases $11 million only brought $100 or $200 per 
farm unit and in terms of today’s costs that’s not a very major involvement in farm costs. 
 
I know that on my farm $100 would barely ripple my pen at all when I am putting in the costs. 
 
We talk about energy conservation and the fact that there was a meeting in Saskatoon where someone, 
the Deputy Minister of Mineral Resources, talked about conservation of fuel on the farms. I don’t think 
that that’s something to ridicule. I know I have been a farmer for many years and I know that I have 
wasted a lot of fuel on the farm and I suppose farmers, as everyone else, have an obligation, if there is 
going to be shortage, to look at any way that we can to reduce that overconsumption. I know of many 
times when we sit by a tractor for an hour or two and let it run and didn’t shut it off. Those aren’t the 
major contributors. The major contributors are situations where we overtill, as you indicated. I know that 
there are many times when we go over a piece of land two or three times without any good reasons 
because we like to see it black, when we really can’t justify it, and those kinds of things are what the 
Deputy Minister was talking about. I think we are looking in terms of energy savings in farm buildings, 
much closer than we ever did before and these are important. 
 
However, in terms of overall energy responsibility, I think we have to look to the federal government for 
that. I think there is a great need for the federal government to be looking at ways of curbing excessive 
waste and excessive use of petroleum products in and around the entire country. I agree with you that 
cars running around this country. I agree with you that cars running around this country don’t seem to 
indicate any shortage of petroleum. When I see hundreds of cars passing an empty bus, it doesn’t warm 
my heart when I think that there might be time when we are short of fuel. But I think these are the 
important areas that the federal government has to provide some direction in. I think the National 
Energy Board will have to take some firm steps in that regard. 
 
I think that we can be assured that if we do run into an energy short situation that we will be there 
making very sure that agriculture has the top priority in getting whatever petroleum supplies would be 
available. I know there are many other alternatives to energy sources in place of petroleum products 
which are already being looked at. You have probably heard the proposition now that ‘gasohol’ could 
become a fuel of the future and that’s certainly something which we could produce here in huge volume 
if we were to do that. The cost right now, it’s not cost effective, but certainly it’s an alternative which 
we would have. 
 
I simply repeat again that in my opinion and in the opinion of the government, that it is not the best way 
to handle a cost price squeeze, is not by subsidizing input costs, but by providing for better mechanisms 
to improve marketing development and marketing capacity stabilization programs which will provide 
farmers with the dollars they need to maintain the input costs. I think that is the direction that we should 
be going. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, on the motion, I think if my memory serves me 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1896 
 

correctly, the stated purpose of the farm fuel rebate program was to reduce the cost of input to farmers 
during a time when farm in puts were crushing. Maybe Alberta is wrong, I don’t know. Maybe Alberta 
has decided that we still have these crushing costs of farming inputs. Alberta has said they would deduct 
12 cents at source, on farm fuels. Maybe they are wrong, I don’t know if you can show me, Mr. 
Minister, that the cost of farm inputs have gone down in Saskatchewan since the introduction of your 
farm fuel rebate program and its subsequent cancellation, as a matter of fact, it was kind of phased out. It 
was limited to $200 and then dropped. If you can show me where farm costs have, in fact, gone down, 
the input of farm costs have gone down, I will be more than pleased to join you and vote against the 
motion. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the member across the way talks about the fact that Alberta has 
reduced their fuel prices and provided a subsidy for farm costs. I would suggest that he look to Alberta 
and ask them why, instead, they didn’t use those same dollars to provide some assistance to a medicare 
program, which would have provided for these same farmers the same number of dollars of 
improvement as well as many other people. We look, for instance, at our Budget and we found that we 
had an increase in grants to farmers of $45 per farm with regard to the homeowners’ grant, which 
Alberta hasn’t got. We know have $375 in homeowners’ grants for farmers. That makes up, I am sure, 
for the subsidy you would get on a 12 cent reduction program That government over there decided that 
rather than do that, they would reduce the gas tax. Now, they made their decision and we made ours. But 
I think if you balance them off, farmers in Saskatchewan are better off with free medicare and with a 
good Property Improvement Grant than the Alberta government is with their reduction in the gas tax. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, I am not quite sure what you said. Are you 
telling me, then, that in Saskatchewan farm input costs have gone down? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, I am not making that argument at all. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t know what you were saying when you 
replied to the member for Souris-Cannington at all. You didn’t seem to answer his question. You were 
talking about Hospital Services Plan and homeowners’ grants and I don’t know what that had to do with 
his question. 
 
He was asking you, very simply, to show him that farm input cots have gone down, a simple question, a 
simple proposal. We want to support you, that is right. The member said that he would be more than 
glad to support you in this case, if you can show him that. 
 
Now, the fact is that you can’t. We are trying to lay on some of the reasons why you can’t and we don’t 
need to get into the argument about Alberta, because I believe your sole NDP member in Alberta got 
into the argument once in the Legislature in Alberta and one of the Conservative members got up and 
said, well, you want to compare Saskatchewan and Alberta, do you? He went down the list, and just to 
name a couple: farm fuel costs are 15 per cent higher in Saskatchewan than they are in Alberta; property 
taxes are 15 per cent higher in Saskatchewan than they are in Alberta; property taxes are 15 per cent 
higher here than they are in Alberta. So, we don’t want to be derailed and sidetracked on that insane 
argument, which this government of yours uses at every turn to compare this province with Alberta and 
Ontario. 
 
I wasn’t comparing statistics, I was telling you about the leadership, the leadership that the Minister of 
Agriculture in Alberta was exhibiting. I was asking you to take that kind of leadership in this area. That 
is very simple. I don’t want to get into the comparisons. This 



 
April 24, 1978 

1897 
 

is Saskatchewan. Let’s look at the resources of Saskatchewan, what our problems are and what we have 
to do to meet those problems. That is what this motion is all about. We see a problem and we need an 
immediate solution to it or an assistance to that problem, as well as a long-term, long-range program. 
What you say in terms of the long-range policy that you may or may not have, is that, well, that is a 
federal issue and they will be saying what it is going to be and we will make strong representation to see 
that farmer energy requirements are met. I don’t have any confidence in you, Mr. Minister, that you 
would do that on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan . None whatsoever. When you can’t get an 
increase — since 1975 we have been asking you to talk to some of your government members, talk to 
the Premier, talk to somebody and get some more expenditures, in particular in the area of research and 
the whole spectrum of agriculture. A small amount of $48 million . . . 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Whom do you think you are impressing? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Labour is making his snide remarks about, whom 
do you think you are impressing? I’ll tell you what I am doing. For many years, since 1904, when my 
grandfather came to this country, he made it on his own without government assistance. My father 
farmed and made it on his own without government assistance. I made it on my own without 
government assistance but boy it was coming mighty tough. Today we are in a situation where the 
farmers can’t make it without government assistance and there is something wrong. We are talking 
about one area as the member for Morse has proposed where you could assist in that area. That is what it 
amounts to; that there have been problems and we have got the same problems today that we had 20 
years ago. Some of them are just getting worse, that is all. 
 
You can go into any number of areas, your own leader of your party, the Premier of this province, say he 
politicked 17 or 18 years and so doesn’t see anything different in the west coast. Well, he can’t see very 
far and he hasn’t been very effective in 17 or 18 years in making any changes. What I am seeing now is 
the Minister of Agriculture who isn’t very effective in making any changes. It is a good motion and I 
want to see some support for it in this House. All the farmers of this province want to see this farm cost 
reduction program reinstated; it is as simple as that. I would really like to see you, Mr. Minister, reply. 
Let’s have a little bit more discussion about the problem instead of passing it off and well, what Alberta 
is doing or Ontario’s health care plan or something, let’s talk about the problem which the motion very 
simply lays out. O.K.? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what answers I can give that will satisfy the member 
opposite. Obviously, he says he doesn’t want any subsidy but he wants a subsidy .He just said that. He 
just said that my father lived without a subsidy and I lived without a subsidy and I intend to live without 
a subsidy. Then he asks for a subsidy. I really don’t know what he is asking. I might point out to the 
member across the way that he is so very critical of what this government is doing and I have in front of 
me a little clipping: it is rather amusing; it is entitled Manitoba Restraint in Spending; it says: 
‘Agriculture cut $4 million.’ That is that tremendous leadership we have over there in the Manitoba 
government. I see another bulletin I have here: ‘Farmers’ Portion of Alberta Budget is Best Described as 
Meager.’ It seems to me that government in Manitoba which is cutting $4 million on agriculture and a 
government in Saskatchewan that is adding almost $5 million is a little bit of difference. It shows a little 
bit more support for agriculture than that Tory government that you have over there in Manitoba. 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1898 
 

Again, I want to say that we feel that the onus should be on providing a better mechanism for 
maintaining incomes and increasing incomes of farmers as opposed . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Do you . . . 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, we improved the Property Improvement Grant which has enable farmers to 
carry another year without having an increase in taxes and I am sure that that is more than a lot of other 
governments have done in Canada right now. 
 
MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Chairman, I must take strong exception to some of the remarks made by the 
Minister of Agriculture in dealing with the specific motion which we now have before us. Let me say 
initially before I begin my remarks, that this motion that is before you today, is not asking for a subsidy. 
What this motion is asking for is a tax rebate. We are asking for a tax rebate and later on in my remarks I 
will explain what I mean by a tax rebate and not a subsidy. The Minister of Agriculture states that if we 
give this rebate or this subsidy to the farmers, industry will want the same treatment. And the minister, I 
must say wasn’t listening to my opening remarks tonight in which I said the priorities of this 
government are such that they are not looking at agriculture which is our major industry. Your 
government presently does subsidize heavy industry in this province. They are subsidizing heavy 
industry by a gross reduction in the gas rate to fuel the furnaces and to run that industry and to heat their 
buildings. They presently receive a subsidy. All that we are asking is that the same preferential treatment 
which you have given to some of our minor industry in this province be given as well to our major 
industry in this province which still happens to be agriculture. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture also states that what we should do — our priorities should be toward 
maintaining farm income. Certainly there isn’t a member in this House who doesn’t agree with that. 
Let’s ask ourselves, what kind of a job have we done in this province to maintain our farm income? 
We’ve done a pretty poor job. We must have done a pretty poor job because our income dropped, our 
gross receipts dropped by 3 per cent last year. Is that maintaining farm income? Our net farm inputs — 
our expenses increased by 15.5 per cent. I say that’s a pretty poor job of striving to maintain farm 
income. Eventually that may happen, eventually we may develop a system in Canada, in Saskatchewan 
where we can maintain farm income. We haven’t demonstrated our capabilities of doing that for the last 
50 years and I’m afraid it is going to take us another 25 years before we are able to come up with some 
kind of a program that is going to adequately maintain farmers’ income in this province. But what do we 
do in the interim? We sit back and say, look we’re working on that program — eventually we’re going 
to maintain farm incomes but because of the high cost of income or inputs, we’re going to allow our 
smaller farmers to drop by the wayside. We’re not going to do anything help alleviate their cost. 
 
Now why is this particular resolution so important? It is important because the cost which farmers now 
bear in regard to energy is a direct result of the actions of this government — actions of the Alberta 
government and actions of our federal government. It is not the results that have taken place because of 
the increase in the cost of living or the increases in labour or the increases in other farm commodities. It 
is a direct result of what your government, Alberta and Ottawa have done. They have increased the 
taxation on farm fuel and all fuels. 
 
Let’s look at what that increase is. On page 112 in your Estimates, your government is expecting to 
collect from the oil industry in this province, $349 million — that is a direct 



 
April 24, 1978 

1899 
 

result of the actions of your government, of Alberta government, combined with Ottawa. What you have 
done at the wellhead price is to say we’re trying to make the consumers of this country pay exactly the 
same thing that the Arab countries are saying to the rest of the people in the world. What did the United 
States do in this regard? Farm fuel costs in the USA are drastically lower than ours are here in 
Saskatchewan or in Canada. They are net importer of oil. They have to bear the cost of what the Arab 
countries charge them but they also take a look at what their domestic cost is and they have averaged 
that cost out. They have taken what it costs to produce a barrel of oil in the USA — they have taken 
what it cost them to buy a barrel of oil from the Arab countries and average that out, and they have said 
to the consumers in the USA, we will average that price out and give you the benefit of the doubt. 
 
What have you done? What has your government and Alberta and Ottawa done? They’ve said, look 
here’s a nest egg for us — the world price is something like $11 a barrel but it only costs us $3.50 to 
produce it in this country but we’re going to charge everybody in this country $11 a barrel, so we can 
get the advantage of that $349 million — $349 million which is going to go into the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund, a new program this year and who is paying for it? The farmers, who every time they put 
a gallon of diesel fuel or purple gas into their piece of machinery are paying that cost. What has that 
meant in increased dollars? It has meant close to 45 to 50 per cent increase in their cost. That, Mr. 
Minister, is why we are asking for a tax rebate, not of subsidy or a handout or a gift. 
 
You are taking it from us on one hand and what we say to you is, give part of it back. The federal 
government because of their actions in regard to the excise tax has decided to give farmers 10 cents back 
which is what they are collecting. What has your government done? Of that $349 million, how much are 
you giving back to the farmers to protect their industry? You are prepared to subsidize heavy industry in 
this province with reductions in natural gas rates but not to our farm producers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You said earlier as well, what’s $100 to the average farmer in the province of Saskatchewan? That’s 
because of your priorities. What you have said is that you are going to refund four cents a gallon to a 
maximum of so many gallons. What the National Farmers’ Union has asked for is a 15 cent per gallon 
reduction and I hope there is no limit on that. 
 
You take me for example. I think I am an average farmer, farming a little over two sections of land. I use 
approximately 5000 gallon of diesel fuel and purple gas each year. What does a 15 cent reduction mean 
to me and what does a 15 cent reduction mean to every farmer in this province, to every average size 
farmer? Not $100, Mr. Minister, but $750 and that is a lot higher than the $185 which Alberta charges 
for their medicare premiums in that particular province and you can’t compare that savings to the fact 
that we receiving free medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, here it is priorities, just talking about the idea that we have free medicare in Saskatchewan as 
compared to Alberta. Whom does our free medicare help you compare that to our farm fuel costs — to 
our inputs in farm fuel costs? It helps the guy who lives in the city who may drive 2,000 or 3,000 or 
4,000 miles a year — his increased cost in gasoline, his savings, by not having to pay that $185 is 
certainly going to benefit him, but it is not going to benefit the farmer of this province, because as I said, 
the average farmer by a 15 per cent reduction could mean a savings of up to $750 each. 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1900 
 

Let’s look, again, at that 5000 gallons of fuel which a farmer uses. As a direct result of the actions of the 
Alberta/Saskatchewan and federal government, farm fuel costs in the last four years have just about 
doubled, just about doubled. We are looking at close to 70 cents a gallon now, on the average, for diesel 
and purple gas. So that is $3,500. So, in effect, as a result of your actions, as a result of the actions of the 
other two governments, farmers in this province, today, are paying $1,750 more for their farm fuel then 
they paid prior to your government and the Alberta government and the Ottawa government starting to 
meddle in the farm fuel cost program — $1,750. 
 
What the National Farmers’ Union is asking, what we are asking, what the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Agriculture is asking, is of that $1,750 give us $750 back. Give us $750 back! It is not too much to ask 
for, Mr. Minister, when you are looking at a total revenue from oil of $349 million that this province is 
going to receive as a direct result. It is for that reason, Mr. Chairman, that I must emphasize, we are not 
asking for a subsidy; we are not asking for a handout, we are asking for a tax rebate. 
 
If you felt it was urgent enough back in 1974-75, before a provincial election, certainly it is more than 
urgent at this point in time and I would urge all members to support the farmers of this province. Don’t 
support me in my resolution, but support the farmers in this province, support our major industry in this 
province and vote for favor of this resolution. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, you know it is interesting when he talks about the fact that the 
federal government and the Alberta government and the Saskatchewan government somehow got 
together and did this dastardly plot to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are getting, as you indicated, $345 million in revenues for the province of Saskatchewan and you 
know full well that a lot of that revenue is being used to provide services for the province of 
Saskatchewan, for the people of Saskatchewan, in terms of highways, health costs, social services costs, 
municipal grants, all of these things which are coming about because we are able to get that kind of 
revenue from oil. I think you would not suggest that farmers are not getting a good share, a fair share of 
that particular grant money or income. 
 
I would suggest that a lot of the benefits of $349 million are coming down to farmers, not in a direct 
way, but are certainly coming down to farmers. I say, again, that I simply feel that it isn’t the proper 
place for the government of Saskatchewan to be putting in subsidy money and, again, he talks about tax 
rebates and there is no such thing as tax rebates because there is not a tax. I simply feel that the better 
way to deal with that problem is to provide income for farmers as opposed to subsidies for farmers. 
 
Again, back to the 1974 situation. In 1974 there wasn’t very many government support programs. There 
wasn’t a Grain Stabilization Program ;there wasn’t any program at all, there wasn’t any program at all 
for beef stabilization; there wasn’t a SHARP program for hogs. I know that the members opposite will 
say that these are federal government programs, and I appreciate that they are federal government 
programs, put in in many cases with prompting and severe pressure from the provincial governments but 
they are there and we appreciate them. They do provide a level of income and level of security for 
farmers which they did not have in 1974. 



 
April 24, 1978 

1901 
 

MR. WIEBE: — Mr. Chairman, let’s just look briefly at how that money is spent. You said that that 
$349 million was going to help build roads and all those various grand and glorious things. Let’s just 
look at how it is being spent. 
 
First of all, $293 million of that money is not being spent at all. It is being paid as a dividend to the 
Consolidated Fund. The reason why they are putting it in there is so that they don’t run the risks of this 
province losing its equalization grant from Ottawa. By putting this $293 million in that special little fund 
we can still wave our hat to Ottawa and say, look we are a have-not province so give us some of that 
equalization grant. That is where $293 million of that is going. 
 
Now we look at grants and rebates for petroleum and natural gas exploration, conservation and 
development — $40 million. That is where some of that is going. Research grants — a whole $35,000 is 
going into research grants. That makes a total expenditure of $333 million. Where is the rest of that 
money going? How much of that is going to agriculture? Let’s look at where the rest of this money is 
going, see how much is going to agriculture. 
 
First of all, University of Saskatchewan, Veterinarian College building expansion — $400,000; good 
that is one point for agriculture. University of Saskatchewan, Engineering Building — $5.6 million. That 
is certainly going to help the engineering industry; it is certainly going to help our minor industries in 
this province but it is not going to help our major industry which is agriculture. Restoration of 
Saskatchewan House — $30,000. Restoration of the Northwest Territorial Government Administration 
building — $170,000. Grant to the University Hospital — $4.9 million. No argument there. Buffalo 
Narrows Northern Development airport facilities — $378,000. Buffalo Narrows Causeway — $1.7 
million. Buffalo Narrows Northern Development airport — $1.2 million. La Ronge Aircraft 
maintenance facilities — $225,000. Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park — $200,000 for total budgetary 
expenditures of $347 million. 
 
Now, this is the interesting part, excess of budgetary revenues over budgetary expenditures — $116 
million that this government has got left and they don’t know what to do with it. They don’t know what 
to do with it. They are just going to leave it there. Let me suggest what you can do with it. You can 
adopt this particular resolution and provide some of that $293 million towards agriculture. That, Mr. 
Chairman, is where the development and the direction that this province should go. You can figure out 
as well, of that $349 million with some quick cash calculations, one-one thousandths of that $349 
million is going to agriculture — one-one thousandths. That is a pretty sad commentary on the priority 
which this government places on its major industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition: — I’ll make a comment or two in order 
to wait for my seatmate to return to his chair. He did have some comments that he wished to make on 
this and in order to hold the item I am going to await the Attorney General’s urgent remarks to the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose and hopefully the member will be able to get back to his chair in time to 
make the remarks that he wished to make . . . (inaudible) . . . No, not at all, I’m just holding it open for 
him. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose): — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have been listening with some 
interest to the discussion going on this evening and it seemed to me that the argument that has come 
forth from the minister at this particular time is that there are better ways to look after the income of the 
farmer and there are some things that have to 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1902 
 

be put in place. I guess what I am saying to you, Mr. Minister, is simply this, that at the present time I 
would like you to state a better way of helping the agricultural industry at the present time, given the 
impression, you know, that we’ve got this and that and we could possibly have this. I can’t think of any 
one single thing, Mr. Minister, that could take place by your department and by your government to lend 
assistance to an industry, particularly in this given year, then the rebate. I don’t know of any other thing 
and certainly if you know of any other measure, Mr. Minister, I think it’s incumbent upon you to say so. 
It’s one thing to talk about, you know the old story about they get free, free. I get quite a kick out of it, 
they get free hospitalisation and they have to pay this much but they don’t pay the 5 per cent, they do the 
apple and oranges bit. 
 
I want to suggest something to you, Mr. Minister, you know how much money, if you took the cost of 
direct government advertising in the province of Saskatchewan today Take the cost of bringing the 
Hollywood producer up to make your ads for televisions, take the cost of rolling them around two or 
three times a night on televisions, take the cost of your weekly advertising in all the newspapers of 
Saskatchewan. Now would it not be better advertising just to drop some of that which is really 
disgusting people anyway, and come forth with real advertising that really counts and give a form of a 
rebate. You know, let’s be honest about it. We’ve seen these ads costing a half million dollars or more 
rolling around now and apparently they are going to keep rolling around. I pick up the small weekly 
paper and government ads, government ads, just by the thousands and thousands of dollars, Mr. 
Minister. It just seems to me that it is incumbent. I am not talking about information ads even; I think 
they are quite in order. I think it is now incumbent upon the government opposite and certainly has been 
mentioned our number one industry. This is a way in which we can make a direct input, right now .and 
if you can think of anything else that you can do immediately I am perfectly willing to suggest what you 
have I don’t know of anything else, at the present time and I don’t think the minister does, that will 
cause a direct input as a stimulus into the agricultural industry, than the rebate. Now if you have 
something else that is more effective, that can be acted immediately, then I think we should hear about 
it. 
 
I would suggest to you that all you would have to do is take your advertising campaign from all the 
various departments, which is just pure political propaganda, and you could well put it into real 
advertising which is a way in which you could subsidize, if you want to use that word, or to alleviate 
some of the high cost in agriculture today. But if you have a better and quicker way of getting help to the 
agricultural industry that that which is suggested in this motion,  then I would certainly like to hear it. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite talks about the advertising budgets of this 
government and I don’t know whether he is referring to the advertising budget of this department, but 
the advertising budget of this department is under $300,000. I think when you are talking about a 
subsidy program, the kind of which you are talking about, you are not talking about thousands of dollars 
you are talking about $30 million, $40 million or $50 million. I suggest that we don’t have the capacity 
in our budget to handle that kind of a program. 
 
I simply suggest that the arguments have all been made that we get around and take the vote on the 
issue. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — Mr. Chairman, before the vote I think the Minister of Agriculture should be 
taken up a little bit on one remark he made. He said the homeowners’ grant was supposed to cover the 
farm fuel deal. I get awfully sick, in this Legislature, to hear each one of the minister stand up and take 
credit for that 



 
April 24, 1978 

1903 
 

homeowners’ grant and what it is supposed to cover. 
 
We heard the Minister of Education claim that he has covered it all and that is why you are getting 25 
mills or something on our mill rate. The Minister of Municipal Affairs he claims it all. Now the Minister 
of Agriculture claims it all. It should be about $2,000 not $200, to cover just what you guys claim. How 
many more ministers are going to get into this circus and claim that? Let’s start being honest, Mr. 
Minister of Agriculture, and not talking it off the top of your head and foolish statements like you have 
been. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I have just one question that I would like to ask the minister. You didn’t seriously 
say a little while ago that the homeowners’ grant was designed to cover the cost of farm fuel, did you? Is 
that the comment you made? Or to help recoup the cost of farm fuel? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I said that there is a homeowners’ grant something which the 
farmers are getting which is $375 which no other governments are giving to farmers. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, are you suggesting that the tax on farmers that is being paid under 
incomes and washed through the government, giving them back through homeowners’ grants, but at the 
same time about 35 per cent of that homeowners’ grant is for the people in Saskatoon and Regina that 
that somehow is helping the farmers with their input cost? That 35 per cent of the homeowners’ grant go 
to the two cities of Saskatoon an Regina and you are trying to tell us that that is for the farmers. Is that 
true? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what percentage goes to the homeowners in the cities 
of Regina and Saskatoon. I know that a farmer with an averaged size unit can get $375 in a Property 
Improvement Grant. That is a direct payment to a farmer. I don’t think you can quarrel with that. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, is the Minister of Agriculture suggesting by this that $375 goes to 
every farmer in Saskatchewan? That is what I thought he said, that $375 was the rebate. Isn’t that what 
he said to the farmers of Saskatchewan? That is the maximum rebate to the biggest farmer in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. The average sized farmer certainly does not get any $375 a year and the 
Minister of Agriculture knows that as well as anybody else in this Legislative Assembly. The fact is that 
the increase in power bills alone to the farmers last year was triple the average cost — triple the average 
cost or the average increase in the home improvement grant. Would the minister deny that? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, the $375 will go to every farmer with an average sized farm. The 
average sized farm in Saskatchewan has got something like 900 acres. If you have 900 you will get 
$375. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — That’s not the average farmer, is it Mr. Minister? That is the average sized farm, 
isn’t it, Mr. Minister? The fact is that for everybody that is over the average, half are under the average, 
aren’t they, Mr. Minister? Therefore, Mr. Chairman, the fact is that a great number of Saskatchewan 
farmers are getting far less than $375, which is the maximum amount that they are allowed to get and 
they only get that, Mr. Chairman, if they own the land. Don’t they, Mr. Minister? If they are working the 
land or if they are crop sharing the land or if they are running it from the Land Bank Commission, they 
don’t even get that, do they, Mr. Minister? Do they? Do the Land Bank tenants get a 



 
April 24, 1978 
 

1904 
 

home improvement grant? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, they do, because they are paying tax. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Sorry, Mr. Minister, the Land Bank people pay a tax, but the leased land people 
don’t pay taxes, do they? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — I suppose that is taken off when a person is leasing land but, of course, the owner 
is paying the tax and so he gets the benefit. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, very briefly. I want to conclude my remarks on this motion. I 
don’t think I am too far out in suggesting that the Minister of Agriculture has got himself in trouble in 
trying to defend this program. Your government introduced the Farm Cost Reduction Program. Now you 
have taken it away and you should well know that it is a lot easier to introduce a program than it is to 
take it away. You thought you had good reason for introducing it and maybe you did but you haven’t 
given us good reason for withdrawing it. What I have seen here is irresponsibility on your part in 
answering these questions that we are putting to you. Your reply to the member for Rosetown-Elrose 
when he says that all of the government advertising in so many areas has been wasteful — we’re talking 
about conservative in energy — we could be talking about conservation in government spending as well. 
He was suggesting that some of those moneys could be cut and better advertising on your part could 
have been done by the re-introducing of this program. You turn around and stand up and say, well a 
paltry amount of $300,000 has been spent by your department. You knew full right well that the member 
for Rosetown-Elrose was not referring to government advertising just within your department and I say 
that is irresponsible because you are making a political argument. 
 
You have made political arguments with the member for Nipawin in his comments on this motion. Now 
you are talking about the Property Improvement Grant. On the one hand you say you are not going to 
subsidize — you call it a subsidy and we don’t from this side. We see it as giving back what you have 
already taken and that in essence is the same thing as the Property Improvement Grant. You have taken 
from the people on the one hand and given them back their own money and made a big foofaraw in the 
process. Now you think it is all right in that area — the Property Improvement Grant but you don’t think 
it is all right in the Farm Cost Reduction Program. There is no consistency there whatsoever and again, 
that is irresponsibility on your part. I see two reason that seem very clear to me that you have given. This 
is the last thing I want to say on this. 
 
You have suggested that because there are more programs, and I will agree — there are more programs 
— you’ve got a whole book — it’s just like volume on government programs, and because of this the 
farmers don’t need this reduction on their farm input costs. That’s one argument. The second argument 
is that because they seem efficient in conservative of fuel and possibly reduce their energy use that they 
don’t need the Farm Cost Reduction Program. Those are the basic two reason that you have given and to 
penalize farmers for doing a good job surely to goodness cannot be responsible. 
 
Again, just very simply, can’t you see the light in this matter and be responsible — show that leadership 
which I am asking you to do because I think that you can be capable of doing it? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member mentioned that the tax rebate was 



 
April 24, 1978 

1905 
 

given and taken away and no reason was given for it. The gasoline tax in Saskatchewan was 19 cents a 
gallon and was reduced down to 12 cents gallon, a 7 cent reduction at the pumps. At the same time the 7 
cent rebate was given to farm fuel simply because there was no tax on farm fuel. There hasn’t been at 
any time except when a Liberal administration sat on the Treasury Benches in Saskatchewan. And that 7 
cent tax which was taken off in the 1974 budget came back later and we’re back to 19 cents, exactly 
where we were back in 1970 and that was the rationale for cutting out the rebate in terms of the farm 
fuel reduction. And that is logical if you think about it. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I would like to thank the Minister of Revenue for giving me a responsible reply. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 12 
 
 
Wiebe Collver Ham 
Cameron Larter Berntson 
Stodalka Bailey Wipf 
Nelson (Ag-Gr) Birkbeck Katzman 
 

NAYS — 23 
 
Thibault Mostoway Shillington 
Bowerman Banda Vickar 
Romanow Whelan Nelson (Yktn) 
Snyder Kaeding Koskie 
Byers Kwasnica Johnson 
Kowalchuk Dyck Thompson 
Matsalla MacAuley Lusney 
Robbins Rolfes 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, I will move that the Committee rise and 
report progress in just a moment. 
 
Perhaps this is a backward procedure, but the motion called for an expenditure of government funds, the 
motion that was before us, Mr. Chairman, or at least called for a recommending that the government 
recommend this. Well, it is no use raising it, because the vote has taken place. 
 
Committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 o’clock p.m. 
 


	COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
	Section 1
	BILL NO. 5 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE AGRICULTURAL INCENTIVES ACT
	BILL NO. 6 — AN ACT TO AMEND
	THE SASKATCHEWAN FARM OWNERSHIP ACT, 1974
	Section 3
	Section 5
	Section 10
	Revert to Section 13
	YEAS — 25
	NAYS — 15

	BILL NO. 26 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE RESEARCH COUNCIL ACT
	BILL NO. 31 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE SUPERANNUATION (SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS) ACT, 1977
	Section 5
	Section 7:47
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — AGRICULTURE
	VOTE 1
	Item 1
	YEAS — 12
	NAYS — 23


