



















































Hansard: April 27, 1978


 

2023 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 27, 1978 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown–Elrose): – Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the members of this 

Assembly, I would like to introduce a group of students from the Rosetown Division III School. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is the fourth group to visit this spring from the Rosetown Division III 

School. They are 25 Grade Eight students and they are accompanied by Mr. DeBoice and Ted 

Brumwell. 

 

We are very, very pleased to have them here. I will be meeting with them for some pictures and for 

some refreshments a little later on. I would like to wish them a very safe journey home. 

 

Mr. Minister, while I am on my feet I would also like to introduce Mrs. Pat Smith who is seated in the 

Speaker’s Gallery. She is the president of the urban section of the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, one of the first ladies to be elected to this position, and she, along with Mr. Hanlon, the 

chairman of the Swift Current Comprehensive School Board, are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

 

To you people, we wish you a pleasant stay here in the Legislature and a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A THIBAULT (Kinistino): – Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great pleasure today to introduce another 

fine group of students from the Cudworth School They are accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Patti 

Henderson and Mr. Peter Yuzik. Their bus driver is Mr. John Diakiw. They have been visiting the city 

here this morning, they have visited the RCMP barracks and this afternoon we will have bear pit. 

 

I am sure that the members of this Legislature will join me in welcoming them here and that the 

impression that they get of the Legislature will be the kind that these students will appreciate. I also 

want to wish them a very safe journey home. Thank you. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E. WHELAN (Regina North West): – Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce to all 

members of the Legislature, 72 Grade Eight from St. Peter School in Regina North West. They are 

seated in the west gallery with their vice principal, Mrs. Vanderlinde, and their teachers, Virginia 

Selinger and Michael Federko. 

 

We plan to have a chat with them and have a picture taken. I want to tell the members of the Legislature 

that this was one of the first separate schools built in the north side of the city. It has a very fine 

scholastic record. 

 

We extend to each one of the people in the group, a very warm welcome and we hope that their stay 

with us today is pleasant and educational. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2024 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. WIEBE (Morse): – Mr. Speaker, as well, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to 

you and to other members of this Assembly, for what I believe is now the fifth year in a row, 

approximately 26 Grade Twelve students from the Herbert High School. I might say that this is the 

school in which I received my high school education as well as the school in which my daughters 

presently are receiving their high school education. 

 

I had an opportunity to meet with this class shortly after the new year when we presented the school 

with pictures of the Queen and Prince Philip and the students with silver pins. I found the questioning 

period afterwards to be very enjoyable and very interesting and I look forward to meeting with them 

briefly again later on this afternoon. 

 

I would like all members to join with me in welcoming them to the Legislature this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Arm River): – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. Gordon MacMurchy who is on 

government business in Swift Current this afternoon, I am pleased on his behalf to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of this House, a group of 17 Grade Eight students and their teacher, Mr. 

Scott Richardson, from Nokomis School. These students are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

 

I look forward to meeting them at the conclusion of the question period and having an opportunity to 

talk with them and answer some of their questions. I am sure we all wish them a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 

MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): – Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you and to this Legislative Assembly the Mayor of Moose Jaw, Mayor Herb 

Taylor. If you will please stand up in the Speaker’s Gallery. With the presence of His Worship Mayor 

Taylor we are now presenting this afternoon the momenta of the 75th anniversary of the celebration in 

Moose Jaw of her anniversary. I am sure that all of us here appreciate the fact that we are a couple of 

years ahead of the province of Saskatchewan and we are pretty proud of that fact and also the fact that 

we are a friendly city. We believe in co-operating with the governments of Saskatchewan and of Canada 

and we believe in a municipal council that this is a momentous year for Moose Jaw. We wish everyone 

here to join with us in congratulating Moose Jaw and the citizens that made it that way. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Cancer Commission – Motion of non–confidence 
 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris–Canington): — A question to the Minister of Health, Mr. 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2025 

 

Speaker, I have here a copy of a letter from the Regina and District Medical Society wherein the society 

has passed a motion of non-confidence in the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission and is strongly critical 

of the composition of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. Has the minister seen or been made aware 

of this letter? 

 

MR. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): – Yes 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The letter I have today and the letter that I gave to 

you yesterday indicate that the problems in the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission are much more 

serious than you and the Premier have led us to believe. Will you now take our suggestion to expand Dr. 

Watson’s term of reference to include the operations of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission and that 

such a review be made in the form of a public inquiry? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: – Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how much clearer one would have to make it to 

the Conservative members opposite next to drawing them a picture, that the scope of Dr. Watson’s 

review is as broad as is required including the total operation of the cancer services in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I said so yesterday and I say it again to the member opposite today. But allow me to say 

this, Mr. Speaker, in further response to the member’s question, in order that we might repair some of 

the damage that members opposite and some of their connections outside this Legislature may have 

done to the confidence of people in the cancer program in Saskatchewan. Everything possible is being 

done to maintain the standards and the quality of service at the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic. 

 

We have engaged Dr. Watson from London, Ontario to do a review on assessment. We have an active 

recruitment program to fill the positions which are vacant. Indeed, within the last two weeks, four 

potential medical recruits have been interviewed and have shown some interest. We have engaged, on a 

contract basis, a local physician to be able, on a part-time basis, to assist with the treatment that the 

Allan Blair Memorial Clinic provides. The Executive committee, after my checking further after the 

member’s question yesterday of the Cancer Commission, has met with the staff at the Allan Blair 

Memorial Clinic and has met with the Regina and District Medical Society. 

 

I just want to point that out and hope that it will help to clarify in the public’s mind that indeed steps are 

being taken to maintain the kind of standard that the Allan Bair Memorial Clinic has provided and will 

continue to provide. 

 

I want to say, further to the member’s question related to the letter from the society, that irrespective of 

the allegations made by the Regina and District Medical Society, I am continuing to have confidence in 

the members of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. 

 

Now, I think that is irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, the recommendation that is made in the letter which has 

been sent to me, which I received yesterday, the suggestion and the recommendation that the Cancer 

Commission ought to consist of only doctors – two members, one from each of the clinics, one in 

Saskatoon and one in Regina, and also three other members of the medical profession. 

 

I say that is irresponsible because the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission is a public body. It is a 

governing board of the cancer program and should have some . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2026 

 

MR. BERNTSON: – Obviously, Mr. Speaker, somebody has to bring the matter to the attention of the 

minister, that evidence by the letter yesterday took 16 days to reach his desk and he still had not seen it. 

My final supplementary is, in light of the grave situation, would the minister act now and ask Dr. 

Watson to start his review now instead of two weeks down the road? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: – No, Mr. Speaker. I will not ask Dr. Watson to do it now. Dr. Watson has 

other commitments. He has indicated, on our request, when he is able to come. That is the earliest 

possible time he is able to come. I am convinced he will do an excellent job in his review and 

assessments, and we are looking forward to his recommendation. We are also looking forward to the 

request made by the executive committee of the Cancer Commission of the Regina and District Medical 

Society to provide any list of potential candidates who might be interested in working in the cancer 

clinics in Saskatchewan. That request has not yet received an answer. I certainly believe that the Medical 

Society in Regina district will want to assist in that recruitment in order that we may be able to maintain 

the program at the highest possible standard at the clinic here as we are continuing to do. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of Liberal Opposition) – Would the Minister, at the very least, meet 

with the Regina and District Medical Association and find out from them directly their concerns about 

the Cancer Commission, and if you find that their concerns are well taken, would you be prepared to 

apologize to this House today for calling them irresponsible. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: – Mr. Speaker, I did not call the Medical Society irresponsible the Regina and 

District Medical Society. I called that recommendation which excluded public participation on the 

Cancer Commission irresponsible. That is what I said was irresponsible and I will stand by that. I would 

be most happy to meet with the Regina and District Medical Society, their representatives. Of course, I 

would. I have yet not had such a request, but in order for the member to clearly understand all of the 

efforts that we are making. I have arranged to meet with the President of the Regina and District 

Medical Society already, and we will be meeting within the next day or two. 

 

Unemployment Statistics Including Native Population. 

 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South) – Mr. Speaker, a question of the Minister of Social Services. I 

had asked the Premier yesterday a supplementary question with respect to unemployment. My question 

assumed that there was a certain portion, at least, of the native population that wasn’t included in the 7.1 

per cent unemployment statistics, and there is some confusion between the Premier and me in that 

respect. May I ask the Minister of Social Services — I am referring to a document prepared by the 

executive council, which was given to you. It said that unemployment among natives is thought to be 

higher than 60 per cent. Adding the native unemployment figures to the labour force survey would 

increase the Saskatchewan unemployment rate from 4.2 per cent to 6.1 per cent. Now, my first question 

is, are the unemployment statistics not calculated on the same basis today as they were in 1976, when 

that document was prepared, and if so, would the unemployment, including native unemployment, not 

be closer to 9.1 per cent than 7.1 per cent? 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES:(Minister of Social Services): – Mr. Speaker, I think I can only repeat what the 

Premier said yesterday. I am not the Minister responsible for employment, as such, although you are 

correct in directing the question to me when it relates, I 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2027 

 

suppose, to Indians and metis people. But I think I have to repeat what the Premier said yesterday. As far 

as I know, the unemployment statistics do include all the native people except those who live on 

reserves, that is the status Indians on reserves. 

 

MR. CAMERON: – May I ask by way of a first supplementary – this same study prepared by the 

Executive Council and given to you indicated there were 110,000 native people in the two largest urban 

centres, Saskatoon and Regina and called for the creation immediately, of 13,000 jobs for those people, 

saying that the province, and I quote: 

 

Will witness the growth of a large alienated native urban population unless those 13,000 jobs are 

created immediately. 

 

It recommended to the government, a major effort on behalf of all departments to get at this problem. 

 

My question to you now is, what has been done in respect of the massive effort which this study 

recommended to the Minister of Social Services and the government, 18 months ago? 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — I will try to answer the question. As the hon. member 

is aware that we presented a Budget which provides for, primarily to deal with two areas. One is the cost 

of living. Since the Budget there has been further tax reduction: A total of $140 million increase in 

purchasing power to people of Saskatchewan. This will have the effect of stimulating the economy and 

will help to create many jobs. 

 

The additional very important thing is our capital program, the area of housing, public construction, road 

construction. $434 million of construction work is planned and will be going on this year. This will be a 

tremendous stimulus to the job creation which will include the native population. 

 

I am glad the hon. member is concerned about the native population and creating jobs for them, not like 

the Conservatives who, today, are attacking any program that we try to create for native people, to put 

them into the stream of employment, to train them for jobs, the hon. members are aware. I think we are 

trying to do something that is a difficult problem. It will not be resolved immediately, but I think that 

our Budget zeros in on the problems for the total population including the native population. 

 

MR. CAMERON: – Mr. Speaker, by way of final supplementary. I want to ask the Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that in 1969, according to government statistics, 49 per cent of the 

entrants to the provincial correctional institutions in the province were native people and that has now 

gone to 66 per cent and predicted by the government to rise to 82 per cent by 1981. Now I want to ask 

the minister, particularly in view of the fact that that is caused by the high unemployment rate, which is 

reputed to be between 70 per cent and 80 per cent among the native population in Regina, how many 

jobs, how many native jobs will be created, in your estimate, by your Budget? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, in case of the direct jobs by the capital programs, we estimate that 

some 4,800 jobs will be created through the additional capital program as I recall it. Then in addition to 

that, we have other programs like the Youth Employment Service, the ESP programs, and we estimate 

that those jobs will create at least 1,400 temporary jobs. But since then a number of things have 

happened. Further 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2028 

 

stimulus to the economy through two tax measures, one the doubling up of income tax, the reduction of 

the sales tax, I think will put additional purchasing power. We would have to do further calculation and I 

feel that this will create quite a number of additional jobs. It is very difficult to say whether or how 

many of those jobs will go to the native people. Certainly as a direct government interest, we do hope 

that a number of those jobs (particularly with the training programs that we are trying to encourage in 

co-operation with the federal government) that a substantial number of them will go to people of Indian 

ancestry. 

 

MR. CAMERON: – May I ask you one last supplementary in respect to this. The unemployment rate 

among native people in this city now is, as you know, said to be between 70 per cent and 80 per cent of 

the 30,000 people in Regina. Now you know as well that is a major source of crime in this city. Can you 

tell me what you expect that unemployment rate to be reduced to among the native population, once 

your Budget has taken hold for the next fiscal year? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker. I do not, first of all, accept the statistics. I don’t know whose statistic 

it is, because certainly we have no direct, you know ….(inaudible interjection) … but Mr. Speaker, I am 

referring to 30,000 native people in the city of Regina, I have heard that figure. I am not convinced that 

while there have been some calculations, I doubt whether they are that precise. Mr. Speaker, I am not 

able to answer the question as to how many will go directly to the native people, and I think the member 

can appreciate that it is very difficult to make those kinds of estimates. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that we can get co-operation from the government of Canada who equally 

have a responsibility for job creation programs and I would hope that since he is a federal candidate that 

he will apply some energy to talking to his colleagues in Ottawa, that they have a responsibility to create 

jobs in this . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I will take the next question. 

 

CABLE TV – CPN 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister responsible to Sask Tel. 

 

I have before me a copy of a memo and I am going to send a copy over to the minister for his 

information and it purports to be from the Co-operative Programming Network from one Rick Sharmen 

to the blitzers who are going on a door to door blitz on behalf of CPN. It gives them specific 

instructions. They are to use, for example, the word ‘confusion’ instead of the word ‘controversy’ when 

they are discussing it, but it also says and I quote: 

 

If any Sask Tel employee that you call on says negative things about CPN, get the name and 

address and report to Rick Sharmen. 

 

Now obviously the only one who can take action against an employee who says negative things about 

CPN is Sask Tel itself. My question is, have you or your officials given any instructions to CPN to 

report Sask Tel employees who make negative comments about CPN? 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW:(Attorney General) – Mr. Speaker, neither the Minister in charge 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2029 

 

of Sask Tel or myself, as Minister in charge of Communications, are in any position to give any 

instructions to either the Co-operative Programming Network or any other independent agency outside 

of government as to what they should or should not do with respect to any other agency. If CPN wants 

to say this to this particular subscriber respecting CPN, while I don’t agree with it and while I have full 

confidence in Sask Tel, it is their right to put it in the memorandum. To suggest that either myself or the 

minister of the government had anything to do with CPN putting this in the memorandum is both false 

and spurious. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, obviously when they make a 

statement, the only way that they would know who was a Sask Tel employee when they went to their 

city-wide blitz is if they had a list of Sask Tel employees. Has Sask Tel, in fact, given a list of its 

employees to CPN and has it, as well, instructed its employees that they must be quiet about CPN and in 

fact subscribe to CPN to build up the list. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the clear answer to all of those questions is, No and No and No. I 

also tell the hon. member that this memorandum, the way I read it, is if an employee who may be 

involved in the installation of equipment, for example, says something about CPN that that should be 

reported by the subscriber to the CPN people who would take it up with Sask Tel. 

 

I repeat again, I don’t believe that the Sask Tel employees do that. We have no evidence that they do 

that and I don’t support this, but to suggest that Sask Tel would give the names of their employees to 

CPN is false. And to further suggest that somehow CPN is being forced on every Sask Tel employee, 

stretches the limits of credibility. 

 

Government Policy re Retail Gasoline Trade 
 

MR. W.H. STODALKA:(Maple Creek) – Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Revenue. 

 

It is approximately one month since you raised the expectations of people involved in the retail gasoline 

trade on the western portion of the province. And in view of the fact that tomorrow is the last day of this 

month, and you indicated earlier in this Assembly, that you would be making an announcement before 

the end of the month, would the minister indicate today what is the reason for this delay in this 

announcement and when, or even if, we can expect any announcement about a policy in the future? 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): – Mr. Speaker, government policy will be announced 

in due course. 

 

MR. STODALKA: – Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated earlier that if there was going to be a program, 

it was going to be retroactive. I would like to ask the minister, seeing that the gas retailers are collecting 

the 19 cent per gallon tax at the present time, how he could institute a retroactive program in this 

instance? Is he suggesting that he is possibly going to give a rebate of say a number of cents per gallon 

to these people, or exactly what does he mean by a retroactive program? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: – The policy will be announced in due course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Fee Structure for Lease Land 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2030 

 

MR. BAILEY: – Mr. Speaker. I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, during the land use hearings around the province, in a number of instances, Mr. Minister, 

the question came up to which there was no definite answer, regarding the difference in lease price 

between grazing lease held by the Lands Branch to an individual farmer and comparable lease being 

held by Land Bank to a supporting farmer. There was a great difference in the fee structure in the two 

grazing leases, given all things being equal, that is the assessment being equal and the carrying capacity 

of the lease being equal. This question came up time and again at the Land Use hearings. 

 

Could the minister tell this Assembly, today, as to why the lease land ascribed to a Land Bank renter, is 

considerably lower than the same lease being leased to an individual farmer? 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): – Mr. Speaker, we are trying to get the leases 

co-ordinated between the two departments and there may be some lag time between when different 

agreements are signed. We are attempting to get the same formula operating on both Land Bank and 

Lands Branch. 

 

As you know we are transferring those lands which are suitable for grazing, only, we are transferring 

those from Land Bank onto Lands Branch and vice versa. The cultivation lands which are suitable for 

cultivation in large blocks are going into Land Bank and under both programs we are attempting to set 

up the same lease with these schedules. This may not have happened in all cases but it is happening very 

quickly. 

 

MR. BAILEY: – A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many 

parcels of land have been acquired by the Land Bank through the action taken by the Farm Credit 

Corporation on foreclosures; that is when lands v  are taken over and turned back to the Farm Credit 

Corporation because of the inability of the clients to pay? How many of these lands parcels have been 

taken over by the Land Bank Commission? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – None at all, as far as I am aware. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): – I would like to ask the minister, in view of the fact that he has 

just stated that some grazing lands that are owned by the Land Bank are being transferred into the Lands 

Branch for lease, is this a change in the government’s policy where they have indicated they are 

prepared to sell or make Land Bank land available back to young farmers who might wish to purchase? 

Would the minister not agree that by taking that land which the government has purchased from private 

individuals and transferring it into the Lands Branch, they are making it impossible for young farmers to 

purchase that grazing land themselves? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – There is an order in council which authorizes the transfer of land between the two 

departments and on the basis of that authority we are making those transfers. I think that would appear 

to be a very reasonable kind of a move, if we get the lease land, that could be land which is suitable for 

grazing, under one branch and get the cultivation types of land under another branch. Basically, this is 

what were going. There are very few occasions where, when we are buying Land Bank land for instance, 

we are buying Land Bank land which is grazing land. Occasionally, in a parcel we will get a quarter 

section of land which is simply grazing land and not cultivation land and in 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2031 

 

those cases we attempt to move them into the land and change the grazing area. 

 

MR. BAILEY: – Mr. Minister, can you tell me why a farmer who has been holding the same parcel of 

land from the Lands Branch under the old fee structure, the 33-year rental (you now what I am talking 

about) that once the Lands Branch takes that over his fee should drastically increase, whereas when it is 

assigned to a holder of Land Bank land, there is not drastic increase in the fees of that same land? 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Minister, there will not be a drastic increase. The Lands Branch and Land Bank 

both charge on the basis of the price of livestock and our annual fee, whatever it happens to be, is based 

on the livestock prices at that time. For both the Lands Bank and Lands Branch that same policy applies. 

There could not be a major increase. It you can identify one I would like you to send it over to me. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Gasoline Competition Assistance Grant Program 
 

MR. ROBBINS: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce the Gasoline Competition Assistance Grant 

Program in order to assist Saskatchewan gasoline outlets that face difficult competition from Alberta 

services stations that do not have to collect any provincial fuel tax. The program will province a grant 

for each gallon of taxable gasoline sold for use in motor vehicles after April 1, 1978. The grant will vary 

with the actual road distance from Alberta competition. While the grant will provide required valuable 

assistance to Saskatchewan businesses, it will not completely eliminate the problem of the problem. of 

competition resulting from different tax systems in Saskatchewan and Alberta. We have attempted to 

restore the situation to what it was last year when Saskatchewan had a 19 per cent gallon gasoline tax 

and Alberta’s rate was 10 cents per gallon. 

 

There is still a relatively wide variation in the price of fuel within the province of Saskatchewan, which 

is not due to tax differences but rather to the pricing policies of oil companies and competitive pressure 

in various locations. For example, Mr. Speaker, regular gasoline at full service outlets in Melville costs 

91.9 cents per gallon but 26 miles away in Yorkton, the cost is 97.9 cents per gallon. Another example is 

in Maple Creek where gasoline costs $1.059 cents a gallon while it is 15 cents a gallon less in Saskatoon 

at 90.9 cents per gallon. We all know of situations even within the same community where prices differ 

by a substantial amount. 

 

The Gasoline Competition Assistance Grant Program will operate by using the current method for 

collecting the 19 cents per gallon tax on gasoline. I want to make that crystal clear to the members of the 

House; the tax of 19 cents a gallon will be paid people using gasoline in Saskatchewan, no matter where 

they are located. But service stations and bulk plants within 48 kilometres of Alberta competition will be 

able to apply for a grant, ranging from 5 cents per gallon to 18 cents per gallon, depending on their 

distance from actual Alberta competition. The grant rate will be 18 cents if the Alberta competition is in 

the same community as the Saskatchewan fuel outlet; 10 cents per gallon for service stations within 24 

kilometres of Alberta competition and 5 cents per gallon for fuel outlets between 24 kilometres and 48 

kilometres of Alberta outlets. The Gasoline Competition Assistance Grant Program will be retroactive to 

April 1, 1978 and will allow service stations to apply for their grant based on the amount of gasoline 

purchase for resale. Bulk fuel plants will be able to apply for the grant on all taxable fuel sold in bulk to 

contractors, municipalities and so on. This program will provide direct assistance to approximately 112 

businesses adjacent to the Alberta 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2032 

 

border, at an estimated cost of $1 million per year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAILEY: – Mr. Speaker, I certainly have some comments which I would like to make. Mr. 

Minister, it happened to be that this morning, checking in my office on three of the four major highways 

leading into the province of Alberta, I checked with a service station 70 miles from the border, one 35 

miles from the border and one 40 miles from the border. These were on highway 5,7 and 1. I didn’t get 

to the highway 14. If I heard you statement properly, approximately anyone this side of the border 30 

miles is not going to be able to participate in the government program It just happened to be that the 

station on the major highway, which was 70 miles from the border, reported to me that their sales had 

dropped 40 per cent. The stations 35 miles, going up on the other highways, their sales had dropped 60 

per cent over the same period last year – I am taking an equal period, Mr. Minister – the third highway 

station I checked was some 40 miles, had dropped 50 per cent. According to your government policy the 

48 kilometre range is not going to affect those people that I phoned this morning at all. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that we have got ourselves in an inadequate position here entirely, because 

it is quite different than the 5 per cent sales tax. As you know the sales tax lingers along the border but 

when you get into modern transportation the effect of this is much more far reaching. I realize that you 

had great difficulty, that this announcement which you made today was really planned to be made early 

in April. Here we are in the second last day of this session in April and you caucus has been so split over 

the whole matter that really the program, Mr. Minister, is going to have little effect at all. The longer 

you have waited, the sales have dropped as I indicated by my phone calls and therefore your department 

will be paying out less money. I think you are too late; it is too little and I don’t think it is going to have 

an effect upon this problem one little bit. 

 

MR. A.N. McMILLAN (Kindersley): – Mr. Minister, I would like to add my voice to those concerns 

expressed by the member for Rosetown. The town of Kindersley is 50 miles from its nearest Alberta 

operation, and the largest independent wholesaler of fuel in Saskatchewan has lost money every day he 

has been open since Alberta lowered its tax. Under your program he wouldn’t be helped one bit. He is 

faced with the possibility of having to lay off the entire 10 people who work strictly at his pumps. I 

would have to agree that on the surface from what we can determine from your statement this is 

certainly going to be an inadequate program. You will perhaps have done something to help some of the 

people that live in the first 10 or 20 kilometres from their Alberta competition but those people that can 

be just as seriously hurt living outside that barrier are going to get nothing at all. I would hope that the 

minister’s proposal is not final, that he will be open for suggestions for improvement from members on 

this side of the House. 

 

I would also like to know if the member would be prepared to table in this House a list of those service 

stations that can be involved in that program and the reduction for each program. I can only say at this 

time that certainly the delay has been untimely and the program now that it has been brought in appears 

on the surface to be completely inadequate. 

 

POINT OF ORDER – Ministerial Statements 
 

MR. MALONE: – On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Just a minor matter but I wonder if 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2033 

 

we could on this side of the House urge on the ministers opposite that when they give ministerial 

statements that they provide the critics on this side of the House with a copy of the statement prior to 

them being given. I believe the practice started last year and was going rather smoothly. I noticed the 

minister today did not do so. I ask you if you could to bring it to the attention of the ministers for future 

reference. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think that is up to the ministers to decide .I don’t think it involves the Chair at all. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill 37 – An Act 

respecting the Temporary Provincial Education and Health Tax Rate Reduction and Federal 

Reimbursement. 
 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Minister, on April 10, I announced to this 

House that Saskatchewan Education and Health tax rate would be temporarily reduced. The 

announcement coincided with similar announcements by the federal Minister of Finance and by 

provincial treasurers and minister of finance in most of the other provinces. 

 

Mr. Minister, I am less than satisfied with the manner in which this reduction of provincial tax rates was 

put in place by the federal government, but leaving that aside for a moment, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased 

that the federal government finally did something to bolster our sagging national economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since last fall, I have been urging the federal government to move to stimulate consumer 

spending. More spending would gradually put idle plant capacity and the unemployed back to work. The 

federal government did not agree with this approach. Instead greater tax concessions were given to 

industry. Manufacturing plants were encouraged to expand even though, Mr. Speaker, 16 per cent of our 

existing plant capacity was idle and while these policies were in place what happened? More layoffs, 

more shut downs, more Canadians out of work, Mr. Speaker. This demonstrated how misguided national 

economic policies have been. No wonder commentators agree that Trudeau’s economic performance has 

been dismal, Mr. Speaker. But events or the lack of them finally convinced the federal government and 

we have made this decision to provide direct encouragement to consumer spending through a reduction 

in the provincial retail sales taxes across Canada. In my view a better form of stimulation would be 

selected personal income tax reductions for lower and middle income Canadians. This would have had a 

greater impact on those who most need a tax reduction and would also have provided ongoing stimulus 

to consumer spending. 

 

Overall, I don’t expect that the reduction in the retail sales tax will have that great an impact on the 

Saskatchewan economy. If consumer spending on the big ticket items like automobiles is increased, the 

stimulus will mainly benefit manufacturing plants in central Canada. A large part unfortunately, may 

also flow to the foreign manufacturers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for our own Budget, we considered an adjustment to the sales tax as a means of stimulating 

our economy but we decided for Saskatchewan, a personal income tax reduction would be much more 

effective. This action put $52 million into 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2034 

 

the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers. Many economists felt that this was the kind of stimulus that the 

national economy needed. However, most governments have not followed our lead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about the way the federal government accomplished the sales tax 

reduction. I want to say the Minister of Finance accomplished this in a strange kind of way. He has 

referred to the measure as an outstanding example of federal-provincial fiscal co-ordination. 

 

Well, I’m not convinced, Mr. Speaker. Indeed, he many have set back federal-provincial co-operation 

and consultation. First of all, it was a last minute effort. It should have been develop and delivered 

earlier, Mr. Speaker. It should have been put forward at the meeting on the economy in January and 

February. That way there would’ve been real federal-provincial consultation. That way the provinces 

would have integrated the measure into their own provincial budget plans. Instead, the federal 

government remained silent and took unilateral action after many provinces including Saskatchewan, 

had prepared their budgets and presented them to their Legislative Assemblies. 

 

I am convinced that the federal government intruded into an area of provincial jurisdiction, or rather I 

am concerned that they have done this, by trying to establish policy for provincial retails sales taxes. A 

dangerous precedent was established when the provinces were not allowed to participate in the 

formulation of the federal compensation formula which does not apply equally, Mr. Speaker, to all of 

the provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the western Premiers made it clear when they met in Yorkton that they were not pleased 

that the temporary sales tax reduction might be precedent for future intrusions by the federal government 

into tax fields traditionally held by the province. Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear that I do not rule out, 

indeed I welcome federal-provincial co-operation in fiscal matters but this was the wrong way to go 

about it. Nevertheless, we did decide to participate. The federal decision to proceed was made from a 

national perspective, in light of judgment that this is what Canada needs and to that extent we are 

prepared to co-operate. 

 

The 1978-79 Budget was already before this House when the federal government approached us with 

their proposal. We had announced an $82 million cost of living protection package. We are now at a 

disadvantage in financing this on anticipated reduction in our education and health tax rates. 

Nevertheless, we intend to bear these added costs in the interest of the national economy and in the 

interest of national unity. We hope that our planned deficit of $44 million for 1978-79 will not grow by 

the full amount of $18 million cost to the province. We expect certain revenue gains if the stimulus 

works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to the bill itself. The bill consists of two parts. First, the education and 

health tax rate will be temporarily reduced. Second, a mechanism will be established for the federal 

government to pay back a portion of the cost to the province. Section 2 of the bill provides for a 

legislated two-point rate reduction in the education and health tax over the period from April 11, 1978 to 

September 30, 1978, inclusive. This coincides with the period during which several provinces will be 

reducing their sales tax rates by three points. Rather than follow this approach, Saskatchewan negotiated 

an equivalent program which would have a longer duration, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2035 

 

Our two-point reduction will last at least until September 30, 1978. It will be followed by the equivalent 

of a two-point reduction for a three month period thereafter. 

 

Section 3 of the bill provides the Lieutenant-Governor in Council with the flexibility to determine how 

this extended reduction will be put into effect. This section allows the government to set the reduction at 

up to two points. This power would expire on December 31, 1979. As a result, Mr. Minister, 

Saskatchewan education and health tax rate will remain at 3 per cent until at least September 30, 1978. 

A decision will be made before October 1 on the extent and duration of the remaining provincial 

participation. The decision will be based on the prospects for the winter employment and other 

economic circumstances at that time. This gives us the flexibility to phase the sales tax rate back up to 5 

per cent rather than doing it in one step, if it appears that a one-step increase may have adverse effects. 

 

Section 4 of the bill provides for federal reimbursement. The federal government has agreed to pay for 

two-thirds of the cost of the provinces of the equivalent of a two-point reduction over nine months. This 

reimbursement will take the form of a personal income tax abatement and a cash transfer. Under the tax 

abatement, the federal income tax payable by each taxpayer resident in Saskatchewan will be reduced in 

1978 by the first $100 of federal tax. The exact amount of this reduction will then be added to the 

taxpayer’s provincial income tax. Therefore, there will be a shifting of income tax revenues between 

government, but the aggregate amount of tax will remain unchanged. The total value of this tax 

abatement to the province will then be compared to the total cost of the program. The difference will be 

made up by a cash transfer from the federal government. 

 

Initial estimates for a two-point reduction of our education and health tax rate over nine months, place 

the total cost of the program in Saskatchewan at $54 million. Of this, $18 million will be borne by the 

province and the federal government will provide its reimbursement by means of $28 million through 

the tax abatement and a $7 million cash payment. When added to the $82 million in benefits announced, 

in the last provincial Budget, this province’s cost of living protection package can be valued at almost 

$140 million, Mr. Speaker. This should have a major impact in increasing incomes, stimulating 

economic activity and holding down the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the method for federal reimbursement under this program is very complicated. It reflects 

the financial box that the federal government has put itself in. A straight cash transfer to the province 

would have been much simpler, Mr. Speaker, but this would have increased federal spending above 

those arbitrary ceilings which Liberal and Conservatives so devoutly believe in. It is plainly ridiculous 

that the federal government feels it must disguise its payments to the provinces and hide them from 

view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are in a pretty sad state when the federal government is afraid, is afraid to show a tax reduction on 

the expenditure side of the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I look upon this national effort, a reduced provincial sales tax across the country, as a means of restoring 

confidence in the Canadian economy and helping to reduce the rate at which the consumer spending, or 

consumer prices are growing. Let’s hope, Mr. Speaker, that it works. 

 

Therefore, I move that Bill No. 37 be now read second time. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2036 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few remarks 

respecting this bill and respecting the remarks made by the Minister of Finance. 

 

I can’t help but be amazed, Mr. Speaker, at the attempt by the Minister of Finance to blame others and to 

accept no responsibility himself for the poor showing of this government insofar as its attempts to 

stimulate the Saskatchewan economy is concerned. I have heard a lot of people whine and I quite 

frankly can’t understand why the Minister of Finance and the Premier of Saskatchewan whine about the 

sales tax reduction when they, in fact, agreed to it before it was ever introduced. 

 

For the Minister of Finance to stand up in this House as he did back earlier in April, and announce his 

participation, his government’s participation the plan then for his Premier to go off to Yorkton to the 

Western Premier’s Conference, and there whine about the fact that they weren’t consulted; whine about 

the fact that the federal government isn’t doing enough to look after the problems of Canada, absolutely 

astounds me. It would do well for the Minister of Finance and the government of Saskatchewan to take a 

leaf out of the federal government’s book and do something with regard to job creation; and to do 

something with regard to the stimulation of the economy, rather than to continue with the sad and sorry 

record of this Minister of Finance and this government of Saskatchewan. 

 

We know full well, Mr. Speaker, that the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan is higher today than it has 

been since the days of the depression. We have 7.1 per cent of our people in Saskatchewan unemployed; 

over 30,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan. What is the government’s answer to solving the 

problem that it has had in large measure, the responsibility of creating? 

 

The answer is to stimulate the construction industry. You know it is a sorry mess, Mr. Speaker, when 

you look at the statistics on page 51 of the Minister of Finance’s own Budget. You take a look at the 

construction industry and you find that in the last 10-year period the highest it has ever been was in 

1968-69 with a Liberal government in this province. And that even with the measures that are being 

suggested by the Minister of Finance today, he can’t bring it up to the level that it was back in 1968-69. 

When you take a look at what is going on in other parts of our economic development we have to pretty 

well sum it up and say, very little of anything. Instead of taking responsibility and initiative for moving 

in and creating divergent development in other sectors of our economy – in the mining sector, in the 

resource development sector – we find that the oil industry has moved out. 

 

You take a look at the annual report of Sask Minerals this year, the number of wells drilled is down, the 

number of rigs in the province is down, the amount of production of oil is down. Doesn’t matter whether 

we look at what the government is doing by itself or whether we look at what the government is doing in 

a joint venture situation, they have taken a posture of saying to the private sector, you are better off 

staying out of here fellow, because if you come in we are going to nail you. They have taken the posture 

of saying to the private sector, stay out of Saskatchewan; don’t come in here and provide jobs for the 

people of Saskatchewan; don’t get in here and try to help us with our unemployment rate at 7.1 per cent 

and help us with the 30,000 people we have got unemployed. Instead they like to pass the buck and they 

like to whine. They have become great people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the slogans, the business of “jobs 

today and energy tomorrow.” It is unfortunate. Had they taken the kinds of opportunities that have been 

available to them since they became this government, there would have 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2037 

 

been jobs already and it would be a matter of going out and trying to look for them now. The minister 

talked about income tax .What a tremendous boon it is to the people of Saskatchewan that our income 

tax rate is dropping off being the highest rate of any province in Canada. I say to the minister and I have 

said it before, surely we were one province that has some room to maneuver; surely when we have come 

from 1972 to the present of going from an income tax rate of 37 per cent to 58 ½ per cent, it is about 

time that it came down a little bit and I don’t expect that there are very many people in Saskatchewan, 

who just completed filling out their income tax forms, who wouldn’t agree wholeheartedly with the fact 

that it is about time that the government did something. It is very much like the policy announced today 

by the Minister of Revenue with regard to the gasoline problem – did something that is just a little bit, 

and a little bit late. Mr. Speaker, I will have some other comments that I’ll want to make when I have 

had an opportunity to consider the minister’s speech and I, therefore, beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North East) moved second reading of Bill 46 – An Act to establish a 

Heritage Fund for Saskatchewan. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to move second reading of the bill to establish the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of Legislation, an important part of our 

government’s resource management strategy. In 1977 the value of mineral production in Saskatchewan 

exceeded a billion dollars for the first time ever, nearly 1 ¼ billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, that is an 

increase of 200 per cent since 1971. In part, this dramatic increase is a result of increased production of 

such minerals as potash and uranium. For the most part, or the most important factor, however, has been 

the increase in the value of our resources, oil in particular. Mr. Speaker, the day of cheap energy 

resource is over and over a long term, all non-renewable resources are increasing in value. That fact has 

struck home in the 1970s. Our own renewable resource policy is, or rather non-renewable resource 

policy is designed to capture for the people of this province a fair share of this increase in value. The 

record since 1971 is a measure of our success, Mr. Speaker. While the value of mineral production 

increased three times, provincial revenues from that production has increased 14 times, from $33 million 

in 1971 to $462 million this year, Mr. Speaker. That sum exceeds the total of all provincial revenues in 

1970. To take these vast new funds into general revenue and spend them would have been easy, Mr. 

Speaker, and popular in the short run, but would also have been irresponsible because there is one thing 

certain about non-renewable resources and I make this point particularly for the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley. I don’t notice him around. When they are gone, they are gone. Every barrel used, every 

ton mined, is gone forever, Mr. Speaker. Oil is the most striking example. Our reserves of conventional 

crude may be gone in 20 years. So initially, Mr. Speaker, we set up the Oil and Gas Stabilization and 

Development Fund, later changed to the Energy and Resource Development Fund, to put something 

aside for the generations to follow us. All of us, Mr. Speaker, have a responsibility to the next 

generation. We, on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, take that responsibility seriously. We have 

invested our present windfall revenues for security of those to follow. A large part of the energy fund 

money was used for public investment in the potash industry. This will return dividends for many years 

to come. Some of the money was used to find help find more oil and more gas and mineral in 

Saskatchewan. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2038 

 

The proposed Saskatchewan Heritage Fund takes this idea one step further, Mr. Speaker. We propose to 

place all non-renewable resource revenues, not just oil, in the Heritage Fund. The Heritage Fund, will, in 

turn, transfer a portion of these revenues to the Consolidated Fund to be used for schools, for hospitals, 

for road construction, agricultural assistance plans and other ongoing programs, Mr. Speaker. The 

amount of money transferred with be governed by the amount that can be sustained in the long term. 

The rest will remain in the Heritage Fund. 

 

That reserve will help stabilize year to year, ordinary revenues. Budgetary planning will be orderly and 

we will avoid expenditure decisions based on year to year fluctuations and non-renewable resource 

revenues. That is the first purpose of this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second purpose is to provide the frame work for converting part of this one-time 

revenue into income producing assets. This will fulfil our obligation to preserve some of the benefits of 

resources used today, for future generations. By investing some of our resource revenue in income 

earning assets, we are converting resources like oil, with short lifetime spans, into assets which will 

yield returns for many years to come. 

 

The proposed heritage Fund will provide a much larger pool of money than the present energy fund. The 

scope for potential social and economic investment is also much broader. Money will be available for 

exploring incentives for the oil industry, grants and loans to assist in the exploration development and 

conservation of energy and mineral resources, provincial development expenditure of the capital nature, 

advances of equity capital to Crown corporations and loan investments to Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the advances of equity capital to Crown corporations such as the proposed advance of $40 

million to the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation will be non-interest bearing and will not 

have a fixed term of repayment. They will, however, provide a financial return in the way of dividends 

or re-investment in the corporation for future capital projects. This is a sound business practice which 

will yield returns for years to come. 

 

Loans to Crown corporations will bear interest and will be for a fixed period of time. The rate of interest 

will normally be set in relation to market rates at the time for the particular term of the loan. In some 

cases, where the loan is not related to a project that will yield a direct financial return, like the loan to 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation for the home insulation program, the rate of interest may be set at 

zero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third category of investments will not necessarily provide a direct financial return. 

These investments may be of many kinds. Essentially they will be capital projects which contribute to 

the social or economic development of the province. Mr. Speaker, I invite you to review those proposed 

for the current year, particularly in northern Saskatchewan. The details of the expenditures of the 

Heritage Fund are contained in the printed Estimates for the 1978-79 fiscal year. 

 

This leads me to the third major purpose of the legislation, that is, to provide a greater degree of 

legislative control over the expenditures and investments made from the fund. All expenditures and 

long-term investments of the fund except the $26 million statutory appropriation will be subject to the 

approval of the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, may I call to the attention of members opposite that 

this provides a greater legislative control of the use of the resource revenues than is the case in the 

province of 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2039 

 

Alberta. In that province, only those expenditures made by the capital projects division which handles 

the non-income generating expenditures are subject to approval by the Alberta Legislative Assembly. 

The Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Act will provide for the legislative approval of all non-statutory 

appropriations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to the attention of this Assembly two further safeguards that are 

embodied in the proposed legislation. Not only will all the non-statutory expenditures and investments 

be voted by this Assembly, there will be two legislated restrictions which will ensure that a portion of 

non-renewable resource revenues must always be set aside for future generations. 

 

First, the amount of resource revenue that can be transferred to the Consolidated Fund will not be 

allowed to exceed 80 per cent of net non-renewable resource revenues. That is, non-renewable resource 

revenues after the statutory drilling credits for the oil industry are subtracted. This will ensure that we 

cannot spend all our resource revenue in any year without changing legislation. Not only would the 

amount have to be voted but The Heritage Fund Act would have to be amended. 

 

Secondly, a further safeguard has been put into the legislation to ensure that provincial development 

expenditures remain a relatively small portion of the Funds’ activity. Provincial development 

expenditures will be limited to 20 per cent of the annual revenue remaining in the Fund after subtracting 

the transfer to the Consolidated Fund. Since provincial development expenditures are not expected to 

earn a direct financial rate of return, the amount of money devoted to this type of expenditure, should be 

limited. 

 

This is, I submit, responsible management. I also want to mention that the proposed legislation provides 

for the retroactive establishment of the Energy and Resource Development Fund and ratifies and 

confirms all expenditures and payments from the Fund. This provision. Mr. Speaker, is required because 

the Supreme Court inadvertently removed the legislative authority for the Energy Fund in the CIGOL 

decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation also provides for the orderly transition from the Energy Fund to 

the Heritage Fund. The assets of the Energy Fund which were valued at $431 million at March 31, 1978, 

this will be transferred to the Heritage Fund and the Energy will be terminated. This will provide the 

Heritage fund with a solid base from which to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, legislation has been introduced amending The Department of Finance Act, to provide for, 

among other things, the repeal of section 33, which established the Special Investment Account. The 

government proposed to transfer the assets of the Special Investment Account to the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. The reason for the transfer is that the two funds are both permanent investment funds and 

it makes good sense to combine the Special Investment Account and the Heritage Fund. There will be 

complete financial accountability of the new fund. An annual report of the fund will be tabled each year 

in this Legislature. The Provincial Auditor shall, from time to time, but at least once a year, audit the 

books for the fund and report his findings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset, I am proud to present this bill. Those who believe that a fair share of 

the increased value of our resources should flow to the people of Saskatchewan will, I am confident, 

support the principle of this bill. Those who believe that we, in this generation, should protect the 

interests of our children and our 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2040 

 

children’s children, will approve the objectives of this bill, Mr. Speaker. Only those, Mr. Speaker, who 

owe their allegiance to the multinational resource companies will find reason to vote, no. 

 

Therefore, I move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 46, being an act to establish the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, 

be now read a second time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

HON. E. KAEDING (Saltcoats): – It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, through you to introduce a group of 

students from Saltcoats and Bredenbury in my constituency. They are seated up in the Speaker’s Gallery 

and are accompanied by teachers, Harry Cardinal and Fred Nicholson. 

 

They will be meeting with me later on, about 4:00 o’clock in the rotunda. I am sure that all of you will 

want to join with me in wishing these young students an interesting and instructional afternoon. 

 

What you have seen here at the present time is the Minister of Finance introducing the Heritage Bill 

which is one of the more important bills of this session and in a few moments you will hear the 

opposition critics reply to that. 

 

I want you all, Mr. Speaker, to wish these students a safe journey home and welcome to the Legislature. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate continues on Bill 46 
 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I think it would be fair to term this bill, 

the Heritage Fund Bill, very simply, a new name for a very old game. Certainly, there are some things in 

this bill that we like. We accept the concepts and approve of the concept that the dividend from this 

Heritage Fund will go directly into the consolidated fund. This is precisely the way that it should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we disapprove very strongly on many of the investment type procedures that will be 

followed. We think, Mr. Minister, one aspect that is a great improvement over the old Energy and 

Resources Fund is that the budgetary expenditures and the equity in the loan investments will henceforth 

be displayed in Estimates. I acknowledge that on the part of the minister and we think that is a good step 

forward. 

 

Mr. Minister, the function of the Heritage Fund, that the minister has been discussing, I suppose in some 

ways would have to be treated by the opposition as a trifle on the facetious side. I note, Mr. Speaker, that 

you are now going to pay exploration incentives to the oil industry from this new fund. 

 

You know I suppose we’ve been through this debate many times in this Assembly over the years but had 

it not been for this government’s bill 42 I really doubt very, very much if any exploration incentive to 

the oil industry would ever have been necessary. I cannot help but think that had it not been for this 

government in the years of the early 70s that we would have a booming and thriving oil industry in this 

province instead of the 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2041 

 

anaemic example that we have that requires a blood transfusion rather frequently. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s a tragedy that this province in the early ’70s of which you personally played a very 

significant role in that government in that era, it is regrettable that you couldn’t have followed the lead 

of our neighbors to the west of us and the wisdom that their financial people and their technical people 

showed as they set up their energy and resources or their Heritage Fund and the procedures that they 

used to build it up. It has to be one of the real tragedies for this province that foresight was not available 

in this province such as they had. Certainly, it is very true, they did not take as much as this government 

took from the oil industry. That’s true. But what they have left is a very thriving, buoyant and successful 

industry that kept going. It kept right on going through that very unfortunate hassle with the federal 

government. It had its ups and downs, it had its slowdown periods but nonetheless they did keep on 

going and the revenues kept coming in, at a lower rate, at a lower percentage rate than did yours but they 

kept coming in. What happened in this province? They just simply shut down. I don’t care to spend a 

great deal of time on the rhetoric on that particular issue and you know very well that it’s true. 

Politically of course you can’t admit it. But if it isn’t true, if you don’t care to acknowledge that it’s true, 

precisely why are you having to put out the exploration incentives that this bill describes? Why do you 

have to do it if you hadn’t run them out in the first place? 

 

Mr. Minister, as I indicated earlier, I am pleased that the Legislature will have an opportunity to view 

the expenditures and the equity and the loan investments in the Estimate book. Mr. Minister, we have 

always been concerned on this side of the House, I think this entire side of the House, the way money 

has been taken from the Energy and Resource Fund with very, very little accountability. I refer 

specifically to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and they have taken $338 million over a period 

of time from the Energy and Resource Fund. It has been an interesting exercise as to why you have gone 

this route on an equity to debt ratio, three to one, whereas on our utilities, etc., you always went the 

other way. Nonetheless, you chose to go that way. The $338 million came out of that Energy and 

Resource Fund. I don’t think this Legislative Assembly had a great deal of input as to whether you were 

going to take that money or whether you weren’t. It was basically, I guess, an order in council decision 

or an internal decision on the part of the Department of Finance. We question those procedures. We 

question those procedures because that $338 million was taken out as a non-interest bearing loan. This 

Assembly has no idea what the repayment schedule is on that $338 million. Obviously there is no 

interest. Frankly, Mr. Minister, we don’t believe that there is repayment schedule on it. We don’t really 

think that the Potash Corporation has any intention of every paying back any of that expenditure, across 

the board of 12 per cent. Therefore, Mr. Minister, when it comes to the tough battles with the Treasury 

Board, when the various department and the various ministers vie for funds you got the hell beat out of 

you, to put it very bluntly. You lost 4.7 per cent, Mr. Minister. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, before we move on I’ll let you respond to that one and then we’ll just keep on going. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, first of all, I would like to respond to the extent that I suggest that he look 

across the border to his neighbor in Manitoba and see what Agriculture got out of the budget in 

Manitoba. I note from the figures I have here that the Agricultural Budget is not 3.7 per cent of the total 

budget but 1.8 per cent of the total budget. That’s that new shining Tory government in Manitoba. 

 

Now you are quoting a figure of 7.4 per cent, which you say that we have got out of this 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2042 

 

budget and on the Blue Book to Blue Book figure that is probably the figure you would get. However, I 

think you should when you are comparing the Budget, I think you should consider that last year we had 

a large non-recurring item. The item of $1.7 million . . . no intention of ever paying back any of that 

equity money that was used. In fact, frankly, Mr. Minister, we don’t think that very many Crown 

corporations, if any, have any intention of ever paying back any of their equity money that has been 

advanced from the Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Minister, we believe very firmly in the Progressive Conservative Party that any money that comes 

out of the new Heritage Fund should come out in the form of a shareholder’s loan. We have no 

objections to money from this Fund being used in a Crown corporation or for a specific purpose 

provided it comes out with a fixed term of replacement and at the very least something approaching the 

going rate of interest. 

 

Mr. Minister, we say, in the Progressive Conservative party, that this is realistic financing. We think that 

it can probably accomplish some of the objectives that you have laid out. We think that it is the most 

businesslike approach and the most realistic way for a Crown corporation to assess legitimate costs. Mr. 

Minister, we reject the concept of advances of equity capital to Crown corporations. We reject the 

concept where these investments will not have a fixed rate of repayment, nor carry a rate of interest. We 

say that is not sound financing; that it is not a realistic picture for the Crown corporation receiving such 

an advance to operate on. 

 

Mr. Minister, I note that this year the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation will receive 

money on this basis of some $40 million. Mr. Minister, we don’t think that that is a wise way to proceed. 

We say, fine, give them the $40 million, but advance it to them and say you have so many years to repay 

it and the going interest rate is – you choose it – but it should be somewhere within the going rate of 

interest on the public market. That way the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation will 

legitimately reflect its financial statements. It will legitimately reflect the proper ongoing business costs. 

 

On top of that, were they paying interest on this money, on this $40 million that they are going to 

receive, this money would then go back into the Heritage Fund. The Heritage Fund would then have 

access to this money either to reinvest or to turn over to the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is nothing particular fancy about this logic. It is just normal logical business. Mr. 

Minister, I think it is only fair to say that when you give money out of this Fund, on a system that does 

not have a fixed rate of repayment, nor carry a rate of interest, then you are closing your eyes to reality. 

That money is worth something to be invested. It should certainly be worth something to be put into a 

Crown corporation. 

 

The object of any Crown corporation, I suppose, is to provide a dividend to its shareholders who, of 

course, are the people of Saskatchewan. Hopefully, the Crown corporation in the majority of cases will 

return some form of profit or at the very least will carry its own weight. But its equity money should 

very definitely be showing a return to the Heritage Fund. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is not my intention to adjourn debate on this particular issue. I very briefly summarized 

the position of our party on this bill. As we go into Committee of the Whole we will be presenting some 

estimates and some suggestions, but it is our hope that this bill can be debated out very quickly, that we 

can get into Committee of the  



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2043 

 

 Whole, as is the case with other legislation and that we can get this Assembly moving and let’s 

hopefully get out of here as quickly as possible. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina South (Mr. 

Cameron) he does get his jollies from some very strange comments, because somewhere I did miss the 

humor in that. Now . . . 

 

MISS CLIFFORD: – You would. It went right over your head. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, I see the MLA for Wilkie is her usual good-natured self with her usual 

fine friendly comments. Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before I was rudely interrupted, it is our hope that 

we can get into the Committee of the Whole and that we can do this on many other bills and that we can 

get the work of this Assembly speeding along and that hopefully, we can get out of here. Now, on the 

other hand, for those of you who may wish to prolong this for whatever purposes, obviously, we can’t 

stop you. But I wish to say that I will not be adjourning debate at this time. I will be introducing some 

amendments in the Committee of the Whole on this bill and hopefully, with certain amendments, we 

may very well be able to support this bill. As it stands right now we will probably have to oppose it, on 

the basis of some of the means that would be used to take money out of this fund. 

 

MR. PENNER: – Mr. Minister, I would say to the member for Thunder Creek that “actions speak 

louder than words”, and if in fact, it is the sincere desire on his part to see the House expeditiously move 

through its business, then I for one will look forward to the action in the next day or so, to see that that 

is, in fact, his intent. It is not my intention, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn debate on this bill. I have some very 

brief comments I want to make. 

 

I think like with the Energy Fund, when it was first introduced, one has to say that the concept of the 

Heritage Fund is a concept that is positive. When one looks at what happened to the Energy Fund, one 

has to remember that the so-called stated intent of that Energy Fund was something that was not 

followed in the years after it was developed. Instead of developing an Energy Fund that was going to be 

there for the development of energy sources and energy resources, the government took that money and 

used it to buy potash mines and the member who spoke just a moment ago indicated that we had over 

$300 million that was intended for a specific purpose but was taken out for something else. 

 

Now, when one looks at the concept of the Heritage Fund, Mr. Speaker, I think one has to realistically 

say that, on the record of the government, the jury is going to be out for some time, with regard to this 

particular concept. It is true that some imaginative person over there picked out a new name and that 

new name is the Heritage Fund. When one thinks about heritage funds and thinks about the future and 

thinks about children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren, one emotionally feels that is a great 

idea. But if the record of the government with regard to the Heritage Fund is anything close to what it 

was with the Energy Fund, then history will show that the Heritage Fund is really not any better than 

what its predecessor was. 

 

I hope that the minister and the government have learned a lesson from what they did in the past. I think 

the fact that moneys are going to have to come before the House for appropriation is good, I think all 

moneys that are going to be used by the Heritage Fund should have to come before the House. I think 

that all moneys that are taken out of the 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2044 

 

Heritage Fund and used in some other way ought to pay an interest back to that fund, if the government 

is really serious in its endeavor to create a fund that is going to be there for our children and our 

grandchildren and so on. I would suggest to the minister that unless that in fact is going to happen, that 

the statement he makes that the dividend will not be a fixed share of resource revenues but will be an 

amount determined each year in line with the level of transfers and so on, that that is really not likely to 

be the contributing factor at all, but what will be the contributing factor is the extent to which the 

government feels it needs to soften the blow of a deficit, for example, and I submit to the Minister that 

that’s not what the purpose of the Heritage Fund ought to be. It’s not what I understand the Minister to 

say the purpose ought to be and I think we ought to give a great deal of emphasis to the fact, that if you 

are serious about developing a Heritage Fund, every effort be made to be certain that that money is there 

for people in the future. When I looked at the bill, when I looked at the budget speech, it seemed to be 

that there was a really great deal of talk about very little. A new name, one can’t help but feel it is a 

reasonably positive kind of thing to talk about the future, preserve the heritage of the province. In large 

measure, I think we are talking about some bookkeeping kinds of things and, as I’ve said before, Mr. 

Speaker, the jury is going to be out for some time. Based upon the record of the government with the 

Energy Fund, I wouldn’t be a bit surprised but what this, in fact, does not work out any better than did 

the energy fund. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – Mr. Speaker, I want to just say a few words on this. First of all, I think this is a 

bad bill. I think it is unwise financing in the province of Alberta; I think it s unwise financing in the 

province of Saskatchewan I think it does very little or nothing for the future generations of 

Saskatchewan citizens or Canadian citizens. I think that ten years from now this dollar may be worth 

two bits, that’s all, it may be worth ten cents. The worst thing you can do is take a pile of money and put 

it in a bank and lock the door, and put it away for 25 years. What is this going to do for the province of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, what you should do with the Energy Fund money, is it belongs to the 

people of Saskatchewan and you should give it back to the people of Saskatchewan right now. Just think 

of what an infusion of $200 million in reduced taxes to the province of Saskatchewan would do to 

generate the economy in Saskatchewan, would be to build jobs for the future, to provide exploration and 

development in a wide variety of areas, by giving it to the people who have the imagination and the 

interest and the enthusiasm to do something with that money. I think that that is what should be done 

with the money. It seems to me that every government right across this country and right across North 

America, whenever they get $200 million, they say, “Well, how can we spend it?”, and it becomes a 

debate among the bureaucrats as to what to do with that money. In reality what should occur with that 

money is that it should be given back to the taxpayers. All I am saying to you, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure 

that the people of Saskatchewan are going to benefit in 20 years, particularly when you are taking the 

interest and putting it in the Consolidated Fund, that I say that this money ten years from now will be 

worth ten cents. The ten cents on the dollar would be following in the present trend. What I am saying is 

that if you take $100 million and put it back in the Saskatchewan economy, that the people with the 

business interest, with the knowledge and the know-how invest that money; let it stimulate the economy; 

let it go now into building jobs for the future. Do you know what has happened to the Energy Fund so 

far? It hasn’t created a single job in Saskatchewan. There are fewer people working for Intercontinental 

Packers today than there were when we invested the money in it. There are no additional jobs working 

in the potash mine, because the potash mines were all there. There is some expansion going on you tell 

us, and that is good but that expansion would have been here and in place now if you hadn’t interfered in 

the potash mines. So all I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, is I 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2045 

 

would like to tell you something, for example, what you could do with that money. In the province of 

Saskatchewan if you have a taxable income of $10,000, you’d like to talk about the under $10,000. You 

know what it is? It cost you $240 a year more to live in Saskatchewan than it does in Alberta. If you 

happen to have a taxable income of $15,000, it costs you $479 more to live in the province of 

Saskatchewan than it does to live in the province of Alberta, just in income tax. If you turn around and 

listen to the province of Alberta and you have an income of $20,000, it costs you $813.90 more to live in 

the province of Saskatchewan than it does to live in the province of Alberta, and that is only one tax that 

isn’t a sales tax, the reduction in oil and gas tax. The Minister of Revenue tried to solve the problem 

because of the ridiculous situation of the high taxes in Saskatchewan and here we turn around now and 

got $100 million and what are you going to do now? You are going to lock it up in a safe; you’re going 

to put it away; you are going to take the interest, so it is not even going to keep pace with inflation. Ten 

years from now it is going to be worth 10 cents at that day’s market and it is not going to do anything to 

create jobs. I can’t support this bill because I think the province of Alberta was unwise, I think the 

province of Saskatchewan is unwise. I say that money should be given back to the taxpayers and let it 

stimulate the economy; let it build jobs today. Mr. Speaker, I got more to say on this, I would like to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill 56 – An Act 

respecting the Dental Profession in Saskatchewan. 
 

HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): – Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to make a few brief 

remarks about the principles that have been incorporated into these revisions of The Dental Profession 

Act. 

 

These revisions were developed as a result of recommendations made by an advisory committee on 

dental licensure. The advisory committee was chaired by the Dean of the College of Dentistry and was 

composed of members of the public and representatives of the dental profession and the Department of 

Health. The advisory committee then proposed a number of ways that the present Dental Profession Act 

could be improved which would allow the College of Dental Surgeons to do a more effective job of 

regulating its member in the public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill before us has been thoroughly discussed with the College of Dental Surgeons and I 

would like the House to know that this bill has the support and endorsement of not only the college, but 

also of the certified dental assistants and dental hygienists who are members of the dental auxiliary 

groups regulated by the college. Under the revised act, the dental auxiliaries will continue to be 

regulated by the College of Dental Surgeons but will be active participants in their own regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain what this bill will do. This bill will enlarge the Council of the 

College of Dental Surgeons, the governing body of the profession, by including on it as full voting 

members, the Dean of the College of Dentistry and representatives of the public and dental auxiliary 

groups. This bill will provide much clearer and more specific hours for the College of Dental Surgeons 

to regulate both dentists and dental auxiliaries. The powers of the college to make regulations will be 

expanded and it will empowered to make regulations establishing standards of competence and 

proficiency, to define professional misconduct and conflict of interest and to require dentists to 

participate in continuing education programs and 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2046 

 

refresher training. 

 

This bill will recognize and encourage professional development in dentistry by allowing dental 

specialities to be defined by regulations and for the qualifications needed to be a dental specialist to be 

similarly prescribed. This bill will empower the College of Dental Surgeons to discipline a dentist for 

reason of professional incompetence. This bill establishes a much improved disciplinary procedure and 

provides a new avenue of appeal to an independent tribunal to dentists who have been subjected to 

disciplinary action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new powers that the revised act would grant the College of Dental Surgeons are 

accompanied by important public accountability features. All regulations other than administrative 

by-laws will be subject to a later review by this Legislature. This procedure is identical to procedures 

established in several health professional acts which were passed by the Legislature last sprint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that this bill will help the College of Dental Surgeons to be more 

independently responsible to its members, the dental auxiliaries and the public and I, therefore, move 

that this bill be given second reading and be referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law 

Amendments and Delegative Powers. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill 60 – An Act to amend 

the Provincial Parks, Protected Areas, Recreation Sites and Antiquities Act. 
 

HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): – Mr. Speaker, in rising to 

introduce the amendments to Bill 60, the Provincial Parks, Protected Areas, Recreation Sites and 

Antiquities Act, I would like to say at the outset that the recommended changes we are seeking are 

consistent with our ongoing commitment and dedication relative to our provincial parks system. 

 

I am sure that all members of this Assembly will share a common pride in terms of our provincial parks 

and consistent with that pride, are prepared to join us on this side of the House in evaluating and 

approving legislative changes which are, from time to time, necessary in order for us to continue to 

maintain the system which we cherish. 

 

For some time now, Mr. Speaker, members of my department have been involved in detailed and 

complex evaluations relative to The Parks Act itself and how this legislation measures up to the 

changing conditions of today. The steadily increasing visitations to our parks and the expectations of the 

visitors as to what a park should be are constantly being evaluated. We should ask ourselves, Mr. 

Speaker, is the system compatible with the governing legislation? 

 

This question, for the most part, can be answered in the affirmative, however, there are some changes 

we feel are necessary and for the next few moments I would like to discuss with you some problems we 

have identified and some solutions we are proposing. Presently there are a number of problems 

associated with The Parks Act. 

 

Firstly, we are concerned that the act provinces for only lands to be established as provincial parks, 

protected areas and recreation sites, when, in fact, some water bodies inside and adjacent to these 

outdoor recreation areas should be firmly established as a component to the park system. In addition, the 

act does not province for a classification of parks. A park classification system is desirable in order to 

maintain an outdoor park system which reflects sound park management and a park system that will 

provide a 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2047 

 

variety of outdoor recreation opportunities for our residents and visitors. 

 

Another problem area, Mr. Speaker, as we see it, is found in section 10, subsection (e) which provides 

authority to prepare zoning plans but it does not include the zoning of waters totally enclosed by 

provincial parks or adjacent to and included in provincial parks. Nor does it indicate what zones may be 

applied to provincial parks and what the objectives, purposes and uses of such zones might be The 

authority to zone waters is necessary to province for the safety and satisfaction of all users by separating 

conflicting uses such as water skiing, canoeing and swimming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this legislation we are also recommending that an amendment be made to section 20, 

which will give the minister in charge of the provincial parks the authority to make regulations 

controlling vehicles traffic in the parks, rather than the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. This will 

eliminate order in council procedures for minor regulations that are required to control traffic in 

individual parks when solving specific problems that arise in park operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, permit me now to spend a few moments outlining to this Legislature the changes that we 

are proposing. Section 3 of The Parks Act establishes that lands designated as provincial park land shall 

be dedicated to the people of Saskatchewan and visitors for healthful enjoyment and for cultural and 

educational and social benefits but fails to establish that waters within, or adjacent to the parks, have any 

protection for recreation use. 

 

I am proposing an amendment to section 3 that will establish that both lands and waters can be 

designated as a provincial park. I am also proposing that subsections be added to section 3 that will 

authorize the Lieutenant-Governor in Council to classify any provincial park according to the purpose it 

is best suited. Parks could then be classified as wilderness parks, historic parks, natural environment 

parks, recreation parks or other suitable classifications. 

 

The classification of parks is a recognized method of sound park management by most of the provinces 

and has proven to be a desirable system in providing and maintaining a variety of outdoor recreation 

opportunities for the park visitors. 

 

Park classification will also provide information to our visiting tourists as the classification of parks 

would permit such listing in brochures, tourist guides and public documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also wish to amend The Parks Act to authorize us to establish both provincial land and 

waters as protected areas. Section 4 presently establishes land only as a protected area and we 

recommend that some waters within or adjacent to the existing protected areas require equal protection. 

The propose amendment to section 4 will establish that waters can be designated as part of a protected 

area. 

 

The proposed amendment to section 5 will clarify that any provincial lands, provincial waters or 

provincial forest lands or waters in provincial parks can be added to an existing provincial parks or 

protected areas by order of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. The section presently states that only 

lands can be added. 

 

The proposed amendment to section 6 is similar to that of section 5 except that it refers to recreation 

sites and the amendment will authorize that both land and water can be designated as recreation sites. 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2048 

 

Amendments to section 10(e) will provide for the zoning of land, water and resources within provincial 

parks and will give the minister authority to establish zones and implement zoning management 

practises. This is required to ensure continuity of our park system, to maintain a variety of recreation 

opportunities within our larger parks and to improve park management on a continuous basis. Zoning of 

areas within a park will also province for the protection of fragile landscapes and preserve the natural 

and historical features that are located in many of the parks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another important amendment to the act is section 20. It is recommended that subsection 

(r) be repealed from the act as it only gives the authority to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council to make 

regulations controlling vehicle traffic when it is in fact the minister or appointed officers who are 

making the regulations. For example, installing traffic signs, setting speed limits in restricted areas, 

designated parking area and no parking area, etc. The amendments will provide two new sections which 

will, subject to The Vehicles Act, give this authority to the minister in charge of parks and thus provide 

for safer and more orderly traffic conditions as regulations can be readily implemented without having 

to go through order in council procedure to make the regulations constitutional. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these then are the specific amendments we are proposing. In summary they will provide 

for the designation of waters or of lakes as part of a provincial park, protected area or recreation site; 

classification of provincial parks; a recognized and widely used system for improved parks 

management; zoning of areas within a park which will maintain a variety of recreation opportunities 

within the larger parks and improved vehicular traffic control by authorizing the minister to make 

regulations when required. It is my sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, that favourable consideration is afford to 

these propose changes and I would be pleased to answer any concerns that there might be in relations to 

the proposed amendments. 

 

I, therefore, take pleasure in moving second reading of Bill No. 60. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert–Duck Lake): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to be leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE – DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE – VOTE 1 (Con’t) 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! When we adjourned, we were debating a motion presented by the 

hon. member for Morse which I would like to read to the Committee. 

 

That this Committee recommend acceptance of the SFA proposal to “establish a broadly 

representative committee in the interest of better public relations between labour, industry, 

producers and government to investigate and recommend on workable guidelines to provide 

settlements in essential and perishable product industries.” 

 

Is the committee ready for the question? I recognize the hon. minister. 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): – I have given a little further thought to the 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2049 

 

resolution which was proposed by the member for Morse in relation to the establishment of a committee 

as recommended by the SFA. I have a little difficulty identifying exactly what that committee could 

accomplish, but there could be some real merit in setting up such a committee. However, I am going to 

be proposing an amendment to the resolution which will propose that the SFA undertake the lead role in 

an attempt to develop such a committee. As a broad representative group of producers across the 

province who have major responsibility not only to producers but to consumers as well, it would appear 

as though they are the organization which is least suspect, and in fact that they also have people in other 

parts of the province and other parts of the country with whom they could discuss these problem. I 

would think they would be the best group to undertake such a move. 

 

We would be most concerned however, Mr. Chairman, if the proposals and recommendations coming 

forward from such a committee would fail to recognize the principle of free collective bargaining. 

Experiences over the years of labor-management negotiations have shown that any attempt to by-pass 

the free collective bargaining process, has usually resulted in both parties accepting settlements under 

duress which are needless and not satisfactory to either party and neither party has been happy with 

those decisions. As a result, the bitterness and recrimination which have taken place are carried forward 

into ensuing negotiations and simply create further problems down the road. 

 

Now our recent experience with the milk industry strike shows the vulnerability of innocent third parties 

in these kinds of disputes, and there is a little doubt that pressure applied by some of those people and by 

all parties concerned, did a great deal to force the parties in this dispute to very serious and responsible 

negotiations, and brought about a settlement in a fairly quick order. 

 

I would want at this time, Mr. Chairman, to sincerely commend both the management and the union 

representatives who were involved in these negotiations during this very difficult period. However, what 

I have found most reprehensible, Mr. Chairman, were the tactics undertaken by the opposition during 

these critical discussions in what could only be seen as an attempt for those members to capitalize 

politically on a very delicate and serious problem. Negotiating teams on both sides in this issue had been 

in the most intensive negotiations for over 24 hours and in fact some of the people had not had a chance 

to see a bed for over 48 hours in their attempt to work out a workable agreement. Both sides made some 

major concessions to arrive at that agreement but I can assure you, Mr. Chairman, that when 

negotiations have been subject to these kinds of strains for long hours, the continuous irresponsible 

ringing of bells in the Chamber did nothing except anger the parties involved and almost drove 

negotiations to a breaking point. I could tell you, I was there and I know that to be a fact. 

 

To some of the members of the opposition, this may look like it was smart and some I understand even 

tried to accept credit for bringing about a settlement because of it. All I can say, Mr. Chairman, is that I 

spent many hours with the negotiations parties and to a man they were angry and they felt the action of 

the opposition was damaging and irresponsible, in fact my impression was reprehensible. The fact that 

the negotiations did last almost 28 hours showed, I believe, a sincerity on the part of both parties to 

negotiate in good faith and to arrive at a reasonable and satisfactory solution. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I fear that had there been an easy alternative, such as the legislative route available to 

them it would have seriously weakened the initiative of either or 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2050 

 

possibly both parties to reach a settlement on acceptable terms. The result would not have been 

substantially different and everybody would have felt aggrieved. As I pointed out last evening, while 

this was a local emergency, the question of labor management relations is a much wider subject which 

continues to be of concern not only to agriculture but to all the other segments of society and any 

resolutions will have to be found on a much wider level. 

 

It is for this reason that I believe that the SFA through its wide membership and its interprovincial and 

national connections of the CFA could well act as a catalyst to bring about a wider discussion of this 

longer term problem. 

 

I would like to therefore, Mr. Chairman, seconded by the Minister of Labour, move an amendment to 

the resolution: 

 

That the resolutions be amended to delete all the words, “that this committee” and substituting 

therefore: 

 

Commends the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture for its proposal to establish a broadly 

representative committee to assist in settlements in essential and perishable product industries 

and further recommends that the Saskatchewan Federal of Agriculture contact the interested 

parties, particularly at the national level to gain support for the said proposals and that any 

initiatives developed be compatible with the maintenance of long established principles of free 

collective bargaining. 

 

I so move. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – Mr. Chairman, I am just going to make a few comments. After listening to the 

remarks of the Minister of Agriculture, I want to tell the Minister of Agriculture that I do not have any 

apology for making the bells ring in here and I really do not have much sympathy for the two 

participants who were downstairs for 28 hours. The people I feel bad about happen to be the dairy 

producers in Saskatchewan. They were the ones who were suffering in here. I do not feel the least bit 

sorry for you either for spending 28 hours. The people that somebody better feel a little bit sorry for is 

the third party in the labor-management disputes in this country and in this province. That is what we are 

trying to prevent. Whether the minister is aware of it or not, the Premier had an argument out on the 

steps of the Legislature with some of those dairy producers. Whether he is aware of it or not, the farmers 

came up and spilled milk on the steps of the Legislature that day. 

 

The situation was a very delicate one, a very delicate one! But it was far more delicate out in the farms 

of Saskatchewan than it was in that negotiating room downstairs, let me tell you. 

 

The real issue was not in the negotiating room. The real issue, and the issue in every labor and 

management strike, in most cases happens to be the third party, the innocent party. In this particular case 

it was a million people in Saskatchewan. That is who it was – everybody who takes milk, every family, 

yes that is right! You are permitting milk to come in from the province of Manitoba, if you want to talk 

about your good labor-management relations and your good labor policies. 

 

The people who suffered in that particular strike and the potential danger were not those fellows who 

were negotiating downstairs. It was the farmers in the province of 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2051 

 

Saskatchewan who were in a very, very delicate position, who had a perishable commodity that they 

were pouring it out in the streets. You are the Minister of Agriculture and you stand up here and criticize 

because that strike was settled. You are the Minister of Agriculture. You should have been the one up 

demanding that the government and the Attorney General bring in a law and pass that bill because you 

are the Minister of Agriculture and you are the man who is supposed to be standing up for the farmers in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

If the Minister of Labour got up and made that speech I would have agreed with him. At least that is his 

job. But you are the Minister of Agriculture and it is the dairy producers who were being hurt in 

Saskatchewan, not the people downstairs who were looking for a job. 

 

You know, that is the funny part about it. You see, when you turn around and you get somebody from 

the third party in the labor-management disputes in Canada here is what happens. The two fellows who 

were downstairs were negotiating but they have got a guaranteed job. Maybe they will lose a day’s pay 

or two days’ pay, but I will tell you something, some of those farmer could go broke. They are in a very 

serious predicament and there are thousands of them. 

 

Not only that, the people who were suffering were everybody who took milk in Saskatchewan perhaps, 

as I said, a million people. We do not apologize for ringing the bells. You just tell us the situation the 

Attorney General said, oh we might bring in a bill. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — How do you know what I said? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – Oh, we heard you whining on the radio. That is right. That is exactly what you 

were doing. Oh, he said, terrible, irresponsible. Well, I want to tell you something and I am gong to tell 

the Minister of Agriculture and the NDP that if governments in this country do not find another way to 

solve labor management disputes as the SFA Resolutions recommends, there is going to be a lot of 

hostility in this country. 

 

Right now in the province of Saskatchewan there is another critical area. What is the government going 

to do in that regard? All I am suggesting, Mr. Minister, is that you, of all people, should have supported 

the Saskatchewan Federal of Agriculture’s resolution to have a wide-based committee to turn around 

and look and investigate – Why do you have to amend it? Because you are little embarrassed you did not 

even know it was a Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture resolution. That is why. You got up and 

spoke against it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to tell you something when you want to talk about strikes, and stopping 

that particular strike. I am disappointed that the Minister of Agriculture got up and made that speech that 

you just made. If it was the Minister of Labour I could understand it. he has got kind of a bad bias 

anyway. 

 

All I am saying, Mr. Minister, as far as I am concerned I make no apology for trying to do whatever we 

could to get the farmers to deliver their milk and get the third party, the party that was being injured in 

this province of Saskatchewan back to work. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): – I am always a little disappointed and a little 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2052 

 

ashamed for the member when he takes to his feet to discuss matters which he obviously has very little 

understanding of. One would think when the member for Indian Head-Wolseley had been around long 

enough to grow grey and feeble that he might have learned something in the process. The member for 

Indian Head-Wolseley was one of the members who sat on Treasury benches on this side of the House a 

number of years ago when they imposed upon the working people of the province of Saskatchewan the 

various pieces of legislation which took away from them the right to bargain collectively and determine 

the conditions and the remuneration for the work that they produced. He remembers it well, I am sure. 

He probably would like to forget it. We, as the result of that action taken by the Thatcher administration, 

found ourselves in a position in 1972 and 1974 with two strikes in the construction industry that were 

precipitated by that action. One might have thought that the member for Indian Head-Wolseley might 

have learned something in the process. We had a strike in 1972 that was a direct result of an arbitrated 

settlement that was imposed upon the construction industry which allowed them to fall behind and fall 

behind badly, to the point where every journeyman who was being graduated from our vocational 

schools looked upon greener pastures; in Calgary, in Edmonton or in Winnipeg or elsewhere while in 

Saskatchewan they just caused people to flee from this province in great numbers – the kind of skilled 

people that we need in the construction trade and we need them badly today. We’ve seen a marked 

improvement, Mr. Chairman, in the history in terms of time lost as a result of labor disputes, partly 

because of the wage and price control program, but partly because of an increasing degree of maturity of 

behalf of both management and labor. We have seen since 1974 when we had a record number of man 

days lost mainly attributable to the construction strike that dragged on. We had 321,000 man days lost in 

1974. Most of it was a direct result of actions which your government took prior to that or to a very large 

measure in 1970-1974, a direct result of the actions of the Thatcher administration. We have seen a 

marked improvement in those figures since that time, since 1974 when we had some 35,000 workers 

involved losing some 321,000 man days, for a average of 1.17 number of man days lost per 

non-agricultural wage earner. We saw that number of 321,000 reduced to 166,000 in 1975, a further 

reduction to 136,000 in 1976 and in the past year, 1977, the number of man days lost, 31,347. A marked 

improvement. And for the member to stand in his place and use some of the age old traditions that have 

been a part of the political party which he associates himself with in order to settle labor-management 

relations, I think proves very conclusively that members opposite learn nothing by experience. If you 

want to inflame labor-management relations, if you want to worsen them, do the sort of thing that your 

friend Gerald Regan is doing in Nova Scotia today. In Nova Scotia they have just introduced a piece of 

legislation which removes the right to bargain collectively from all civil servants in the province of 

Nova Scotia. We see the same thing happening in the province of Alberta and I forecast that this free 

enterprise move will be followed directly by Sterling Lyon, the new Conservative Government in 

Manitoba. If you want to inflame and increase the number of man days lost, if you want to worsen 

labor-management relations, then travel the path that the member for Indian Head- Wolseley suggests. 

And you have got a built-in formula for conflict. Instead of being in a position where they were 

supportive of the free collective bargaining system in this Chamber, they use the subterfuge of passing 

the motion, a nefarious motion. I was not here, and then left the Chamber with the Leader of the Liberal 

Party passing the message over to the Attorney General saying, we are going to ring the bells forever 

until you people bring in a bill to return those workers to work when they were downstairs applying the 

final touches, doing the fine tuning, down to the short strokes in bringing a conclusion to an agreement, 

a very delicate one, harassing, making life miserable for people who had been around for some 27 or 28 

hours attempting to effect an agreement, which incidentally both parties are satisfied with. Had that man 

had his way we would have 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2053 

 

been in a position where there would have been a legislative settlement and both of the parties would 

have gone away unhappy and we would have paid the price for that at a later point in time. As I said 

before the member for Indian Head-Wolseley has been around long enough to grow gray and become 

feeble but he hasn’t learned a thing. 

 

Industrial relations is an exact science. It means, in definite terms, the art of compromise. It means 

attempting to effect a reasonable solution at the bargaining table so you return 12 months later or 24 

months later in a spirit of co-operation and good will, rather than engendering the kind of confrontation 

and conflict that is brought about by the suggestion made by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

I support the amendment, I think the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture probably will be in a 

position to contribute to improved management-labor relations. Certainly this should be the route that 

members opposite should be willing to travel rather than inviting conflict. All you have to do, Mr. 

Chairman, is to look about the world and see other places where that kind of heavy-handed attitude has 

been applied to industrial relations and you see some of the worst labor-management relations you’ll 

find anywhere. Australia is often cited as a case in point where they had a statute on the books which 

makes a strike or lockout an offence. It’s illegal to strike in Australia and yet they have more time lost as 

a result of wildcat strikes than we do in the province of Saskatchewan where a strike is not illegal. 

 

Now, it strikes me, Mr. Chairman, that some sober thought should be given by the members opposite to 

this resolution. I think it travels in the right direction, the amendment that is before us travels in the right 

direction in terms of making a genuine and sincere dedicated effort to improving labor-management 

relations. Not the playing of politics as we saw in this Legislature when the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley and his colleagues attempted to disrupt what it was then almost a bonafide act of 

conciliation between the two parties, for that had all but reached an agreement during the number of 

hours that the collective bargaining arrangement took place. I was never prouder of my people. I don’t 

think I have ever seen them where they worked more diligently and applied themselves better. The 

bargaining came on both sides and I think they applied themselves in a matter which should give every 

member of this House reason to be proud of both parties. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether a great deal more can be added except for the fact that the 

Liberals have travelled this road before and they are travelling it again. Their colleagues in Nova Scotia 

are repeating the same mistakes that have been made in the past. I have no doubt that if either of these 

two parties opposite were to assume the reins of government that they would take the position of 

removing from the civil service of this province the genuine right that they have enjoyed over many 

years to withdraw their services in the event that they find circumstances intolerable. I am sure that this 

would be the route that they would take. We have had a good relationship over a period of something in 

excess of 40 years. We have had a good relationship with our public servants in terms of good 

labor-management relations. We’ve undergone some stresses and some strains particularly during the 

period of raging inflation. I think that’s to be expected but I say to you now, you don’t throw the baby 

out with the bath water. You don’t destroy a system that is working well, one which the Canadian 

Chamber of Commerce agrees is the best, the most civilized way of setting the terms and conditions of 

employment. On this point the Canadian Chamber of Commerce and the Canadian Labor Congress 

agree. It seems the Liberal Party and perhaps, I don’t know, the Conservative Party, but it seems that 

that’s a lesson that they have yet to learn, I just 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2054 

 

suggest to you that you take some advice from your friends from the Chamber of Commerce who seem 

to be more realistic and more objective than you seem to be in taking the position of applying the heavy 

hand of government and forcing upon people your will regardless of the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I support the amended motion because I think it has some prospect of improving 

dialogue between the two parties. Certainly I think it has some promise and I would imagine that the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and other agriculturally based bodies would be prepared to 

agree that this is the most civilized and the most reasonable way to go in a democratic society. 

 

I would be pleased to support the amended motion. 

 

MR.C.P. MacDONALD:(Indian Head–Wolseley): – Mr. Chairman, after listening to that very quiet 

and dignified response. I want to tell the minister, the worst labor-management disputes in the history of 

Canada have taken place in Saskatchewan and in Canada in the last five years since they became the 

government. The worst in the history of Canada. Do you know that Canada had the worst 

labor-management record in the world of any industrialized nation in the world until wage and price 

controls come along two years ago? You turn around and say, we are moving up. Why, as soon as you 

became the government in 1971, this whole province became asunder with strikes and disputes and 

confrontations. That is a fact, Mr. Minister. Get up and deny it! You even admitted that yourself. Why, 

he said, now things are getting better. The only reason that things are getting better is because the federal 

government put a lid on with wage and price controls and didn’t make any difference, there was no 

value to strike anyone, because the wages were being controlled. You boys put it on yourself, or 

supposed to have, have you set up your own anti-inflation board. It didn’t make any difference what it 

was, they rolled it back. No more collective bargaining for you fellows either. 

 

All that I am going to say, Mr. Minister, don’t try to turn around and say, the strikes in 1974, four years 

after you became the government, where the result of what we did. Baloney, Canada has the worst 

record in the history of the world, the worst record in the world. And do you know what happened? 

There happened to be three provincial NDP governments, in British Columbia, Manitoba and in 

Saskatchewan. I don’t know if that had any relationship to it or not, but certainly in Saskatchewan, 

Canada had a very, very bad and critical time until wage and prices came along. So don’t tell us that it is 

our fault. Don’t try to tell me that the collective bargaining process, today, is working. Certainly it is 

working in some strikes or some disputes, but there are an awful lot of problems with it. 

 

This particular resolution is saying to you, very calmly, it is about time that we looked for alternative 

methods of settling labor-management disputes. I am going to tell you … 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — What is wrong with the amendment? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – We will tell you what is wrong with the amendment in a minute. So all that I am 

going to say, Mr. Chairman, is that it is unfortunate to listen to the NDP stand up here, now, and try to 

get around this particular problems, related to the ringing of the bells. Then the Minister of Labour goes 

back for the last seven years and all the problems that occurred all went back to Bill 2, all the problems 

in Saskatchewan and right across Canada, the worst industrial relations of any free nation in the 

industrialized world. That was Canada’s record and you know it, Mr. Minister. During the very period 

that you are talking about and trying to . . . Bill 2. That is a disgrace. 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2055 

 

Mr. Chairman, all that I am saying, once again, that it is time that labor-management and everybody 

examine the present system of settling strikes so that the third party doesn’t suffer. We are not talking 

about compulsory arbitration, we are not talking about anything except the opportunity of evaluating, 

assessing and coming up with the ingenuity that goes – I heard the Attorney General make that speech. I 

will go and get his clipping if you want. He stood up and made that speech five or six years ago, that you 

have to examine a new way of settling labor-management disputes. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: —I said that? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – That is right, in Saskatoon. I will get you the clipping. 

 

Mr. Minister, once again I am going to say we make no apologies on this side of trying to make it 

possible for milk producers in the province of Saskatchewan to deliver their milk. There is only one 

thing that I want to say to you. Mr. Minister, isn’t it strange that the strike was settled? 

 

MR. SNYDER: – Mr. Chairman, just a brief comment with respect to some of the remarks of the 

member. I am always a little disappointed in people who say, for instance, there has to be a better way. I 

don’t know what it is, they will say, but you have to find a better way. That is a classic rejoinder to a 

complex problem. 

 

I had a call from a chap who was watching one of the Stanley Cup playoffs and a thought just struck him 

and it occurred to him to give me a call, because he saw a couple of fellows facing off and they had a 

bad face off and they tried it again and the referee waved them out and brought out in another couple. 

So, he said, maybe that is the solution. Bring in another couple of negotiators if these ones don’t solve 

the management relations that I see from members opposite. Instead of attempting to find two in the 

operation they are saying, you have to find a better way, and in essence, Mr. Chairman, there are only 

two ways. 

 

One of them is the method that have been used successfully in terms of free collective bargaining over 

many years. It served us well in large measure. With care and attention and dedication on the part of 

both parties it will continue to serve us well. 

 

The other option is compulsory arbitration. You can talk blithely about labor courts or whatever, but in 

the final essence you have two choices free collective bargaining or compulsory arbitration, and you’re 

going to have to make that choice. I know which bargaining system is by far the most civilized of any in 

the industrial world. It has its shortcomings and its failures but it certainly hasn’t given any evidence to 

indicate that we should discard that. In the event that for perishable products we impose compulsory 

arbitration, that is the first step down the slippery slope and then you will see the kind of action being 

advocated that is being put into place now in the province of Nova Scotia, in the province of Alberta and 

in those other provinces that have a political party of this type of members opposite. Not ready to do this 

kind of fine tuning nor dedicate themselves to a civilized process of having two disputants get together 

and solve their problems without the heavy hand of government. 

 

MR. MALONE: – I have always felt somewhat sorry for the Minister of Labor when he has to get up in 

this house and start defending the union organizer, executive of the SFL 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2056 

 

and so on. There is probably no person in the last two or three years who has been more vilified by those 

particular organizations and unfairly in my view, than the Minister of Labour. I’d ask members to look 

at the reports of the last conventions of the Saskatchewan Federations of Labour and hear what they say 

about the Minister of Labour, and hear what they say about the Premier, and I must say that I think the 

Minister of Labour has honestly gone out and tried to do a job for the working man in Saskatchewan. He 

has been a member of this Legislature for many years and I disagree with many of the things he does but 

nobody questions the sincerity of his approach except those that he is trying to help. I must say, Mr. 

Minister, that I find myself feeling somewhat sorry for you when you have to stand up in this house and 

try to defend those people who are sticking a knife into your back every day a little bit deeper. 

 

Let’s get to the resolution here, the motion. I’m not going to support this amendment., If this had been 

the original motion, indeed I may have been able to support it. What we presented to you last night was 

a motion in the exactly wording of a representation made to you by the Saskatchewan Federal of 

Agriculture, exact wording An organization presented to you what I believe was a very, very decent type 

of approach, to form a committee to check into the situation, basically that is what it amounts to. That 

organization represents several thousands of the people of Saskatchewan. I believe it is representative of 

the majority of the people of Saskatchewan. Indeed it certainly representative of the majority of the 

people of Saskatchewan. What you have done is say to the Saskatchewan Federal of Agriculture 

members of the Wheat Pool, members of SARM, members of all those organizations, “We’re not going 

to listen to you, we are not going to listen to you because it’s going to embarrass us a little bit with our 

friends in labor. So what we are going to do is take your motion, the motion we proposed, and twist it 

around to try and put the blame on somebody else, in this case the reference to the national level.” If you 

were to put this in as a separate motion, separate and distinct, from the motion that we put in, we’ll 

support it. But we are not going to have the motion of the Saskatchewan Federal of Agriculture just 

disposed of by your government majority, just throw it out. The Minister of Agriculture, you’d think, 

would be most concerned about the feelings of the people directly involved in agriculture in this 

province, but he gets up and says, “I don’t care about the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, we’re 

going to put in another motion, we are going to put in another motion that is totally different from the 

motion that was put to us by this very important organization,” So I say to you, Mr. Attorney General 

and Mr. Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Minister of Labour, we are not going to support the amendment. If 

you are prepared to put this in as a separate motion and vote for the motion that we put in, we will 

support it. 

 

I want to talk to the Minister of Labour for a moment. He talks about the long established principles of 

free collective bargaining. Indeed maybe those principles were effective at one point in our history We 

look around. No, not any more. That is what brought the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture to 

make this submission to your government because they because they are not effective any more. That is 

why thousands of people all across this country are saying, we have to find a better method, a better 

device and that does not mean compulsory arbitration. 

 

Let’s just look at what has happened in Saskatchewan the last few weeks. It was only about six weeks 

ago we had people picketing up and down in front of this building. The Saskatchewan Government 

Employees Association, they were on strike. As a result of that strike, courts were shut down across this 

province. Now you talk about the right to strike and that is a right everybody should have. But we also 

have a right to get justice. Which right takes precedence over the other? I don’t know but obviously the 

free 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2057 

 

collective bargaining system was not working properly in that particular strike. 

 

Again, just a few days ago, we had milk producers pouring milk on the front steps of the Legislative 

building. You think they thought the free collective bargaining system was working? It wasn’t working. 

Believe me, I give the Minister of Labour credit for getting the parties together in the Premier’s office, 

browbeating them or whatever he did to get them to come to a decision to settle the strike but that is not 

part of the free collective bargaining process. The government does not belong in the free collective 

bargaining process as you know it. but he, by his own actions in the milk strike, has indicated to most 

reasonable people that the free collective bargaining process was not working because if it had been 

working, he wouldn’t have had to get involved in it. 

 

Now what do we see in today’s newspapers? We see CUPE taking a strike vote in the hospitals in 

Saskatchewan, a strike vote that indicates so far, that there is a very real possibility of a strike in those 

hospitals. What are you going to do then? Are you gong to call the Legislature like you did with the SPC 

workers? Was that the free collective bargaining system working? I suggest to you, Mr. Attorney 

General, all of the examples I have given you demonstrate very dramatically that the free collective 

bargaining in system as known by the Minister of Labour, as cherished by the Minister of Labour, is 

simply not working in this day and age. 

 

I wish I had the answer to give to you today what would work. All I can say to you right now is if your 

government sits there and resists legitimate, legitimate representations to you by the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Agriculture, asking for you, as a government to become involved in trying to seek out a 

new process, a better process, I say that you are being derelict in your duty and you should not be 

governing any longer. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MALONE: – Their request was a genuine request. They are not trying to burn any political 

bridges and they are not trying to fight any political battles. They are coming to you representing all 

political parties and they are saying to you they have a genuine concern. By this amendment, you are 

saying to them, we don’t care about your concerns. I won’t be supporting this amendment. I hope all 

properly thinking members will not support it either. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Chairman, I am very interested in that tirade made by the Leader of the Liberal 

Party. It is rather interesting that he, all of a sudden, has become the champion of the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. I can tell you that the people that are on that a list of Federation of Agriculture have a lot 

more confidence in this government than they ever had in the government of Ross Thatcher. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: – I can tell you that even in this particular strike, the strike which we were involved 

in, we had a situation where some of the people at issue were members, were farmers, farmers who 

belonged to the dairy co-op and there were some people phoning in on both sides, saying to the 

processors, look stick to your guns. We had other guys say, well you know, fellows, we have to get on 

this issue. They were negotiating on behalf of the membership that was out there and we knew they were 

negotiating on 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2058 

 

on behalf of that membership. There was conflicting opinion out there with regard to the milk industry 

but there were a lot of people in the dairy industry who were saying, stick to your guns, we are prepared 

to hold out for another day or two and that was the decision made by the people in the country not the 

decision of this government or the decision of the Diary Producers Association. 

 

So I think we should recognize that at the bargaining table there was some power on the part of those 

people in the country. I think in this motion we have commended the Federating of Agriculture for 

coming forward with a proposition .We have suggested that they should be the people who should be 

doing the spade work on this because if we, as an NDP government went to do it, you people would 

immediately be opposing it. You could say that we are against that because the government proposed it. 

But if the Federation of Agriculture does it, then they will be prepared to give them some support. I am 

not interested in whether I get credit for it or not. I am interested in whether there is some resolution to 

problems and I think that is the issue that we should be discussing here, not whether it is your policy or 

ours. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I have listened with a great deal of interest to the exchange that 

has been going on back and forth and trying to relate it to agriculture and somehow it happens to have 

just gone over my head. Exactly what was the significance of the Department of Labour that they 

dragged into agricultural Estimates? As it has been dragged in however, I can’t help but sympathize to a 

degree with some of the comments made by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. I would sympathize 

with the comment that the Minister of Labour has, since his tenure in 1971, been a walking disaster in 

that department – the strikes, the number of man days lost were never greater than under his tenure and 

yet at the same time he failed on both counts because he hopped into the pocket of the large international 

unions, hopped into their hip pocket and yet at the same time, he lost the favor of many of the labor 

groups in Saskatchewan. So he accomplished to objective – that he became a tool of the multinational 

unions and yet at the same time he lost favor with his own provincial labor groups. 

 

MR. SNYDER: – We’re doing all right. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well now we’ll just exactly see how you do, Mr. Minister, because you are in 

for a pretty good jolt with your labor people on the next time around because . . . 

 

MR. ALLEN: – They are going to go with you, are they? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yes, I think are. 

 

Mr. Minister, you spent some time telling us about that terrible 28-hour ordeal that you went through 

and regrettably, my heart strings don’t start twinging over that. For keeping the negotiations going, I do 

give the Minister of Labour a degree of credit, but as the member for Indian Head-Wolseley said, the 

people who were losers on that were the milk producers. 

 

All right, all of this has been said and I see very little point in the redundancy of the debate. But you 

know the interesting point of it is, and I’ve been hearing and reading from all sides in this House, about 

how we, in this corner have been obstructing the 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2059 

 

passage of Estimates legislation in this Assembly. I heard the member for Lakeview on radio not very 

long ago referring to what he called the inane delaying tactics of the people to his left. We have heard 

the Attorney General referring to the obstructionist tactics of the people across the floor, I suppose, 

meaning us. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the other night we had to sit here under, I think probably some of the more absurd 

circumstances (I won’t say the most absurd because we have had some real prizes) but when we argued 

about the camera that a gentleman happened to walk into the press gallery with and snap a picture. You 

have wasted three hours of this Assembly’s time. Mr. Chairman, I would ask all sides to take note that in 

that three hours nobody from this corner could find anything to say on that momentous issue. It was 

beyond us. Mr. Chairman, we have a rather lengthy agenda on agriculture. There are now quite a few 

subvotes. Agriculture is a very, very important subject in this province. Now somewhere along the line, I 

would respectfully suggest to all sides in this Assembly, that we just might have gotten sidetracked 

when we start arguing the merits of collective bargaining under the Department of Agriculture 

Estimates. Everyone knows that the Department of Labour under the present minister has fouled up the 

labor situation and this province to an inordinate degree. That is fine. We will settle that one under 

Labour Estimates but not under Agriculture. Now, Mr. Attorney General, if you promise not to give a 

lengthy speech and kill the clock until 5:00 o’clock, I am going to sit down and respectfully suggest to 

the minister to get your estimates going again, pull your darn amendment out of it, let’s vote on the silly 

thing. Let’s get down to the business of dealing with Agricultural Estimates and the vote if you would 

stop your obstructionist tactics. Let’s get on with the business of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. MALONE: – Mr. Chairman, I just want to respond very briefly to the member for Thunder Creek 

and point out two things to him. Number one, that when a member of the Liberal caucus is attacked by a 

member of the government and the government tries to use its majority to steam roller over that 

member, the Liberal caucus is going to defend him, not unlike the members over here . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – Not like the member for Souris-Cannington so brilliantly last fall. That is point 

one. Point two is that in Agricultural Estimates we believe that Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture 

is a very valued and valuable organization and when they come to our caucus and present us with a 

legitimate request, we are going to abide by that request because of that organization and because of the 

respect we have for it. If the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) and the Tory caucus don’t have 

respect for the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, that’s their business. When they come to us 

with a request and they come to the government with the sam  e request and the government does not go 

along with that request, we believe it is our duty to promote the interests of that organization and bring 

to the attention of the government the wishes of that organization. It so happens that one of the wishes of 

that organization is to review the concept of free collective bargaining. If the member had been in the 

House when this first came up yesterday, he would realize what the debate was all about and that’s why 

we are debating the issue. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAILEY: – Mr. Chairman, I have been listening with interest to the debate on both sides of the 

House. In particular, there were three statements made and I find it a little uneasy, as a person who has 

lived in this province all my life, to just accept all of those 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2060 

 

statements, Mr. Chairman. For instance, the Minister of Labour said, in referring to settlements, what 

happens in the settlements is a “civilized way of doing things.” Now, somehow I can see when I look at 

the situation – I’m not just referring to Saskatchewan – but somehow when food is wasted, when I read 

of apples rotting on the ground, when I read of these things happening, Mr. Minister, I just can’t put the 

words “civilized way of doing” to a situation like that. It is beyond me. 

 

The second thing that the minister happened to say is, “The system is working well.” That’s a direct 

quote, Mr. Minister. I’m not disputing your ability as Minister of Labour one bit, not one bit. But I do 

want to say this, Mr. Minister. When you have a situation in which the Minister of Labour in 

Saskatchewan stands up and says, “The system is working well”, when the farmers have paid millions of 

dollars in demurrage charges at the west cost alone, how does the Minister of Labour in a province like 

Saskatchewan where our number one industry is agriculture, how does he have the intestinal fortitude to 

say that the system is working well. Now, how do you say that? I’m not saying it, you know a great deal 

more, Mr. Minister, about labour than I do, but I’m saying this, the third thing which you said is it’s the 

best way to settle disputes. I’m not contradicting that, Mr. Speaker, it well may be, that doesn’t happen 

to be my particular field, but you know, it may be the best way, but nobody on that side of the House or 

on this side of the House in 1978 should sit on their laurels and say that that’s the only way to settle 

disputes. I really believe that it isn’t the only way to settle disputes. When I watch the country of 

Canada, go from the worse labor record in the world a year ago August, drop in the GNP from fourth to 

fourteenth, you know, how do you attach to it that that’s a civilized way of doing it? You know, the 

Minister of Labour to say it’s civilized thing to let food rot, how do you attack that in this modern day 

and age? How do you say, you know to the western farmers who in the last decade, every farmer in 

Saskatchewan is out thousands of dollars, no question. And then the Minister of Labour stands up and 

says it working well. 

 

I say to both sides of the House, I say that this argument is redundant. I say to the Minister of Labour the 

civilized way in a civilized country is that we do what I think is on the way now, and that is to get into 

away of settling disputes before we hurt the third party, which always happens. I think that you are 

trying to – here we are locking up a labor orientated government, locking up, trying to get somebody in, 

making statements like the Minister of Labour made. He wouldn’t dare go make those statements in 

rural Saskatchewan, he wouldn’t dare say it’s a civilized way, civilized way to have 20 ships lined up 

and every day that there it’s costing us hundreds of thousands of dollars. And that’s civilized, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, I believe that the Minister of Labour is a good minister for that position. I’m not criticizing his 

position, at all. I’m saying to the member opposite, as well as to the members on this side of the House, 

surely we have matured in this country from past records. Surely we have matured in the track record in 

Canada that we can find a better way. It may be the best way now and I’m not denying that but that 

doesn’t mean that we have to sit here and not seek out a better way. 

 

MR. CAMERON: – Mr. Chairman, the amendment really amounts to a cynical dodge by the 

government. That’s what it is. The wording of the amendment is of course very carefully couched in this 

cynical dodge by the government of a real issue. And I want to read to the members both the resolution 

that the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture put before the government and the words of the 

amendment. Then you’ll see how carefully it is done. What the government wants to do is to avoid 

having to say 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2061 

 

“yes” or “no” to the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. It appears to me that the government 

doesn’t have the courage to either say to the Federation of Agriculture, yes, we will accept your 

recommendation, or, no, we will not. What he wants is to take some middle course, appearing to pay 

some attention to the resolution of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture on the one hand and 

appearing on the other hand, not to raise any problems in the labor community with the resolution. 

 

Here’s what the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture brief said and I wish the member for Thunder 

Creek were still here. He considers it such a petty issue, why is it being raised here in Agriculture 

Estimates? Last night, if he had been here, he would have heard the member for Lakeview read the list 

of organizations that belong to the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture and I want to remind you, 

some of the farming members over there, again of the people that came before you the other day in the 

same way they came before us. They said, one of our 10 major concerns in Saskatchewan at the moment 

is this area of labor-management relations. Those people were the Saskatchewan Milk Producers 

Association, the Saskatchewan Swinebreeders Association, the Saskatchewan Chicken Marketing 

Board, the Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers Marketing Board, the Saskatchewan Turkey 

Producers Marketing Board, the Diary Producers Co-operative Ltd., the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the 

United Grain Growers Ltd., the Co-operative Hail Insurance Company Ltd., the Federal Co-operatives 

Ltd., the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail 

Association and the Saskatchewan Women’s Institute. Now let’s not take such a cynical approach to this 

thing. These are organizations, major farm organizations in this province who have a concern and it’s a 

deep and abiding concern that they have. Why do we take this so easy cynical dodge of what they are 

saying to us. Let me read to you from their brief which they gave to you. This is the several 

organizations speaking to its government in this province: 

 

Since we have just experienced a strike in the dairy processing sector this month we wish to 

acknowledge (it said fairly) the prompt prodding of the government to get negotiations 

completed. However, a January annual meeting expressed the concern that labor negotiations 

should not end in a walkout or a strike in essential service industries, particularly in the 

enterprises handling perishable products. As a beginning (I stress these words quoting from their 

brief) we ask that the government establish a broadly representative committee of those 

interested in better public relations between labor, industry, producers and government, to 

investigate and recommend workable and acceptable guidelines which would provide settlements 

in essential and perishable product industries. Now they say this. For example, in the case of the 

dairy strike, back to work legislation was requested. There is always a costly time delay in 

preparing and implementing it, should that course be decided upon. Why not prepare and have 

read a generally worded piece of back to work legislation for the essential services sector and 

which allows for collective bargaining to continue with a government mediator? 

 

Now that is what the Federation of Agriculture, which is the composite organization of these several 

farm groups in the province, has said to the government. They have a concern and it is one of their ten 

major concerns. I asked personally of those people what priority they placed on this matter. They told 

me it was now one of their major concerns in this area. They have taken, in my view, what is a 

reasonable proposal to the government. They have simply said let’s establish a committee, drawn up 

with the various interest groups involved and take a look at this question openly and see if we 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2062 

 

can’t find some better ways. Now carefully pay attention to the amendment drafted in this sort of careful 

cynical language; “Commence a Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture for its proposal to establish a 

committee.” 

 

Well, it never made such a proposal, Mr. Minister. It proposed that the government establish such a 

committee. It says, “commence a Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture for its proposal to establish a 

committee.” Then it says, “to assist in settlements.” It never said that. It didn’t say a committee, “to 

assist in settlements.” It said a committee to find some better way to improve relations and find some 

better answer than the strike or the lockout in essential or perishable service industries. That is what I 

said. It recommends that the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture contact the interested parties. 

Well, surely to goodness, these many organizations that have been in this province since its inception 

and who surely represent collectively agriculture in this province shouldn’t themselves have to establish 

that group. Why does the government resist the appeal of these people to do it, if it isn’t a cynical dodge 

on the action because you know that there are differences in viewpoints here between the interests of 

labor on one hand and the interests of agriculture on the other. We all know that those division exist but 

why don’t we put our minds in the spirit that these people suggest to some better resolution of that 

problem. It doesn’t have to land anybody in any difficulty particularly. Then it goes on to say 

“particularly at the national level.” 

 

Now what is that again, I ask you, if that isn’t a cynical little trick again, you know, to somehow take the 

spotlight of the problems we are having in the province and tell them to go to the national level with 

their situation. Well, it is the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture; it is the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool; those are the people that are requesting action on your government in your jurisdiction. They may 

very well be taking a similar proposal to the national government in respect of its jurisdiction, but I 

would think that one of the basics of good government would be to accept the suggestion by these 

organizations, representing as they do without question, agriculture in the province, and take a look at 

the problem which is clearly there and to try to find some better means of meeting it. Now what you do 

is put before us, without the courage to say yes we will do it or no we won’t or we want more time to 

consider it, would have been a better response. Instead you put before us this cynical little dodge and I 

think that is unfortunate. It is unfortunate that you are not prepared to take some responsibility in this 

area when you have been requested to do so by the agricultural industry broadly in this province to do it. 

For that reason I am going to join my colleague in not supporting it. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: – Mr. Chairman, a little note in the Leader Post today and it’s entitled Canada 

First, and I thin it really sums up the “working well” system that the Minister of Labour has indicated. It 

says: 

 

A Canadian is a man who leaves an Italian movie, enters his German car, drives to a Chinese 

restaurant, orders Dutch beer and Danish cheese washed down with French brandy. On arriving 

home he doffs his Korean shirt, Romanian pants, Polish shoes, Taiwanese dressing gown, 

watches his Japanese television set, writes with an American ball point, turns on his Hong Kong 

radio to hear Yankee and commie unions – Ed Broadbent of the NDP rail against ever rising 

unemployment. He then waits for a French Canadian Prime Minister to donate millions of his tax 

dollars to Cuba, Zambia, Tanzania to establish Russian control of South Africa. Fortunately, he 

never asks himself why Canada has dropped from fourth to thirteenth place among the 

industrialized nations. Finally, he figures out where he went 



 

 

April 27, 1978 

 

2063 

 

wrong with a Singapore calculator. 

 

MR. ALLEN: – Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one word on this because I think that this is an 

important issue and should not be treated lightly. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it is true that we have had some industrial relations problems in 

Canada that have affected agriculture adversely over the years. There is absolutely no doubt about that; 

that fact cannot be denied. I think that reasonable people who look at the problem would recognize that 

the main problem that we have had in Saskatchewan is, as the member for Rosetown-Elrose has 

suggested, because of demurrage charges because of problems we have had in the grain handling 

system, particularly at the west coast over the last number of years. These problems that we have had at 

the west coast as far as handling grain is concerned, can’t be solved in Saskatchewan. They can only be 

solved by a national effort. I think that this amendment addresses itself to that particular problem and for 

that reason should be supported. 

 

I would also like to say, Mr. Chairman, that in Saskatchewan it is true that we have had industrial 

disputes over the years. I suggest that they haven’t been a bigger problem for the agricultural community 

than they have for the general public, with a few notable exceptions namely, the milk problem we had 

here a few weeks ago. The point I think that has to be made, Mr. Speaker, is that in 1977 we had over 

300 collective bargaining agreements signed with no strikes, no lockouts whatsoever. Now we don’t 

read about those in the newspapers it is true, because they don’t make news. But the fact of the matter is 

that the vast, vast majority of disputes are settled under the free collective bargaining process. We look 

at places like Australia, as the Minister of Labour pointed out, where they don’t have free collective 

bargaining; they have many, many more strikes. True they are illegal strikes or walk-outs, but the 

problems that they have in their economy, I think, are brought about because of these particular pieces 

of legislation that they have. Because when you have people who are in a position where they are forced 

to accept compulsory arbitration, they are not happy with the settlement. They are just not happy with 

those kind of settlements. I think that it makes much more sense to stick with our free collective 

bargaining system, with all its warts, and I don’t deny for one minute that there are problems in the free 

collective bargaining system. I might point out that there are problems in democracy generally. There 

are lots of systems, I suppose, that could be considered more efficient than the democratic system. There 

are things that could be done that would make government operation more efficiently, I suppose, than 

the process that we go through in this House but I think that in a free society, that all of us believe in, we 

want to try and preserve those free institutions. And where we have problems, I’m not suggesting that 

there are not problems in free collectible bargaining, I think we have to work to try and solve those 

problems. It seems to me that these problems that we have that particularly affect the agricultural 

community, which the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture is particularly concerned, are national 

problems as well as provincial problems. And the only way that we can solve these problems for our 

agricultural producers is to do so on a national basis. For that reason, I will support the amendment and 

not support the original motion. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas – 33 



 

April 27, 1978 

 

2064 

 

 

Thibault Kaeding Skoberg 

Smishek Kwasnica Allen 

Romanow Dyck Koskie 

Messer McNeill Johnson 

Snyder MacAuley Thompson 

Kramer Feschuk Lusney 

Baker Faris Birkbeck 

Lange Rolfes Bernston 

Matsalla Tchorzewski Wipf 

Mostoway Vickar Thatcher 

Banda Nelson (Yorkton) Katzman 

 

Nays – 0 
 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 


