
























































Hansard: May 08, 1978


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2503 
 

EVENING SESSION 
 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — TOURISM AND RENEWABLE RESOURCES — VOTE 1 (Cont’d) 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — I realize this and I would like to know just what your department has done. 
We don’t seem to be getting the air traffic into Canada even with Norcanair travelling into there and it was 
brought out here a few weeks ago that it is the customs facilities at the Regina airport. I wonder if your 
department is working to promote better facilities here and a better airline hook-up with the United States? 
 
HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Chairman, with respect 
to the Norcanair schedule flights. These connect the farthest northern point, La Ronge, to Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, Regina to Minot and as you are aware, this has been established about a year and one-half ago, or 
about a year ago, and these are continuing, although I think there has been some change in the schedule. With 
regard to the customs clearance facilities here in Regina, that is a problem, unless some arrangements are made 
ahead of time for clearance facilities, then I think the problem is not quite as great. Nevertheless, as the facilities 
are now, it will provide clearance for some 20 people and we have made representations, sort of ongoing 
representations, to the federal authorities with regard to this and they are fully aware of it, but it would seem the 
only time that they will probably be able to improve the facilities is when the physical facilities of the airport 
are improved. Hopefully, the completion of the present study with regard to improving the airport facilities of 
Regina will move on positively to provide for, not only an expansion of the airport facilities physically, but as 
well, to provide for custom clearance facilities. Oh. I think I was in error in saying that it provided clearance for 
20 people, it’s 40 people. 
 
With regard to tourism promotion on this Norcanair flight, it is a joint promotion between Norcanair and the 
government of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me just at what time or how late was the last meeting you had 
with the Minister of Transport? Has your department been meeting with the Minister of Transport or customs 
officials, regarding enlarging this facility at the airport of Regina? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — You know, one of the times, I think it was in February or March, we had a tourism 
conference in Ottawa and that was the time when all the provincial ministers met with Mr. Jack Horner. The 
Minister of Transport was not available at the time so we tried to get the message through, through the Minister 
of Industry and Commerce. I indicated very clearly to the conference at that time that in the improving of 
custom clearance facilities priorities should be given to capital cities designating them as international airports. 
I believe that following that I had some correspondence with Jack Horner on this. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister. don’t you think though, that — and I remember you saying this before when 
the questions were put to you about customs facilities and I realize that Otto Lang wasn’t at this tourism 
meeting in Ottawa — don’t you think that to let something like this go when it is so important (we are the only 
western Canadian city that doesn’t have direct contact with the United States on a regular daily basis) now do 



 
May 8, 1978 

2504 
 

you not feel that this is important, that you should have immediately set up another meeting when this one you 
mentioned didn’t take place? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — There are ongoing discussions not only with my department but there are also 
discussions carried on with the transportation agency. We are going to continue to impress upon the federal 
authorities to improve the facilities here. I don’t think it would do much good to sit on the doorstep there day in 
and day out and insist in that manner but we are pressing for it and there are ongoing discussions; I don’t know 
just what else one could do at this time but I think we are doing all we can to try to convince and persuade the 
federal authorities to improve the facilities. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, we have a saying in the farm machinery business that says it is the squeaky 
wheel that gets the oil: I wonder if we are not making enough noise. We have airlines in the United States, 
North Central and Frontier Airlines and if they had the franchise to fly into Regina and through Saskatchewan 
— and I am not suggesting we shouldn’t have a Saskatchewan airline on this route — you’ve got to remember 
that since this Norcanair started to go to Minot and have this run, we’ve seen the air service to Minot 
deteriorate. We haven’t seen it growing. I maintain that if North Central or Frontier were to have this run into 
Regina, you would see advertising promoting Saskatchewan. I wonder what is happening in this direction. If 
Norcanair is not going to be optimistic and exploit this to its fullest, I wonder if we shouldn’t be looking in 
other directions. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I’m informed by my officials that Frontier Air Lines and Norcanair are 
working fairly closely together in promotion of this air route. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think what is happening on this with the reduction of air flights in the 
week that their promotion . . . . that they are doing a very good job on it. I think if the southern-most airline 
were to be doing the promoting instead of being connected with two airlines, you would see a far better job 
being done. Just changing the subject, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you if you would ask your officials on 
these . . . at Boundary Dam, if you recall a year ago, we had some problems with pollution from the steroids 
from the fly ash. I wonder, have you any recent reports on what is happening in this area? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Tests have been carried out with respect to the effects that the fly ash may have on 
fisheries and wildlife and it’s been established that there are no detrimental effects from it. It doesn’t influence 
the fishing life in the dam and there is no evidence that it would indicate that the wildlife is harmed in anyway. 
I might say that the tests have been carried out by the university and the Freshwater Institute. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me, do you have an ongoing system of checking these fish for 
such things as in your industrial areas mercury poisoning? Do you have an ongoing program in checking the 
wildlife and the fish in all areas? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, to answer the member’s question, our ecologists are continually 
checking the mercury content, not only in the Boundary Dam water but in some 400 or so lakes. The tests are 
made by the Provincial Lab, the Department of Public Health. With regard to other testing of the water for 
other content in the water, this is done by the Fresh Water Institute as well as the Provincial Lab. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me, are there samples of wildlife such as ducks shot in certain 
areas and fish that are caught, do you send them in regularly? Are 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2505 
 

these done on a monthly basis or twice a year or how is this handled? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — With regard to testing of the wildlife, this is done annually, that’s 
waterfowl, this is usually done in the spring of the year. This is done through the Canadian 
Wildlife Service. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Have you run into any problems with either the fish or wildlife as far as 
pollution that has damaged the birds or fish? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — There have been a few isolated cases of botulism in waterfowl, but the 
cases with respect to fish were very, very few. One especially is lack of oxygen. This has occurred 
in Qu’Appelle Lakes. 
 
MR. LARTER: — This is in the Qu’Appelle Lakes you said, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes. 
 
MR. LARTER: — There are quite a number of suckers in the Qu’Appelle River Basin. Have you 
come up with any commercial use for fishing these suckers out? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — They make good fertilizer. 
 
MR. LARTER: — I would like to touch on, Mr. Minister, are you responsible for the fresh water 
fountains at Wolseley, for instance, along the Trans-Canada Highway? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No, we are not responsible for it. It is town supply. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Well, the Department of Highways or someone is looking after this. Is it not 
Tourism that is looking after these fountains? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No, the Department of Highways is only assisting with the access to it, but 
as far as the water supply is concerned, it is under the jurisdiction of the town. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, this is quite a popular thing along the Trans-Canada Highway. It 
may be minor but it is causing quite a traffic problem there and I just wondered what (I thought it 
was your department) you were doing to re-locate this one at Wolseley. Are there going to be 
more of these strategic places along the highways in Saskatchewan? It is a very popular stopping 
point for tourists and for people just travelling. I just wonder . . . . . . 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I think over a few years, the department has provided a small grant 
towards assistance but since the regional tourism development program has come into place, many 
of these are going to fall in under the regional program. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Just switching for a few minutes over to Kenosee. I would like to ask you a 
couple of questions on Kenosee. You mentioned a year ago that you had taken over the top floor 
of the hotel at Kenosee Lake for offices. Is this still the case? Do you still have offices on the 
upper floor and have you done anything to increase the rental facilities on that resort, such as 
motels? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, it is true that the staff are occupying the upper floor, that is 
the second floor of the Chalet. However, the lounge that is located there is available for public 
use. The dining room and the eating facilities will remain the same. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2506 
 

We have no plans for expanding any of the motel facilities. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, just one last question on item 1. I was away the first night that 
Tourism was on Estimates and I had this question. I don’t know whether my mate from Prince Albert 
asked it or not. Do you have a training program on for staff of the parks? Do you have one under 
community colleges or continuing education that trains these people to meet with the public? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, we are involved, our staff is involved in the hospitality training 
seminars that are being held and sponsored by the hotel and motel restaurant association. With regards 
to our park staff, there is a one week seminar that’s held each year in the fall. There is a one day seminar 
for our seasonal staff and then there is a travel counselling seminar that is normally held for three days. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you, you made a statement a while ago that your 
exposure in mid western United States and northwestern United States that has created a lot of interest 
for this area and you mentioned figures on the amount of people you had shown your display to. Do you 
plan on, if it is so successful and has potential for increasing the tourist business, you planning on 
expanding this into further areas if it successful? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I might say, Mr. Chairman that the Saskatchewan Showcase is operating for 
about eight months a year and it’s visiting various points. I think what we probably could do with it is to 
change the location on an annual basis and therefore perhaps will have a wider viewing area. In 
February we move into the northern United States; I think we visit something like four American states. 
Just to give you an idea of what areas or what communities the trailer is going to visit: Billings, Miles 
City, Montana; Williston, Minot Air Base, Bismarck, Grand Forks and Fargo, North Dakota; Aberdeen, 
Sioux Falls, Rapid City, South Dakota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Cheyenne, Wyoming; Missoula, 
Helena, Great Falls, Montana; Lethbridge and Medicine Hat, Alberta; Moose Jaw Air Show, Calgary 
Stampede, Edmonton Klondike Days and Dauphin, Manitoba; Grand Forks Air Force Base, Montana. 
 
It just gives you an idea of some of the areas that the our trailer visits, plus numerous centers right in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we try to vary these communities from time to time. 
 
MR. HAM: —Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just to straighten something out in my head. 
You made a statement earlier this evening to the member for Estevan to do with suckers and he was 
asking about his area. I had a call two or three weeks ago; it was amazing to me to find out that they 
allowed dip netting of suckers in certain areas in Saskatchewan. I don’t think they have any commercial 
value at all and I was quite surprised to find out that they are allowed to be dip netted. This chap wanted 
an extension, he wanted to continue dip netting and I don’t know what he is doing with the darn things 
but he wanted an extension or a permit. Your officials indicated to me he couldn’t get one. I understand 
why he can’t get one because they can’t be certain that he’s just going to keep the suckers when he dips 
fish out of the water. But apparently there must be a commercial value or they wouldn’t be fishing for 
them. Can you check that further? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, when I indicated that there is no market, I indicated that there is no big 
market for it. Very likely there probably are small domestic markets but to be able to sell fish in 
thousands of pounds, that isn’t the case. But as the hon. Member 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2507 
 

indicates that, sure, there are some of these small markets but it certainly doesn’t make much of 
an impact in the number of sucker fish that you find in the Qu’Appelle Lakes. So when I said no 
market, I was hoping you didn’t take it that there was just no market whatsoever. 
 
MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I may be in the 
wrong department here but with our goose lot that we have in Regina and with the power plant 
shutting down in, what is it, a year or two years’ time, is your department involved in any long 
range plans for this; would your department have any involvement in this, to help the goose get 
away or whatever. What have you been doing or what are you doing on this? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member again is in the wrong agency with 
respect to this question. We certainly are interested to see geese around because our interest is 
wild-life but at the same time we are interested to see that they have proper kind of a home and 
shelter. The matter of whether or not there is going to be a place for the wild goose in the 
Wascana area is under the jurisdiction of the Wascana Authority and we, of course, are always 
ready to work with them if we can be of any help. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, is Pike Lake your responsibility? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, it is a provincial park. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Are there any plans to expand the boundaries of the provincial park itself 
and second of all, is there anything that you’re going to do with the golf course there, which is 
better known as Cactus Course and third of all the weed control problem within the lake? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, we have no plans for expansion of the park. There are no 
fees charged for golfing at the golf course at Pike Lake and we try to do our best in controlling 
the weeds on the golf course. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — How about putting back the trees and doing something with the golf 
course then. Is that in your future plans or not at all? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — We have no plans for much improvement at the golf course or expanding 
it. We feel that there are a lot of golfing facilities in and around the City of Saskatoon so 
therefore, we don’t have any plans at the present time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Would you be willing to allow a private person to take over that golf 
course and manage it on a commercial basis? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I suppose, Mr. Chairman, that’s a consideration. I am not too sure what 
the private person would want of us. He might want us to improve and get the golf course in 
shape and have him operate it at that time. I don’t think we are in a position to do that but if he 
wishes to provide some improvements to it himself or operate it in the manner, as it is, I suppose 
we’d be quite open to consider it. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — In other words, you would welcome somebody to come to see you about 
that proposal. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — We are prepared to talk about it. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2508 
 

MR. HAM: — Does your department have a specific policy with regard to private investment or private 
development in provincial parks and specifically, maybe you can tell me with respect to the South 
Saskatchewan landing bridge area, Diefenbaker Lake — I know there have been proposals, at least I 
have heard of proposals to develop a motel complex and a marina but it seems to have petered out for 
some reason. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Our policy with regard to developing physical facilities in the park is that the 
department would develop the facilities and we would be prepared to consider leasing the commercial 
activities of the facility. Our policy is to not allow any private development in the park area. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Chairman, would you mind specifying why? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — One of the main reasons why we have taken this position is because the 
department would have a much better control of the activities that take place with respect to the physical 
structure, be it a motel, hotel or any other facility. 
 
MR. HAM: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think probably through restrictions or regulations you can control 
what develops and what doesn’t and still allow private investment to develop your park area. I think the 
department should seriously consider allowing private development to take place in these parts, with 
restrictions if you like. In the parks that I am referring to, there is no development and I don’t know if 
the department is doing much more about it anyway. So had these people, who proposed the marina, for 
example, and/or the motel complex at Diefenbaker Lake been allowed to continue, they may be there 
now. But we haven’t got them and maybe we will never get them, I don’t know. So your departmental 
officials and yourself should seriously consider exempting people in some instances. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Well up to this point in time our policy has been not to allow any private 
development in the park area. 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Minister, just one question. Do you have any immediate 
plans for improving the entry points at our two major crossings, the Trans Canada and the Yellowhead 
Route? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Did I get your question right, sir, that is whether we are prepared to or do we 
have any plans to improve the signing, is it, at the . . . . . . . if you don’t mind repeating the question, 
please? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — No, just the entry points — yes, the displays that you may have that are 
advertising our province, something more elaborate than you have now. Do you have anything proposed 
for that? As you know, I have talked to you before about this and suggested some ideas that you might 
take into consideration I am wondering if you have taken them into consideration or what you propose 
to do in the immediate future? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member is referring to signs, highway signs 
particularly. I think that the hon. member may have discussed this with the Minister of Highways. We 
are working very closely with the Department of Highways in an attempt to design new signs at the 
entry on the east approach on the Trans-Canada Highway as well as the west approach and the same 
thing applies to Yellowhead. Hopefully, we might be able to have something new in place within a year. 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2509 
 

Item I agreed. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
ITEM 3 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Does any of the vote here cover any of the costs or any portion of the costs at Kelsey, 
where they have the course to train people for forestry work? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, that vote would be under the Department of Education. I think you are 
referring to the Kelsey Institute. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — I would like to ask one simple question; under which item is your budgeting for aircraft 
listed? I know in some circumstances you people lease aircraft and in other circumstances you may have your 
own. I would like to know where that is covered and what your annual cost would be. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I suppose it would matter what the aircraft was used for. I think most of the aircraft 
cost would be under Regional Services. Histories and Wildlife may be another subvote that you might be able 
to ask that question. So if you wish to bring it up under any of those subvotes I think it would be quite fine 
because there is some aircraft being used in the various subvotes. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
ITEM 5 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I believe this is where we get permits for cutting wood, is that correct? Is 
this the vote? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Cutting timber in the forest, yes. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: —What are the regulations for people, let’s say, from the South going up North to cut birch 
and so forth for fire logs? Do you have regulations covering that or how do you handle it? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The regulations with regard to obtaining timber from the forest area. One would have 
to obtain a permit from the Conservation Officer and the permit would allow to cut, depending on the species, 
from 100 to 600 cords, except white spruce. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, is this money set aside each year for fighting fires? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — That’s right. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2510 
 

ITEM 9 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, is this our regional parks you are talking about? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — These are regional services in the various regions in the province. It doesn’t 
include the regional parks. Regional parks would come under tourism and recreation. 
 
MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Minister, can you give me breakdown . . . it 
doesn’t have to be now, can you send me a breakdown of the amount of this money that will be going in 
to the Prince Albert region? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, we can send you that. I’m taking that you are interested only in the Prince 
Albert region. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, the Prince Albert region includes Duck Lake area, does it? Mr. Minister, 
I’m also interested . . . maybe it’s another region . . . I’m also interested in the moneys that are going 
into the Duck Lake area. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, yes, it includes Duck lake, so you’ll have it all. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
ITEM 10 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, can you tell me approximately what the cost for 
pumping the water into Pike Lake is each year? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the hon. member’s question, the cost in a normal year 
would be from $3,000 to $5,000. Last year we didn’t do any pumping because the water level in the 
river was very low. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, what about Blackstrap? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — There are no pumping costs in Blackstrap because we just don’t do any pumping 
into Blackstrap. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, does the Water Supply Board handle all the costs because of that channel? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The Water Supply Board handles that and I think you’ll find that under item 21. 
We make a payment to the Water Supply Board in the amount of $267,000. 
 
Item 10 agreed. 
 
Item 11 agreed. 
 
Item 12 agreed. 
 
ITEM 13 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I’ll request from you again without going into a lot questions, 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2511 
 

if I could get a breakdown on item 13 for the Prince Albert region; you hired extra staff along 
most of the regions, but a breakdown on this $1,777, 000 if I can get that from you later on. If it 
is nice and complete I wouldn’t have to . . . . . . 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — We will get the hon. member the information. 
 
Items 13, 14 agreed. 
 
ITEM 15 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, may I just go back to 17 and ask for a breakdown there also. For 
the Prince Albert region there is $2,274,000 and I understand that there is about $1 million of 
that going into the Prince Albert region. I wonder if I could just get a breakdown down of 17, 
the amount of money that is going up into that region and what it is for. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, we haven’t even got to item 17 yet. No, 16 then. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Have you finished 16 yet, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — No I haven’t even read it out yet. I am just trying to get into that. O.K.? 
 
Item 15 agreed. 
 
ITEM 16 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister — the vote so far, up to the 
end of Swift Current region there, is approximately 341 employees in this amount. Now, can you 
tell me, Mr. Minister, under Permanent Positions or Other Personal Services under the votes we 
have gone through, do you have any other employees now who have been with the department 
over two years, who are listed in these categories but in reality should be listed under Permanent 
Employees? Do you have any who have been with the department over two years who are shown 
under Other Personal Services or Other Expenses? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, there are some employees who have worked two years and more 
under Other Personal Services. These are seasonal employees but there are also some full-time 
employees that have been working under Other Personal Services but they were on a temporary 
basis. Two reasons why they are on a temporary basis are because many of these positions are 
training positions and there is a possibility that their responsibilities could change. They are kept 
on a temporary basis but they could be full time. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, it is my understanding that there are some people in this area 
in your department that may have been, as you mentioned, under training, but they have been 
with your department for over two years. Now why should the department of the government, 
that is the probably the third largest industry in Saskatchewan, have to hide these employees 
under Other Personal Services? Now why would you have to apologize for not taking these 
people into permanent payroll? It doesn’t give these people any indication of permanent 
security; it is not fair to their families and I would like to know why you would have to 
apologize for your Industry Department? 



 
May 8, 1978 

2512 
 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The employees, the sort of the full time, I think those are the ones that the hon. 
member is referring to, the full time employees who are in a temporary position, are really geared to the 
various activities that there are in the department for them and once they are placed in the permanent 
position, then of course their position or their responsibilities are sort of set out a little more confined 
than they are otherwise. As far as security goes, the temporary people have, I would say, similar security 
as the permanent people. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, would the minister say then that these people who are classed as 
temporary but have been with the department for over two years, do you feel that they are very happy 
with the arrangement that they know they are full-time employees but are listed as temporary. Would 
you say they are satisfied? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, there were not any serious concerns. There were, I would say that I am 
aware of, perhaps maybe a half a dozen who have expressed some concern about it, but as far as their 
security goes, they have it just the same as the permanent staff and I don’t think there is that much 
concern. There are with some people but generally speaking, I think the employees feel that they have 
similar security and similar benefits as those that are on a permanent basis. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Just one more question, Mr. Minister, do you feel then that the real reason for this is 
to keep them flexible, that you can move them around wherever you want and once you establish them 
as permanent employees they are situated in one branch of your department and they can’t be moved 
then, they will have to bid, is that what you are saying? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Most of the employees are quite happy where they are, they don’t express any 
concern about perhaps not receiving the kind of protection that the permanent people have. Oh, I 
suppose I must admit that they probably would be much more satisfied perhaps even more secure if they 
were placed in a permanent role, but I don’t think the concern is that great among the employees. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Order, I wonder if I could have leave to introduce a 
group of students. 
 
Well, fellow members I would like to ask you to join with me in welcoming a group of cubs that we 
have with us tonight from my constituency, Rosemont constituency. They are the Mabel Brown 74th 
cub pack, 23 in number and they are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied tonight by 
David Fairley, Horst Lange, Ken Anderson and Steve Fairley. I’m sure all members would want to 
welcome them to House and hope that their stay here is informative and I look forward to meeting them 
a little bit later for any questions they might have. 
 

Committee of Finance Continued 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — A couple of brief questions to the minister with respect to Swift Current region. 
Does your department get involved in the count of migratory game birds during the hunting season or 
anytime during the year as they pass through that zone? As you would no doubt be aware many people 
have contacted you perhaps 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2513 
 

mistakenly about the problems that have arisen as a result of game bird counts being done by the 
Canadian Wildlife Service; but I would also like to know if in fact you people are undertaking do to do 
any bird counts or surveys of any kind yourselves from the air? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The department doesn’t conduct any aircraft surveys insofar as the water fowl is 
concerned, Canadian Wildlife Service does that. We do carry out aerial surveys on antelope, moose and 
deer, but this is done outside the hunting season. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — So none of the work that is done with respect to migratory game birds is done by 
DTRR at all, then? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No, we don’t do any but we work fairly closely with the Canadian Wildlife 
Service but we don’t conduct the aerial — 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Well that was going to be my next question. What kind of an association do you 
have with them? I understand that you are involved in the setting of bag limits and season dates, etc., 
and those decisions are based upon the data collected by the Wildlife Service, for the species, where it 
is, at what time and overall bird counts. Have you been involved in all of the work that is being done by 
the Wildlife Service with respect to the aerial counts that are done, etc.? How close is the relationship? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — We don’t conduct a survey, as I mentioned earlier, but we do use their statistics. 
Any of the records that they obtained from their surveys we use them for our purposes. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — Does your department keep the information with respect to the flyway patterns, 
etc., for your own use or do you refer to that information as it is held by the Wildlife Service? Do you 
people keep that data? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Our department reviews the information that is provided to us by the Canadian 
Wildlife Service and we sit down with them and review it and from that we establish the seasons and the 
various recommendations with respect to waterfowl. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — But in summation, then, I suppose what I most want from you is a plea of ‘not 
guilty’ because I have had great difficulty in the past two and one-half years trying to get some 
satisfactory answers for the disturbed hunters in our area with respect to the flyway pattern that has 
changed and the kind of aerial work that is being done. I would like to ask you again, are you aware that 
the migratory bird flyway, particularly with respect to black geese, has changed substantially along the 
western part of the province in the past few years? Have you people come to any decisions about why 
that has happened or are you aware of anyone’s direct involvement in changing that flyway? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, we are aware of it, but I don’t think that we really have an explanation for 
it except to say perhaps that the water areas in that area have changed. I don’t think we have any other 
explanation as to why the flyway has changed. 
 
MR. McMILLAN: — You are not aware of any overt move by the Canadian Wildlife Service or any 
governmental department or agency then, to re-establish the flyway further east? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2514 
 

Item 16 agreed. 
 
ITEM 17 
 
MR. WIPF: — I will just ask the minister again if he will give me a breakdown on the Prince Albert 
region, how much of this money is going to be spent there in that region and particularly in the Angling 
Lake area, where I understand that there is going to be a fair development take place or has started to 
take place in the last year or so and what you are doing to the levels of the lakes up there. Can you 
supply me with that information later on? Also, Mr. Minister, I don’t know if I am under the right vote 
here but your department, in the regional parks, you are allowed 48 hours I believe, 48 hours to park in 
some of these regional parks, is that correct? You cannot stay there a week? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — With regard to the 48 hours, that the hon. member refers to, that refers to the 
provincial parks and not the regional parks. As far as the regional park is concerned I suppose it would 
be up to the regional park authority whether they want the 48 hours to apply or not. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, I wonder then if very shortly, when you start advertising on your 
television ads, if you could put in and let the people know that there is a 48 hour limit on that I think it 
would help your employees a lot. Because some of the places I parked last year . . . . when the people 
went away for a day or two through the rainy season they were warned that if they did this again their 
vehicles would be towed away, their trailers would be towed away to the compound. It causes a little 
hardship; when I talked to some of the employees at the gates it was a little frustrating for them to try to 
get this across. I wonder, in your advertising, is it possible that you could advertise this so that the 
tourists may know; or the people that are going out to these camps will know that they have 48 hours. I 
think it would just make it a little easier. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — We could consider it but I’d like to inform the hon. member that usually when a 
camper comes into the camp office he obtains all this information. They probably don’t read it but it’s 
there and we’ve been doing it in that way. I am not too sure about a widespread advertising campaign on 
that but this information is available. I’d like to refer to an earlier question by the hon. member with 
respect to giving a breakdown of Item No. 17 for the P.A. region. This is impossible because our 
promotion is sort of on a provincial basis rather than on a regional basis and, therefore, it would make it 
very difficult and perhaps be somewhat inaccurate if we try to provide you with that information. I think 
we could quite easily provide the hon. member or the members of the House information with regard to 
that entire item and then you might want to sort it out yourself but it’s very difficult and almost 
impossible. I’d say it’s impossible to try to designate a certain amount of dollars that may be spent in the 
P.A. region when it refers to the entire province. We can provide a detailed breakdown of that item. Is 
that all right? 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K., Mr. Minister, that’s good. I was just wondering, out of this budget how much 
money is actually spent to advertise that area, the Prince Albert area and across Saskatchewan; it’s rather 
deprived there as far as tourism goes and we’d just like some more in. We’ve got some beautiful areas 
and if we can get the whole budget we can figure that out. Thank you. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask the minister, the moneys that have been 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2515 
 

coming forth to regional parks in the last few years, is this same amount of money or percentage increase 
according to costs? Is the same amount of money going to regional parks this year, or has it been increased, or 
what is happening? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The increase in the regional parks budget, total budget, is $110,000 and this will take 
care of some new regional parks that have been established. So I would say that the budget is pretty well the 
same in terms of dollars. 
 
MR. LARTER: — I would just like to mention to the minister that I think in the Estevan area alone we have a 
few regional parks and the regional park concept is really going over well with the public. It’s giving them 
many extra places of recreational facilities on weekends. I would like to commend the government on the 
regional park concept and I think they have done a terrific job, especially in the Estevan area, in what they’ve 
helped us to do with our golf course and the entire regional park. I think it is really to be commended and Mr. 
Rathwell has just done a real good job of cooperating with all the officials and I’d like to commend you for 
that. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I just must rise and thank the member for handing out this bouquet. I think he is quite 
right that the regional parks are very well accepted by the public. I had the opportunity of going through the 
regional park at Estevan and I was certainly very much impressed with it, particularly the golf course. 
 
Item 17 agreed. 
 
Item 18 agreed. 
 
ITEM 19 
 
MR. LARTER: — Just one question, Mr. Minister. We are getting some complaints on people who have land 
in this Qu’Appelle Basin there. Their land will run down from the top land and part will end in the valley and 
restrictions have been placed on them recently as far as getting permits if they want to put up any kind of a 
shelter for their cattle or anything. Now is this your department or is this the Department of the Environment? 
But they are being restricted on their own land in some of this area now and they tell me that some of this land 
is not anywhere near the water. Would you comment on this? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The hon. member is referring to, I believe, the special planning areas that have been 
established and this is under the jurisdiction of the Department of Municipal Affairs. So if there is any problem 
with respect to this area then I suggest contact be made with the Municipal Affairs Department. 
 
Item 19 agreed. 
 
ITEM 20 
 
MR. WIPF: — Just one question on that, Mr. Minister. Can I get a breakdown again for the Prince Albert 
region in the amount of money out of that $266,000 that was spent in that region? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Yes, we can get that information for you but not at the present moment. We will have 
to supply you later. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2516 
 

Item 20 agreed. 
 
ITEM 21 
 
MR. WIPF: — The same question on this, Mr. Minister. A breakdown on this one, too, for the Prince 
Albert region, if you will? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, item No. 21 is a single payment made to the Water Supply 
Board. I’m not too sure just what information the member would want. Did you want some information 
on this particular item? 
 
MR. WIPF: — Yes, Mr. Minister, if there was any work being done in the Prince Albert region that 
takes some of this $266,000. It may not be. I was thinking of the lake level controls in the Emma Lake 
area. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: This refers only to Blackstrap. 
 
Item 21 agreed. 
 
Tourism and Renewable Resources - Vote 39 agreed. 
 

Capital Expenditures — Vote 40 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
ITEM 2 
 
MR. WIPF: — Is this the item that the Angling Lake facilities and the lake level control comes under? 
If it is, will you give me a break down on that also? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — No, it won’t be under this item. That would be under PA Region so you may get 
that information when you get your information on the Prince Albert region. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Just one question on this. What is the big expenditure in the doubling of this capital 
expenditure over last year? It is more than double. Can you tell us where the biggest expenditure is? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The increase here is mainly for the purpose of upgrading our park facilities, 
campgrounds, sanitary facilities and the like. 
 
I wanted to let the House know that I have the capital estimates for each member of the House and these 
could be distributed as soon as we have completed the estimates and then you would be able to look 
these over and select your area that you may be interested in. If you have some questions following that 
you can see me on a personal basis or whatever you like. 
 
Items 2,3,4,5, and 6 agreed. 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2517 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — On this one item, the air weapons range, the $453,000 in the Meadow Lake region, 
could you give me the reason that we get that amount of money and what the breakdown is? You can send it to 
me later if you would like. It has been quite a hot issue in the federal House, this exact item. Could you send me 
the reason why it is $453,000? For example, in the province of Alberta they do not receive this amount for their 
portion of the weapons range. 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps the best way to answer that question is to provide the hon. 
member with a copy of the existing agreement. I think all of that information, all of the details will be in it and 
we will arrange to provide that to you. 
 
Vote 40 agreed. 
 
Supplementaries agreed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is that completed, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — That’s all, Mr. Chairman, except that I’d like to pass on to the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the copy of my speech remarks that I made last June, 1977 covering the Grasslands 
park. As well, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to have these distributed. 
 

HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION — Vote 17 — Capital Expenditure. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Minister, could you tell us what this $85,000,000 consists of . . . what 
this is for? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Well, we have a number of items. 
This is the main item for construction of highways, assistance to urbans for street improvement, those we share. 
It will also include the amounts we pay for assistance to transit, 50 per cent of all buses for instance, that are 
purchased in Regina and Saskatoon are paid. Seventy-five per cent of the buses that we provide for 
handicapped people in Saskatoon, Prince Albert and I think there’s one getting started in Estevan . . . . two 
buses. Swift Current has one. This type of thing. But in the main, it is the funding for the building and 
blacktopping, no maintenance, is it not? It has nothing to do with maintenance, only building and paving of 
highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is there any of this amount of money being set up or used on 
the start of super-grid as the conception is on super-grid roads? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No. This will all be in the Department of Rural Affairs. When any money is spent and 
that is entirely in the Rural Affairs’ budget. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Would any of this amount of money, Mr. Minister, be allotted to salt-based roads in 
municipalities? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — No. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Could the minister tell me in what way the new highway from Saskatoon to Regina 
is going to come through Chamberlain. You have announced it is going to be finished this year. Would you like 
to tell me and the citizens of that town how you are going to double lane that through Chamberlain? 



 
May 8, 1978 

2518 
 

MR. KRAMER: — Well, there will be a temporary accommodation with widening, with a 
considerable amount of widening with a narrow median, not the wide ditch. But eventually, we 
are negotiating with the railroad, one line will be removed which will accommodate it better in 
the future. But there are negotiations going on but there will be a slow down with the service 
road but it will still be one way traffic through the town. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is that something, for example, similar to what you have at Delisle, 
Saskatchewan, where you are cramped up the same way? Is that the same suggestion you are 
making? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Yes, I would say that it would be similar. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
ITEM 2 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, what is this urban transportation? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I am sorry. That is what I was telling you about, the urban assistance. There 
is about nearly $2 million in it for urban, this year. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
ITEM 3 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, what are you doing with this $210,000 this year? This is quite a 
drop from last year. Where will you be spending it? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Well, we have built the major airports. They will be officially opening 
Hudson Bay, the new airport in Hudson Bay this coming Friday and this is mainly for the 
regular southern small airport program that we finance and assist with. The $210,000 will be an 
assistance to the smaller airports. There was some of that last year. It was for the Prince Albert 
one as well. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Minister, there is none of this $210, 000 for maintenance of the air strips 
then? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — That is part of the maintenance and grants towards improving and regrading 
and repaving. That is the whole package. Mr. Chairman, I will admit that it isn’t a great deal, but 
that’s all we are getting applications for. 
 
Vote 17 agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE — Vote 19 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — To my right I have the Deputy 
Minister of Industry and Commerce, and to my immediate front left, Herb Scott, to the right 
Derek Ireland, behind me, Bryce Baron, Wayne Lorch, and Charlie Webster. 
 
ITEM 1 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, can the minister tell us in what direction you are channelling 
your energies towards as far as retaining industries? How many industries 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2519 
 

in this province have you assisted in keeping here versus trying to new industries to come here? Could 
you tell us what proportion of your channelling of this type of work — can you tell us which direction 
you are going on this? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, about two-thirds of the staff’s time is taken up with the looking after 
and the maintenance of existing industries and the balance of the time is channelled to creating and 
establishing new industries and businesses. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Could you tell me just what ratio of success you are having? The reason I ask this is 
we do seem to because of our geography here, where we are located in Saskatchewan in relation to some 
of the markets, we do have some problems at times getting new industry. Now, we do have many 
industries for instance in Regina here, farm equipment manufacturing that has been assisted by your 
department. I wonder if you’re expanding your thoughts on these industries. Are you helping them 
through tough times and expanding them into the future? Is your department working with, for instance, 
the farm machinery testing in Humboldt, or does the Industry Department work in conjunction with the 
companies you are working with? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, to answer the first question that the hon. member has raised, our 
success ratio to this point has been exceptionally good although we don’t have any exact figures on the 
numbers of industries that we have helped through good times and bad. 
 
Your second question raises our involvement with PAMI in Humboldt; yes we are involved only by 
assisting related manufacturers and directing Saskatchewan manufacturing products to that area. We are 
not directly involved in the testing of the equipment. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you what your department is doing to assist some 
of these companies that you have assisted in locating in Saskatchewan or companies that you have 
assisted in Startup? What assistance are you giving these firms? It might not be your responsibility but I 
think the responsibility of the success of these companies probably is your responsibility. What 
assistance are you giving these companies in finding new markets? Now I am thinking of Firmaglass in 
Estevan for instance, which is a very versatile company and can build almost anything. I wonder what 
you are doing to extend their markets. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, we give these companies various attendance and various aids to existence. A 
good example is the cost sharing programs that we have in studying markets and market development. 
Another one of our programs is the Aid to Trade Program where we will assist Saskatchewan 
manufacturers to go show their equipment abroad, in other areas, in order to market their systems. Our 
people are being continuously alerted from the manufacturing sector on the need for assistance and we 
are always prepared to help, no matter what happens. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Could the minister tell me (I think it is in this report) how many new, for instance, 
manufacturing firms, small or large, that you have assisted in starting in Saskatchewan this year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — It is very difficult for us to give you an exact figure as to how many industries we 
have established because we may have been in there at the outset with the developing industry at the 
developmental stage, giving them assistance. Once we 



 
May 8, 1978 

2520 
 

have completed our surveys and our market studies and what have you, these firms may go elsewhere 
and start up on their own, unaware to us. As long as they are functioning, we are not aware of it, so we 
are really not on top of the number of industries that we have helped to establish during a given year. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, how many industries you have assisted or enticed 
to come into Saskatchewan over the last couple of years and failures that have taken place this year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Again, Mr. Chairman, that is a very difficult question for us to answer at this 
moment and 1 doubt very much whether the staff can dig up any information like that and even give it to 
you. We would have to go through our files and give you a list of many businesses and industries that 
we were originally involved in. Whether they were a success or a failure would depend on more 
information that we would have to gather at this time. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, are you satisfied with the job that the Industry and Commerce 
Department is doing? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly am. I am quite happy with the job. As a matter of 
fact, from the response that we have been getting in the last six or eight months that I am aware of, it has 
just been fantastic. I think that the Department of Industry and Commerce have been accepted and are 
becoming more and more accepted to the public and private sector as times goes on. Yes, the answer to 
that is by all means, we are very happy with it, 
 
MR. LARTER: — I shouldn’t have opened that door. I let you have a speech. 
 
Are your regional offices working out fine? Do you find that your regional industry and commerce 
people are being utilized to their fullest or could it be better worked out from central office? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I’m glad you brought that question up, Mr. Chairman. Yes we are finding that the 
regional offices are working out very well. As a matter of fact, our regional offices are working to such a 
point that they just don’t have enough time to devote to all the clients that are trying to make use of their 
particular offices. We are looking at every office on an individual basis and if I was looking through a 
crystal ball at this time I would suggest that we would possibly in the not too distant future increase the 
staffing at some of these offices because of the nature of the work that they are doing. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, just another question to the minister. I think. Mr. Minister, that the 
secret of many of these companies and you mentioned you are assisting these companies these farm 
machinery companies, for instance in finding markets and I would suggest you are probably doing it to 
other manufactured goods in Saskatchewan, I wonder if really the secret of these companies for the 
future in Saskatchewan isn’t a real aggressive selling campaign by the Department of Industry with the 
people you have that you can utilize because some of these small companies are limited in their scope as 
far out as they can reach and I think the secret of the success of these companies and keeping these 
people employed in Saskatchewan, the employees they have would be through your department. Do you 
have any plans in the future of expanding this and expanding the market for these goods? 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2521 
 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes, we have some programs, trade program as I mentioned a few moments 
ago, was just recently this year expanded to help the small business people expand their 
operation. We are expanding our managerial expertise training program to help the small 
business people and the small manufacturing sector in the province and this we have found has 
been a key to success or failure in any industry. However, having said that, I have to say that the 
success of every small industry or business in the province of Saskatchewan depends largely on 
the entrepreneur that is involved and if we can make the entrepreneur realize that he does or 
does not need assistance is a key issue and it’s very difficult for the Department of Industry and 
Commerce to knock on one’s door and ask ‘do you need our assistance’. It has to come from the 
private sector and to this point we are finding great success. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, your department promotes and assists small 
industries in the direction they are going. You don’t handle any of the financial. You just steer, 
them direct them in the proper way as far as financing goes. Industry Commerce doesn’t do any 
financing. 
. 
MR. VICKAR: — To this point, no we have not done any financing. To this point we have 
directed them in the direction that they themselves have set their goal for. However, under the 
new programs that came about as of April 1st of this year, you will notice that some of those are 
funding programs. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Just one more question, Mr. Minister, do you find and I don’t mean this in a 
facetious way, do you not find in most of these industries that you are channelling towards 
SEDCO because of your connection, as you said. Do you let them pick their bank or which ever 
way they want to do? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Definitely, we will channel our aid to these industries to a given point and 
then when they are ready to establish themselves, it’s just a matter of their choice as to what 
banking institution they use. As a matter of fact, nine times out of ten, I would say that our 
department suggests the regular route of financing which is the banking institutions. Should that 
fail with the customer and if he comes back and asks us, we will then channel him through 
SEDCO. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, on something that’s a little closer to home — I’ve talked to 
you before about our Homco Industries which originally employed about 70 people. You have 
indicated your willingness, if the claimant was right or everything was in place, to look at that 
again. Can you tell me, is your department involved in the mobile home industry anywhere in 
Saskatchewan as far as people you’ve guided in the business? What is happening in the mobile 
home business in this province? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, Mr. Chairman, we’re not directly involved in any mobile home industry 
as such. We’re not involved at this particular time with any further studies either. To answer 
your question on your Estevan plant, that is in the making and whether it will materialize will 
depend largely on the proposition of the local shareholders. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, does your department encourage and assist sons of farm 
machinery dealers to buy out their fathers? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, yes, if the hon. member is looking for ways and means to sell 
his implement dealership to his son, by all means, come on over and we’ll see if we can assist 
you. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2522 
 

MR. R. E. NELSON (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister could tell 
us what he has done through Industry and Commerce to bring some industry to the Outlook area and the 
Gardiner Dam as far as irrigation is concerned and industry to look after the irrigation crops and to 
create industry and new jobs in that area in Saskatchewan. There’s a great potential and I’m just 
wondering what you have actually done in your department to look after that. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, our involvement in Outlook is really, at this particular point, on 
a limited scale because the Department of Agriculture is in that area. We are, however, working with the 
Department of Agriculture, on a limited scale, to provide secondary industries. Through the EDPD 
Program that we have, we have provided people working on some of the local vegetable potato farms 
that they have in that area. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — The minister says he’s in a very limited area in that and I would say the 
Minister of Agriculture is just as limited. I think it’s time both of you get off your pants and get into the 
act and get some industry going up there and develop jobs and bring in the potential we have for 
industry there. It’s long, long overdue and your departments are absolutely asleep on it if they don’t get 
up there and do some developing. I’m wondering what industry you brought in or what you have done 
as far as your Pacific Rim office is concerned? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we didn’t quite get that question. Can you repeat that, please? 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — You had a Pacific Rim office; it’s now in the department. I’m wondering 
what industry you brought in from that area or just what that particular office did in your department? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the Pacific Rim office that the member is talking about was always 
located in Regina and its purpose always was to help develop markets rather than to attract industry. We 
really don’t have a Pacific Rim office per se. If we have any industry that we can encourage from the 
Pacific Rim, we do that from within House. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — Well, we understand that they’re there to develop markets. But what 
markets have you developed? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — We were instrumental in the alfalfa dehydration development program and we’re 
primarily in the food processing program for the Department of Agriculture. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — You may be in all that but what has this to do with the Pacific Rim office? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, that’s where the markets are, that are presently using the alfalfa 
product. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — We know that there was a large over-production here just a year or so ago 
in the alfalfa plants. How much have you sold in Pacific Rim? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have any figures as to what each alfalfa dehy 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2523 
 

plant sold but we are given to understand that they sold all that they could produce. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — Would it be anything like the European manager you had in the 
trading corporation who attended two or three shows over in England and I believe he arranged 
for the shipping of two pigs to Denmark. That was his year’s work. I wonder is the Pacific Rim 
office in that category? 
 
MR. VICKAR: —I can answer that with just a short no. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — I’m wondering, there has been a real problem in rural Saskatchewan 
as far as Industry and Commerce is concerned and there seems to be no problem at all if you’re 
in the city you can borrow, probably one-half million dollars, if you want to get a motel going. 
No problem at all. But if you go out in a small town in rural Saskatchewan you need $20,000 to 
help out in a garage and you’ve got another $20,000 to match it, you just can’t seem to get 
anything from Industry and Commerce. Is this going to be continued to be your attitude in the 
. . . 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that ever was the attitude of the Department of 
Industry and Commerce. As a matter of fact, if the hon. member has a specific case that he has 
in mind, I would like to know of that particular case. 
 
Up until April 1st of this year, you’re quite aware that the Department of Industry and 
Commerce was never involved in the financing of any industry as I mentioned just a few 
moments ago. However, since the first of April, we are now prepared to go into these various 
areas in Saskatchewan and assist these small businesses. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — You say you haven’t been prepared up until January of this year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — We have not been involved in financing these institutions prior to April 1st. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I believe you are responsible for operation recycle. Am I 
correct? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, we are. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Operation recycle was a good idea until you people hashed it up. The 
mess left behind at some of the collection points are sometimes a worse eyesore than the junk 
vehicles, it seems. Mainly because the junk vehicle you could see and the broken glass and the 
refuse left behind by Curtiss and other companies that are compacting for you, are not visible 
once the weeds and the grass grow. Is it your intention to clean up the mess you’re leaving 
behind all over the place or is it your intention to keep leaving the mess the way you have been 
doing? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member has any particular area in the province of 
Saskatchewan that the recycling program has left a mess behind, we again would like to have 
that information because we’ll go back and clean it up. For the hon. member’s information, 
operation recycle has various depots across the province where these used vehicles and these 
wrecks are brought to and they are gathered from one particular location in the area and there 
cannot be any more mess than other than in one particular area and when that’s completely 
cleaned up, it’s clean. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2524 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — How far behind is operation recycle running presently? I understand their original 
mandate was a short period, three or four years and they’re still going and it looks like they’ll be going 
forever. In fact, I understand that Curtis doesn’t even have to tender for the work. He’s just given it 
automatically now. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, as long as they manufacture automobiles and as long as automobiles 
are wrecked and go back to the junk yard, we’ll be in business. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, in that case are you ever going to consider opening up the contracts so 
somebody else can bid on it or are you going to keep giving it to Curtis each year without them having 
to apply and bid? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, every contract is opened on a regional basis and I would challenge 
the hon. member to give me an instance where somebody did not get the contract because he was either 
the lowest bidder or for what particular purpose. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, I would suggest the minister check with his department, because last year 
when I checked with the department and asked when Curtis would finish his contract and how come he 
had two units and only one going at the time and when was he renewing it, they said that they were 
doing it automatically. There was just a little bit more work and they did not want to have anybody else 
buy all the machinery, so they just gave it to him again. Now, that is the answer I got from your 
department. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I am sorry. If Hansard has that statement recorded that was made last year, I would 
like to retract that statement, because that statement was never made. Curtis, or anybody else, is 
contracted on a yearly basis. 
 
MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I would 
like to ask you a few questions about what your department intends on doing in coming to grips with the 
unemployment problem in Saskatchewan. I think you are well aware that, according to statistics 
published by the Department of Labour, that at the end of March there was 7.1 per cent of the labour 
force unemployed, some 30,000 people. We were advised by the Minister of Finance in his Budget that 
through make work projects, YES — Youth Employment Services program and so on, that there will be 
created in the public sector about 4,800 jobs, leaving approximately 25,000 jobs or people unemployed. 
Now, you are the department that’s to encourage industry and commerce in the province by helping the 
private sector to develop, expand and so on. I look in your Estimates and I look in your report to find out 
what expansion has taken place in the past. I find very little. My question to you now is, on your 
Estimates for the forthcoming year, how much money are you allocating through direct grants or 
through guarantees or whatever, to create jobs in Saskatchewan for the 25,000 people that will remain 
unemployed and would you tell me how many jobs you anticipate, new jobs being created this year say, 
between now and the end of September? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes. Mr. Chairman, the new programs that were established this year in April 1, are 
all geared to the smaller entrepreneur and we feel that the best way to channel our funding is through the 
small business sector so that they, in turn, can employ the people. We are looking at a great number of 
people being employed in the private sector in that field. We also have the EDPD program which will be 
expanded this year to help disadvantaged people take on normal jobs that they haven’t been able to do at 
present. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Well, that hardly answers the question. Your program for 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2525 
 

handicapped people is indeed a good program. I compliment you on it but that certainly is not going to 
alleviate the situation where there are 25,000 people unemployed. Now, you have talked about 
assistance to the small entrepreneur, fine, I think that is where assistance should be going, is the small 
entrepreneur — the large entrepreneur can look after himself. But I still ask you, you have plans for this 
year to help the small entrepreneur, you have plans to give him money or to help him with expansion, 
help him locate new facilities, all the things that your department provides. That still doesn’t answer my 
question. What is your estimate as to the number of jobs that will be created through the operation of 
your department within the province of Saskatchewan? Indeed, it is your department more than any 
other, that deals with the private sector. The Minister of Finance has indicated that It was up to the 
private sector to provide these 25,000 jobs we are still looking for. I am asking you, how many are you 
going to provide? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, it is very difficult for us to establish a figure on the number of people 
we are hoping that the private sector is going to employ. Let’s take one example. The steel expansion in 
Saskatchewan, if that develops, we are looking at quite a number of people. By the same token, the 
various industries and various businesses that we help around the province, each one of them will create 
employment. It is very difficult for us to establish a fact and say, yes, we are going to create x number of 
employable jobs. Our department, from the studies which were made and from the new programs that 
we have in existence this year, is looking forward to a great number of people being placed in the private 
sector. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Minister, talk to the IPSCO expansion and I think you would be the first to 
concede that the bulk of the money going into the expanding of IPSCO comes from the federal 
government. Again, that particular expansion was covered by the Minister of Finance in his statements. 
He indicated that there would be between 600 and 800 new jobs provided at the expanded IPSCO 
facility if it goes ahead and we hope that it is going to go ahead. That is looked after by the Minister of 
Finance in his statements. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Minister, it is fair to say that when you assumed that portfolio we, on this side of the 
House, had some high hopes because of your own personal business experience. It is the first time that 
government has had anybody in that portfolio with business experience. I think you have done some 
good things with SEDCO and some good things within the department. But you have been in there now 
for over a year and what we are now looking for is some very direct results of your administration of 
that department and we are looking in vain. We can’t find anything the Department of Industry and 
Commerce is doing within Saskatchewan that is going to create new jobs, new enterprises, new 
opportunities for the people of this province in a significant way. Now it is fine for you to say you are 
going to help the small entrepreneur, fine and dandy. But surely you have some target, some goal you 
are trying to meet in this particular year. Now is that 1,000 jobs or 500 jobs or increasing the number of 
businesses by a certain percentage? I think it is entirely appropriate for us to be asking these questions 
tonight and I wish you would address yourself to them and give us some answers. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like to thank the hon. member for his remarks at 
the outset of his last question. Secondly, I might say to the hon. member that given a little time, all these 
things will materialize. We are hoping with the new programs that we have established and the programs 
that have been in existence, we will be able to create these jobs that we had planned on creating. Again, 
I have to say 



 
May 8, 1978 

2526 
 

that it is very difficult for us to pinpoint whether we are going to create 1,000 jobs or 500 jobs, or what 
have you. If I was to be asked that question on a personal basis, I would say, yes, we are looking at that 
figure and possibly more. But I really can’t because we have to channel our resources through the 
private and public sector in the manufacturing or business field and it is from there that we are going to 
get our input in the employment sector. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Mr. Minister, the government has had the time. Since 1973 this province has been 
on the threshold of great opportunities through oil, potash and perhaps uranium, depending on the Bayda 
report. It doesn’t do you much good to come in here now in May of 1978 and say give us more time. 
You sound like the Premier, all this nonsense of jobs today and energy tomorrow. As I said to him and I 
say to you, it should have been jobs yesterday and energy today. 
 
I want to ask you about just one particular sector of Saskatchewan’s population, a sector that desperately 
needs employment. That is the Indian and Metis people. Has your department done anything in 
connection with the problem of Indian and Metis people off the reserves? I know it is not your 
responsibility on the reserves . . . . . . . . (interjection) . . . . My seatmate says, sure it is, and I accept 
that. Maybe you can respond to that. But you know full well that in Regina you have some 30,000 
people in this city of Indian and native background, Metis background. I would suggest to you that the 
records would show that the majority of those people are unemployed. Now. there is an area, where I 
would suggest to you, that your department could be doing something, either through re-education, 
retraining, jobs within the government, jobs within the private sector that you are aware of, as you are 
dealing with the expansion of the private sector. 
 
Now, with that particular group of people alone, have you done anything in the past year and what are 
your plans for the future year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, to answer that particular question, we have to go back to some of the 
manufacturing developments that have been developed since you asked the question since 1973. Yes, we 
have established industries since that point in time. There have been many people employed in those 
various industries. You refer to the Indian and Metis problem. We have Native Metal Industries that we 
developed primarily for that type of people. We are presently looking at programs that we hope to 
inaugurate that will be geared directly to that type of people. Although we are not discriminating 
whether it’s an Indian, Metis or a white person, they are all employable in the private sector as far as we 
are concerned. In many cases we employ either one or the other, or we try to see that one or the other is 
employed. 
 
MR. MALONE: — Well, you still haven’t given me an answer. You say you have hopes of doing this, 
maybe this will happen and if things work out right we’ll be able to do this that and the other thing. 
Obviously you have no plans for the forthcoming year for creating employment. I think that’s a fair 
assessment from what you have said. But you have talked about helping the small entrepreneur with 
various services. You can’t point to one particular program, one particular plan, one particular penny of 
your budget that’s going to create a single job in the private sector at a time when Saskatchewan has 
30.000 people out of work. All right, let’s go back. If you can’t do it for the forthcoming year, can you 
tell me for last year how many jobs as a result of your department’s activities were created in the private 
sector, because of your particular activities, because of your budget? 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2527 
 

MR. VICKAR: — Under one of our new programs for the coming year developed as of April 1, the 
Small Industry Development Program, we are looking at between 40 and 60 new projects. It is very 
difficult for us to tell you how many people these projects will employ, because we don’t know how 
large or how small they are going to be. We will average them out. If I give you a figure that we are 
looking at five employees per project, that may be too low or too high. I can give you a figure for those 
40 to 60 programs, or those projects rather, but I can’t give you a definite answer because all our 
employable people have to come back through the private sector. We will be funding the entrepreneurs 
or the business people in the area and they are the ones who will employ the people. 
 
MR. MALONE: — You mean that as of April 1 you have 40 to 60 projects that are anticipated; 
presumably some will go ahead, some won’t go ahead, maybe others will come along between now and 
when we next meet. But say you have 50 projects that are going to go ahead. The member says, name 
them. I’m not going to ask you to do that. You are saying maybe 5 people will be employed per project, 
say even 20 will be employed per project. That doesn’t even put a dint into the unemployed in this 
province. Not even a tiny little dint! Now you look around the benches over there, and you ask yourself, 
which department is going to create employment in the private sector. Is it the Minister of Labour’s 
Department? No. Is it DNS? No. Is it the Attorney General? No. You go right down the benches. The 
only department that can do anything about creating employment in the private sector is your 
department. The minister, whether you or your government, I don’t know who is at fault. May I suggest 
to you that you have done absolutely nothing to alleviate this problem that was on the horizon a year ago 
and that your particular department, as well as the other departments, is showing a completely cavalier 
attitude towards the unemployed people in Saskatchewan. I believe you intend to do nothing. I invite 
you to reassess your programs, for this year, and hopefully you will come up with something better than 
you have to date. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I just gave the member eight program examples. This is only one 
program amongst the many others that we have in existence or that we have brought on stream. We are 
hoping to develop an awful lot of employable people, but I can’t give him a hard and fact figure as to the 
number that we will create, along with the various other types of other programs that we have, if we are 
looking at employing many more people. 
 
I have to say to the hon. member that we are always conscious and aware of the fact that we have an 
unemployment situation, small as it may be, in the Dominion. We, in the Department of Industry and 
Commerce, are concerned and our people are geared towards looking for outlets and methods of 
employing these people. 
 
MR. C. P. MacDONALD: (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I just want to follow up what 
my colleague the member for Lakeview has said about native people. 
 
You know I don’t think there is a problem that faces Canada in the future, and Saskatchewan in 
particular — we have the worst native problem of any province in Canada, as the minister is aware. 
There is just no question about it, it is growing to proportions that are on the verge of tragedy. In the 
province of Saskatchewan, the NDP government appears to be doing nothing about it. 
 
You know I look back a few years ago and there were some definite attempts by the government of 
Saskatchewan to provide some leadership in this area. I am one of those who believes in the past. It is 
about time that we started to discriminate in favor of Indian 



 
May 8, 1978 

2528 
 

or native employment and it is very, very important. 
 
I think of the old policy of turning around and saying that everybody who built a construction 
project, or received public grants or public funds, had to be insured that they would have so many 
native people employed if possible. I think of the supernumerary positions, projects in the province 
of Saskatchewan in the Public Service Commission, which were positive, from definite steps made 
by the government of Saskatchewan to provide leadership to the province in employing native 
people. In 1971 when this government came in, of course, they turned around and said, oh, that is a 
terrible thing to discriminate even in favor of Indian people and they cut out all those programs. 
They have absolutely refused to provide any kind of leadership or example to the province of 
Saskatchewan in the employment of native people. 
 
As a result, this problem is getting worse and worse and worse. If there is anything that the 
Department of Industry might do is to turn around and provide some incentive and some leadership 
for the NDP government in this province, to provide some employment for native people. As I say 
there are fewer natives employed today than there were in 1971 when you became the government. 
There is certainly far fewer of them in the Public Service; there are far fewer of them in any 
institutions such as hospitals or highway contractors or anything else, that actually receive public 
moneys or funds to build projects. Just exactly what is the government going to do? Has the minister 
any thoughts about the future? Is the government of Saskatchewan taking any steps to provide some 
of the solutions to this ongoing problem or are they sitting on their backsides and remaining 
completely static? Mr. Minister, if the Department of Industry doesn’t do something about this, the 
province of Saskatchewan is in for a real tragedy in the future. You have completely ignored the 
problem up until now. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of Industry and Commerce presently has five 
native people employed on the Economic Development staff to implement the EDPD Program and 
to help create jobs for the native people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The special ARDA Program that is in existence is also one that we are trying to expand and enlarge 
on; that will also help create additional employment for native people. 
 
We are very conscious of the fact, as I said a little while ago, of our problem and we are 
continuously looking at methods and programs to help alleviate it. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Mr. Chairman, in creating work for the native people in Saskatchewan, you had 
mentioned that one of the companies that you were involved in was the Native Metal Industries, I 
believe. Can you tell me how many people it employs and how long has it been in operation? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the Native Auto Shredders plant, as you well know, now belongs 
to IPSCO but it was developed back in about 1973. We don’t have the exact figure but we think it 
employs around 100 people, 100 native people. 
 
MR. WIPF: — You mentioned that as one of your companies that you are involved in. Can you 
mention another one that is in existence today that you helped get started and is operating on its own 
today or with your assistance? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, we helped establish the Native Auto Shredders. We helped establish Sask 
Pac at Meadow Lake. I don’t know how many people Sask Pac employs, 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2529 
 

maybe 25 people at this time, I’m not sure. Lar Construction in Saskatoon employs native people that 
we were involved in. So that there are quite a few. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Lar Construction, Mr. Minister, that’s a non-profit organization. I believe it’s building 
for the Sask Housing Corporation, is it not? The Sask Pac at Meadow Lake, what is that? Did you take 
over Meadow Lake Industries? Is that the one that took over Meadow Lake Industries that went broke? 
It had a loan from the government and went broke and now you are starting another industry there? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, Sask Pac is a native group that formed Sask Pac Corporation to build prefab 
homes, primarily under contract with Saskatchewan Housing. That has nothing to do with Meadow Lake 
Wood Industries. They just happened to be renting those facilities. 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister. You get Sask Pac going with Prefab homes as you say. Were you 
involved at all with Target 21, I believe it was, just out of Prince Albert in building prefab homes? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we have had no involvement with Target 21 other than at intervals 
when our department was called in for some information. 
 
MR. WIPF: — In Target 21, did you supply any management expertise to them or what was your 
involvement? Have they invited you to get involved in the last year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, we were involved by invitation from Target 21. We went in there and we made 
some recommendations to them. I might say, regretfully, that they didn’t take our recommendations and 
therefore the problem. 
 
MR. WIPF: — In this Native Auto Shredding business, where is that located and how many people are 
employed by it and what amount of money has the government put into it? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that that has been purchased by IPSCO and there are 
approximately 25 native people working on the job. We have no dollars and cents involvement with it 
whatsoever. 
 
MR. WIPF: — Well, can you name any other company that you help get started that has not been 
absorbed by a larger company that is actually running on its own with the native people running it? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, it is very difficult for us to give you the amount of native people who 
are employed in a certain industry. We can give you the names of the industries that we helped 
established that are native. Now, whether they are employing native or white people, we really don’t 
know because these industries are functioning on their own and we are not involved on a day to day 
basis, so we can’t control the type of people they employ. I can give you a list of quite a number of 
native industries we helped establish, whether that is going to help you in your question or not, I don’t 
know. 
 
MR. WIPF: — O.K. Mr. Minister, you can tear off a sample and send it across. How long have these 
industries been running? Have we got any that has been running three years? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes. 



 
May 8, 1978 

2530 
 

MR. WIPF: — O.K. So you do have one at least somewhere. You talked about helping the small 
industry, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me what? There is a little industry up in my area, it is PAPCO, 
Prince Albert Pulp Company, and you were involved in their chemical division in Saskatoon. Can you 
tell me what you have done there? It is in your annual report. How much money did you have to spend 
to help this little company out? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — The only involvement that we had there, Mr. Chairman, was on a consultant basis. 
We were consulted on two or three different occasions as to their involvement and their changeovers, 
but to say that we are financially involved, we are not. 
 
MR. WIPF: — The only thing you supplied to this company was consultation. Is that right? 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — . . . . . sponsored by the Japanese Canadian Trade Council at the Hotel 
Saskatchewan some months ago, the minister indicated how very interested he was in increasing and 
improving the Japanese/Saskatchewan trade. In light of the fact that Japan is, by far, the best customer 
Saskatchewan has for its products and most of the Pacific Rim countries are good customers, would the 
minister not consider opening a Pacific Rim trade office that would actually be situated in Japan to 
foster trade? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we have weighed that situation out on many occasions and we feel 
that we can handle the Pacific Rim trade from a point in Regina rather than establishing an office 
abroad. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — Mr. Chairman, the department maintains a trade office in London for 
European trade at a cost of about $ 170,000 a year. Really, you get just next to nothing out of it. Then 
you actually disband the Regina office that looks after the trade in the Pacific Rim countries. Wouldn’t 
the minister agree that the priorities that are given are absolutely wrong with the little trade you get from 
Europe and with the great deal of trade you get from Japan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr, Chairman, there is a difference between a trade office and a development office. 
The London office is a development office and we have found, over the period of years. that we have 
received more interest from the London office, from the European market than we have from the 
Japanese. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Could the minister tell us what trade he has actually received from the European 
office? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — We are looking at, on the average, of about 12 inquiries on a monthly basis from the 
European market, through the London office. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — And what have they resulted in? I get more letters than that a day, let alone 
a month. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the London office has proven to be satisfactory to us because of the 
long-term inquiries that it has been making and that is going to take time before some of these newer 
ones are developed. 
 
The London office is also there for the use in other departments, not necessarily the 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2531 
 

Department of Industry and Commerce because it is operated under that department, but we use 
it for various purposes — developing manpower, creating a special type of personnel that we 
might need in the province. I can give you one example. I know of a town in Saskatchewan that 
needed a radiologist and we advertised in Saskatchewan and couldn’t find one and through our 
London office, they were able to find one and bring one in from Britain. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — So your office was in there at $170,000 was able to hire one person 
in the last year. That is your achievement? You know, let’s get on with it! That is the only 
specific thing you have said and I have asked you a specific question three times. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I just quoted an example of what the office did in one 
particular case. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — I thought that was a terrible example — one man hired in . . . . 
(Laughter) You say you get eleven enquiries a month, you hire one man in a year, you spend 
$170,000 in a year. What are you really doing over there? What is going on over in that office? 
No wonder. I wonder if you could tell us who your senior consultant is who made the trip 
around the Pacific Rim and to China from your department last summer, I wonder what he 
brought back. What kind of results in trade did he bring back? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — For the information of the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, my department tells 
us that in the last two years, we recruited approximately 300 people, in various walks of life, 
whom we couldn’t get in the province of Saskatchewan and through the London office we were 
able to locate them. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — Is this part of the reason why we have 300 people out of jobs or 300 
more people out of jobs? You are bringing in people from England? Will you answer the 
question on who is the senior consultant in your department who went to China and what was 
the cost to your department for that senior consultant who made the trip to China and to Japan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. We had one chap by the name of Ted Gray who went 
over there to make an assessment on the very issue that we were talking about a few moments 
ago, whether we should or we should not establish an office in the Pacific Rim. From his studies 
over there and the surveys that he made, he came back and came to the conclusion that we can 
operate the office from Regina rather than an establishment over yonder. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — What was the cost of that trip? I understand the same consultant 
was involved in — was this the same fellow who was involved in arranging the Premier’s tour in 
China, Japan and southeast Asia? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, this gentleman, Mr. Ted Gray, was the only one who went 
across and he was on loan to us from the Department of Trade and Commerce in Ottawa. He was 
a trade commissioner and he knew the operation very well. He was stationed in Tokyo for your 
information. 
 
MR. NELSON: — What was the cost? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — My staff doesn’t have that information but we can get it for you. It’s no 



 
May 8, 1978 

2532 
 

problem; we’ll get you that information. 
 
MR. NELSON: — I’m wondering, did he arrange the trip to the potash mine when the Premier went 
over to sell potash? Did he arrange the trip for the Premier to see the potash mine and you didn’t know 
about it before they left? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Gray did not arrange any trips. He was involved in that particular 
expedition but he arranged nothing. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — It says here that he was involved in arranging the Premier’s tour in China, 
Japan and southeast Asia, on page 14 of the Annual Report, Saskatchewan Department of Industry and 
Commerce. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I said, Mr. Chairman, that he was involved in the trip; maybe as the trip went on he 
was part of the arrangements. There is no doubt that he was involved. He was not involved in the 
original arrangements. 
 
MR. NELSON: — You mean he just went along for the ride, is that what you are saying, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Because of his involvement in Tokyo prior to the trip, he, I understand, made some 
arrangements when they got over there for the Premier’s tour to visit some of the given areas. 
 
MR. NELSON (As-Gr): — What were his other jobs over there besides this? What did he do? What 
did he accomplish? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, his prime reason as I stated earlier this evening, his prime reason for 
going over there was to evaluate the Pacific Rim for the potential of a Saskatchewan office, whether it 
would be feasible or not. But because of his experience and his involvement in the Pacific Rim prior to 
that in being in Tokyo, he made introductions to the trading companies and the tour at that time followed 
them up. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister, did the officials of your department, 
or did your department do anything to try to convince your colleagues not to purchase the potash mines 
and to use the energy money to create other jobs in Saskatchewan? The potash mines were there and you 
didn’t create any new jobs. You might say your money is down the shaft. I wonder if your department 
did approach your colleagues, and also with the oil industry, did you do anything to try to stop them 
from spending the money in these two industries? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, Mr. Chairman, we weren’t involved in either one of the propositions that the 
member is making. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister, since 
Industry Trade and Commerce is potentially one of the real big portfolios in any government agency in 
this province, I would like to ask the minister why it has become such a very minute one, particularly 
since this province was unfortunate enough, that he should assume the portfolio? 
 
Mr. Minister, the potential for your portfolio in Saskatchewan is boundless. I notice some of your 
officials sitting behind you, with a smirk on their face and we will see 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2533 
 

whether they are smirking in about one year from now. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! The hon. member is making imputations against civil servants, 
who cannot defend themselves in this House. I would like him to withdraw. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, specifically what would you like withdrawn? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The remark that they are sitting back there with smirks on their faces, etc. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — All right, I’ll change the smirks to smiles then, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, since potentially this portfolio is one of the more important ones to the people of 
Saskatchewan and regrettably has never worked out, I would like the minister to tell us exactly what 
he has in mind in this area. You have access, which 1 suppose does tell you and you have access to 
SEDCO, which ties in perfectly to the Department of Industry and Commerce. You have SEDCO and 
I don’t think anybody is going to dispute the fact that this province is certainly short of primary and 
secondary industry. 
 
In short, Mr. Minister, and I have gone into a lot of preamble, what is your game plan? What have you 
got in mind for this province that we can very briefly summarize as to a development of a primary and 
secondary industry, to pick up the employment which is rising sharply in this province, but, most 
important, the secondary industry to pick up our spin-off effects from whatever may be available for 
potash, but more important from. what may be appearing to be a very rapidly expanding agricultural 
sector? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I am sorry that the hon. member wasn’t in here earlier this evening 
and he just came in and I have to answer the same question that was answered earlier. However, I 
don’t mind doing that now that the hon. member is in his seat. 
 
Our department is constantly looking at various types of programs in order to attract a new industry 
and to help maintain existing industries. We are also looking at programs to help develop the business 
sector in the province so that they can enlarge and develop so that they, in turn, can create 
employment. The department is continuously working with people from other countries to develop 
various types of industries and these don’t just happen overnight. At the present time I can take a 
guess and I would say we are dealing with five or six different large types of operations that could 
eventually develop and yet, on the other hand, some of them may fall by the wayside, but not for the 
lack of trying. We are looking continuously at developing new programs, new industries. We work 
with the private sector should they come forth to us to help us develop some of their ideas. We are in 
there at all times to help them try develop them. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I think the programs have been described in rhetoric, I think 
they are very laudable and very commendable. Regrettably, you haven’t told us very much about the 
specifics and, most important, you haven’t told us very much about who’s coming and who isn’t. I 
suppose if we are going to total a list of who is 



 
May 8, 1978 

2534 
 

coming and who isn’t coming, the list on the side of who isn’t coming is going to very drastically 
outweigh the list on the side of who is coming. So why don’t we get a little more specific, Mr. 
Minister. Tell us specifically what programs you are talking about. Tell us who is coming and then get 
into the very much longer list and tell us who exactly is not coming. I really don’t expect that to 
happen, Mr. Minister, because, as you know, the list of who isn’t coming probably outweighs several 
times over the list of who is coming. Just for the sake of hilarity, why don’t you very briefly tell us who 
is coming and then I’ll go through the list of who isn’t coming, if you care to do it that way. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the hop. member doesn’t really want me to give him the list 
of the names of the people with whom we are dealing at this time. I’m sure the hon. member has sort of 
made a facetious question and I’ll accept it as such. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — No, Mr. Minister, it really isn’t facetious because I would like you to name one 
specifically that you are dealing with because you know, down through the years, when it came to a 
CCF or an NDP government naming who was coming to this province, it did get a little bit funny. I can 
recall, going way back to about 1948, a pulp mill for Prince Albert being announced (somewhere about 
1948) and somehow it never materialized. Then again in 1952 which, just by sheer coincidence, 
happened to be an election year, there happened to be a pulp mill announced for Prince Albert. For one 
reason or another (and I am sure that the reasons were very laudable), a pulp mill did not appear in 
Prince Albert in 1952. Then in 1956, it was absolutely guaranteed, a pulp mill for Prince Albert. You 
know for some reason it just didn’t quite make it in 1956. So the government of the day (which was still 
basically of your philosophy) announced a pulp mill for Prince Albert in 1960 and it still didn’t appear! 
Now, Mr. Minister, I don’t mean to appear facetious, if we are talking about a pulp mill, if we are 
talking about an iron mine — tell me what we are talking about. Name one major industry that came on 
stream for this province under your philosophy and your ineptness as Minister of Industry. Name one 
that is coming. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — For the information of the hon. member, I don’t mind naming one or two that have 
started within the last year that came about through our very deep involvement. They both happen to be 
in Moose Jaw. One happens to be the R Refrigeration Company which was announced and which will, 
hopefully, employ between 70 people and 100 people. The other one is Canasphere Industries expansion 
program that is going to take place — I don’t know whether they have already started or not, but that 
will take place in Moose Jaw as well. Now, these are programs that are now on stream. I don’t think the 
hon. member honestly thinks that I am going to disclose any names of industries that we are working in 
that might jeopardize our position with these companies. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I suppose on behalf of Moose Jaw, I should apologize that 
the last ditch efforts to divert that refrigeration plant from Moose Jaw to your constituency didn’t really 
work out. Time will tell whether or not that refrigeration plant will, in fact, locate in Moose Jaw. I notice 
a little bit of earth moving going on and time will tell if this big plant . . . . My, your officials are smiling 
again, Mr. Minister. I wonder if they will still be smiling about one year hence. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Minister, I would like to say thank you very much for finally approving a much needed 
motel loan for Moose Jaw because certainly we did need that one to wipe off the stigma of the Golden 
Acres. I do hope that if the minister happens to be down that way in Moose Jaw, in our particular area, 
that’s Thunder Creek, investigating the area for potential expansion, that he will find time to perhaps 
stay in that motel, that under great pressure he finally did accede to approve that particular loan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I really don’t expect you tell us very much about what you have got on stream for that area 
or for any other area because the fact of the matter is you haven’t got very much of anything. You know 
very well that refrigeration plant that you have got in Moose Jaw is there primarily because of the efforts 
of DREE. Whether or not that 



 
 May 8, 1978 
 

2535 
 

refrigeration plant is economical for the city of Moose Jaw will be seen in the future. I sincerely hope 
that it is. Don’t try and tell us that it is there because of the efforts of industry, trade and commerce. It is 
there because of an outright handout from DREE, on the straight capital expansion. From their point of 
view I sincerely hope that it works. I question that it. will. I really wonder if they are going to be there 
about five years down the road. Mr. Minister, again, I would ask you what have you got in mind for this 
province? What you have peddled so far is nonsense. If that refrigeration plant is the best you can do, 
then we are in trouble in this province. Again I will ask you specifically, what have you got in mind for 
this province? Spare us the nonsense, spare us the likes of Golden Acres and Western Press. What have 
you got that is tangible? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. member for the invitation to visit 
Moose Jaw and stay in his fine facilities. The second point he made, what involvement did we have with 
the RV Refrigeration, Mr. Chairman, no matter what we are going to tell the hon. member, he is going to 
come back and tell us that he doesn’t believe us, that somebody else was involved. He has to only take 
my word for our involvement in RV Industries and we were very deeply involved in it right from the 
word, go. Again. Mr. Chairman, it is very difficult for me to give him any specific industry that we are 
dealing with now. However, I will say, as he himself has already said, what have you got in a year from 
now, or do we have to come back and find out? I will say, Yes, come back in one year and we will prove 
it to you and we’ll show it to you, that we have new industries developed in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, we have no intention to obstruct the passage of Estimates in this 
Assembly. In fact it is time to get out of here. Consequently, Mr. Minister, we are going to allow your 
Estimates to go through tonight as expeditiously as possible. However, I would like to serve notice this 
evening to the minister that last week in Crown Corporations you did receive some requests for some 
specific documentation tomorrow morning. I would like to serve notice to that minister, tonight, that 
tomorrow morning we expect that documentation. I see that you are up in SEDCO tomorrow morning. 
We expect that. Your estimates are going through tonight. As far as I am concerned I can’t account for 
the gentlemen to my right, but as far as we are concerned they are going through, but, Mr. Minister, 
don’t think that SEDCO is going to go through tomorrow as what your estimates are this evening. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the member for those fine remarks and if the 
member would like me to show him the documentation, they are ready for you for tomorrow morning. 
There will be no problem whatsoever. We stand by our word. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, one thing has come through clear 
tonight, really with all the money being spent this government has got very little to show in the way of 
effectiveness of an industrial incentive program. 
 
I would just like to ask a series of questions, of how much has the government put into the malting plant 
in the Biggar area? Has the government taken full ownership of the malting plant and what happened to 
the Henniger Company that was originally involved with it? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of Industry and Commerce have no involvement 
financially in the plant whatsoever. I think that information can be searched out in Crown Corporations 
and it probably will be as time goes on. 
 
MR. LANE (Qu’Ap): — Did you do any studies in anyway as for the feasibility of such a 



 
May 8, 1978 

2536 
 

plant? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, my department tells me that they think it was back in 1973 
when we did some of the original studies at that time, Henniger Malting along with the consulting firm, 
who eventually took over and we were not involved any more from that time. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Items 3 to 14 agreed. 
 
Industry and Commerce - Vote 19 agreed. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION — VOTE 48 
 
Vote 48 agreed. 
 
Committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 o’clock p.m. 


