



















































Hansard: March 14, 1978


241 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

March 14, 1978. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Regina Lakeview):— Mr. Speaker, I am advised by one of the pages that we have a 

visit today by 13 high school students from Alta Vista High School which is located in the Lakeview 

constituency. The students are sitting in the east gallery. I want to on your behalf, welcome them to the 

Legislature today and I hope that they will find their visit today both enjoyable and instructive. I hope I will 

have some time to meet with them later after question period. 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont):— Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me to introduce to you 

and through you to the members of the Legislature, a group of 60 students from Wascana School, seated in 

the west gallery. They are accompanied today by their teachers, Roice Barlow and Mr. Ron Kujat. I had the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of visiting the school last week and speaking with these students in anticipation of 

their visit here today and I was very impressed with their knowledge and their interest in the public affairs of 

our province. I certainly hope that their visit today will at least encourage some of them to take an active role 

in the political life of Saskatchewan in the future. I look forward to meeting them a little later on and I’m 

sure all of us want to welcome them to the Legislature today. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina Elphinstone):— I would like to join with the member for Rosemont in 

welcoming the students from Wascana. Many fine young people from the Elphinstone constituency attend 

Wascana School. They include two of my children, one of whom is sitting in the third row. I have visited the 

school on a number of occasions on parent-teacher night. I share with my colleague from Rosemont, the high 

opinion of the Wascana School. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.R. KOWALCHUK (Melville):— Mr. Speaker, it will just take a moment. I too, through you and all 

the other members of this House, would like to extend greetings to a group of nine students from Goodeve 

right in the village where I live. They are here today with their teacher, Mr. Bohay and their bus driver, 

Kenny Ruthgabber. Goodeve is an integrated school, Mr. Speaker, and we have students coming from the 

Black Bear Reserve for their public and junior high school education there. The relationship and the public 

relations in that school is excellent, Mr. Speaker. I will be meeting with these students later on in the 

afternoon. I hope they have a real good time in the city today and I hope that some of what goes on in this 

House here today will add to their education which I am sure they will take back with them. We also wish 

them a safe journey back home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Regina Centre):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

242 

 

you and through you to the House a number of students from the Regina Plains Community College who are 

situated in your Gallery, the Speaker’s Gallery. There are actually two groups from the College, one is a 

group of 40 adults accompanied by their teachers Stewart Mein, Bill O’Shaw, John Leboldus, Leslie Brown. 

The other is a group of 14 adults with their teacher Marlene Smale. I hope to have an opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to meet with these students later. I hope they find today’s proceedings enlightening and they leave 

feeling they have had a realistic view of parliament and democracy in action. Thank you. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

REVENUE SHARING FORMULA 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would direct this 

question to the Premier and I would appreciate it if I could make a small preamble. There is much concern 

being expressed by cities, towns and villages and rural municipalities around the province about many 

aspects of the so-called revenue sharing formula being put out by the Department of Municipal Affairs as 

announced by the Minister of Finance in his Budget — such concerns as, for example, the requirement by 

the government to form associations for the purposes of creating the super grid system, concerns about farm 

access grants, concerns about grants that have been made over the years such as regravelling grants that are 

made once every second year, once every third year, that are now supposedly a part of revenue sharing and, 

therefore, there are a great many communities in our province that have stated that they will receive or it 

appears that they are going to receive less money under the new formula announced than they would have 

received had the old system been under way. These concerns are being expressed. I ask you, Mr. Premier . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, could I have the member get to the question. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— The question is this, are you prepared today on behalf of your government to commit 

the government of Saskatchewan, without qualification, to the fact that no municipality, town, village or city 

in the province of Saskatchewan will receive less money either by average or other than it would have 

received under the old system or the new system that you have introduced in this Budget? 

 

MR. MOSTOWAY:— That’s not what you said yesterday. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anyone can give any generalized commitments like that. 

Obviously one can calculate grants in many different ways. Municipalities, for example, might well have 

been entitled to a community capital fund grant last year and not this year and, accordingly, they will get 

fewer dollars this year than last. I know the member for Nipawin would say that I didn’t mean that. I could 

mention some other recreation grant which they might have got last year but they won’t get this year. I know 

the member for Nipawin would say, well, I didn’t mean that. I am merely illustrating the fact that there are so 

many grant programs and so many different ways of calculating entitlement that I think no one could give an 

unqualified statement that no municipality will get less money in operating grants, however that may be 

phrased, than they would have last year. Generally speaking the formula so operates so that it would be a 

very, very unusual circumstance indeed if any rural municipality got less money in the forthcoming year than 

they got last year. 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

243 

 

MR. COLLVER:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. In the light of the Premier’s words and in the 

light of the tremendous number of grants and grant programs that he has announced today or that he said 

today, as we have seen so many grant programs and in the light of the apparent confusion on the part of a 

great many people in municipal governments in the province of Saskatchewan, are you prepared then to re-

align your thinking in terms of specific amounts to be included in the so-called revenue sharing formula or 

will you, in fact, have a real revenue sharing program which will be a share of all provincial government 

revenues? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, firstly, with respect to announcing specific amounts I believe that the 

member for Last Mountain, the Minister for Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy) is at the SARM at this very 

moment in the course of announcing the grants to individual municipalities, individual rural municipalities. 

He spoke with them this morning and so far as I am aware he will be giving them that information today. 

 

With respect to the other point raised by the member for Nipawin I think he misconceives the nature of the 

revenue sharing formula. No one has suggested that there is not a sharing of all provincial revenues. Indeed, 

the dollars that come into the till do not bear a sign which says, ‘sales tax’, gasoline tax’, ‘resource revenue’; 

they all come in and they are all paid out. There is no suggestion that any money is being withheld from the 

Consolidated Fund except, of course, for the Heritage Fund out of which the revenues are being paid. The 

question that the hon. member directs himself to is how they shall be escalated, what the index shall be. The 

index is not in effect so in a sense it is a theoretical question but the announced index is not based upon all 

provincial revenues but is based upon selective provincial revenues and that is to give the index a greater 

degree of stability. Resource revenues go up and down. It is entirely possible for some resource revenues to 

go down. The revenues selected for the index, the sales tax and the gasoline tax and the others, have an 

almost unrestricted, almost unimpeded record of gradual increase. That, I think, is the sort of index which 

the municipalities will want rather than one which goes up and down depending upon the exigencies of the 

economy and, accordingly, we have negotiated with them an index. Please note that has nothing to do with 

where the money comes from. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— In the light of the Premier’s refusal to give the same kind of guarantee or assurance to 

municipalities that was included in the Budget Speech, which was that no municipality would receive less 

and that the implication was operating grants, will the Premier announce today, at the very least, an appeal 

procedure by municipalities, cities, towns and villages in the province who end up receiving less than they 

would have otherwise got under the old system, an appeal procedure that they will at least receive as much 

this year as they received last year. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, the difficulty with the hon. member for Nipawin is that, while the 

Minister of Finance will state in the Budget Speech the government policy, the member for Nipawin likes to 

rephrase the matter a little bit more than somewhat and then asks someone to say yes or no to it. I have, I 

think, acquired that degree of caution which everyone should acquire, indeed, with the member for Nipawin 

and, accordingly, I would prefer to rely upon the words of the Minister of Finance. And if I may say, 

whatever is in the Budget speech is government policy and if that assurance is there then it is government 

policy. 

 

INCREASE IN TUITION FEES 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

244 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Continuing 

Education. As the minister is undoubtedly aware there has been an increase of approximately 9 per cent in 

the tuition fees at the University of Regina that has been announced. In fact, Regina already has the highest 

tuition fees in western Canada. The College of Arts and Science, in fact, charge over $100 more per year 

tuition fees than the neighboring provinces, particularly Alberta and Manitoba. Would the minister please 

justify as to why we have this increase that exceeds over $100 beyond the other two provinces and, secondly, 

would he indicate what programs he might be thinking about to help some of these young people to ensure 

that people from these, particularly the low and middle income families will have an opportunity to go to 

university next year. 

 

HON. D.L. FARIS (Minister of Education):— Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to answer this question. 

You’ll find if you examine grants to the university sector across Canada this year, that the grants of 

Saskatchewan are the highest percentage increase of any province in Canada. Grants to the university sector 

in Saskatchewan this year exceed 10 per cent. In British Columbia, they’ll be about five or six per cent, in 

Ontario, about four or five per cent and in Alberta, wealthy Alberta, they’ll be approximately eight per cent. I 

can tell you that the tuition fees do exceed those in some other provinces. The university in Saskatoon last 

year had exactly the same tuition fees as the University of British Columbia, however, and you can talk 

about in terms of an average difference of something like $50. 

 

I want to say this. We have the richest bursary program to assist these students, of any province in western 

Canada. Students here can receive over $400 a year more, on the basis of need, than students in our 

neighboring provinces. 

 

In addition to that, there are other costs that are laid upon students in other provinces which are not borne in 

this province, for example, car insurance. Most young people have cars and in Alberta they pay $800 a year 

more than they do for car insurance in this province; in Ontario, over $1,000 a year more. Mr. Speaker, this 

is the best province in Canada for students to attend a university. 

 

MR. STODALKA:— I would ask the minister to pause and to listen to see how satisfactory his particular 

programs are at the present time. We can all talk about percentages and 10 per cent of this and 10 per cent of 

that or 15 but what did they start out as at the beginning? Percentages mean nothing if you talk about bases 

that are not comparable but I would like to ask the minister, what incentive is there for a student in rural 

Saskatchewan to attend university in either Regina or Saskatoon if he’s going to have to pay over $100 per 

year more in fees? 

 

MR. FARIS:— Mr. Speaker, he can receive up to $3,600 in student loans and grants, over $1,800 in grants 

and not $1 was available under the former Liberal government for grants for those students. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

INCREASE IN POTASH MINES 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan):— Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister in charge of Sask. Potash and PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan). During the potash debate it was mentioned that, at that time, the 

Russians were experimenting with trading potash for surplus wheat. On March 13 editorial of the Leader 

Post they 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

245 

 

mentioned that Russian potash sales could harm our market. Now with the real potential of United States 

markets being eroded with the increase of sales of Russian potash in the United States, is the government 

going to go ahead with their increases in the output of the present mines which they now own? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Minister of charge of the Potash Corporation):— Mr. Speaker, after yesterday I 

went back and read the article that the member for Estevan was quoting from and he conveniently took one 

paragraph out of the middle of a quarter page article and forgot the rest of it. I suppose they may have done 

the same thing. I would’ve thought, however, that the member for Estevan would not be at all worried about 

Soviet potash because, according to him, the only people who can produce potash and sell it in any market 

are private enterprisers. However, I want to assure the member opposite that we think that not only the 

public sector in this province, but indeed perhaps even the private sector in this province will be able to 

compete effectively with the Soviets for potash markets in the U.S. The short answer to his question is that 

we intend to increase our capacity. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARTER:— I wonder if the minister does know that he now is in the free market system business and 

have you estimated just how much of this potash market the Russians could take away from PSC? 

 

MR. COWLEY:— Yes, we are in the free market system along with the Russians, and, yes, we do have 

estimates. 

 

PERCENTAGE DROP IN FEES IN BUDGET 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— A question to the Minister of Continuing Education, Mr. 

Speaker. Is the Minister of Continuing Education aware of the fact that in terms of percentage of budget that 

the difference between what was budgeted in 1971 and what has been budgeted in 1978 is a drop in priority 

from 25.4 per cent to 22.3 per cent and that in fact is the reason why our fees in Saskatchewan are higher 

than they are anywhere else in western Canada? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FARIS:— Mr. Speaker, that is the foolish, shallow sort of analysis I would expect from the member on 

the other side. The reason for that percentage drop is that there has been a tremendous expansion in programs 

for other people. For instance, senior citizens receive over $80 million in programs now where they received 

less than $4 million under your government. Do you want us to take the money away from senior citizens; do 

you want to take it away from children for the Dental Plan? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PENNER:— I wonder if the Minister of Education, when he talks about shallowness, would not agree 

with the proposition that in fact the only reason that fees in Saskatchewan are higher than they are anywhere 

else in western Canada by well over $100 before this fee increase was put into effect is because your priority 

is such that the only people you feel want an education beyond the secondary level are those who are rich 

and can afford it in the first place. 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

246 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FARIS:— Mr. Speaker, we introduced a bursary program in this province where a student on the basis 

of need can receive up to $1,800 each and every year and not have to pay back one cent of that. When your 

party was in government there was not one cent available for those students. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. FARIS:— I want to tell you this, Mr. Speaker, that from 1970 to the present time, although the student 

enrolment from 1970 to the present has increased about 4 per cent or 5 per cent, the number of staff and 

faculty at our universities in Saskatchewan has increased over 28 per cent. 

 

PAMPHLET ON TOURISM 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Tourism. 

You alluded in your remarks last night to the new travel rates for Share Canada and the fact that 

Saskatchewan has been left out of that program. I have a pamphlet that was mail dropped in the city of 

Regina and I believe Saskatoon and according to the pamphlet, if I can explain, was inserted in other major 

urban papers in Canada. That particular pamphlet makes no reference whatsoever to the province of 

Saskatchewan, makes no reference whatsoever to the great tourist areas of the province and I am wondering 

what action the government has taken to call to the attention of the publishers of this particular article, of the 

discrimination both by Air Canada and the article itself in ignoring Saskatchewan’s tourist areas. 

 

HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources):— Mr. Speaker, I am not aware 

of the pamphlet that the hon. member has in his possession. I would certainly like to see the pamphlet and 

make a review of it to see what he means by his remarks. He might be quite correct and with respect to the 

package tours that have been set up in the promotion of tourism in Canada, I have certainly expressed my 

disappointment in no uncertain terms to the federal minister and hopefully that Saskatchewan could be better 

represented in a tour package. I am not too sure whether this could be out for this year, but certainly for the 

future. 

 

MR. LANE:— My supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I heard the comment about ‘nationalize’ and that’s the first 

answer to everything from the government opposite. My question to the minister: will you undertake to raise 

with Air Canada, as well as the minister the discrimination by Air Canada against the province of 

Saskatchewan and urge Air Canada as a national Crown corporation to start to take and recognize the tourist 

potential of this province and not to continue the blatant.. frankly, I call it an insult.. the program promoted 

by Air Canada and this particular magazine and I am going to table this magazine and hope that the Minister 

of Tourism would have his officials write to them and clarify the omission? 

 

MR. MATSALLA:— Mr. Speaker, I want an opportunity to review the periodical, or the pamphlet the hon. 

member is referring to and certainly we will make representation to the proper agencies if Saskatchewan is 

not represented in that travel magazine. 

 

INVESTIGATION INTO CUMBERLAND HOUSE PROGRAM 

 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

247 

 

Northern Saskatchewan. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan started an investigation into the 

Cumberland House Residential Rehabilitation Program in March or April of 1977, just about a year ago. Is 

the minister prepared today to table or tell this Assembly the results of his department’s own investigation 

into that program? 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan):— Mr. Speaker, I attempted to answer 

the member yesterday that the department on its own did not undertake any investigation of that incident. 

Any investigation which has been undertaken has been undertaken jointly by CMHC and the department as 

well as the Attorney General’s department. There is no report that I know of that has come to my attention 

that has come back as a result of investigations made, a full report of the details or the assessment of the 

facts as they have been investigated in Cumberland House or in some of the other areas related to the 

Residential Rehabilitation Program. 

 

MR. WIPF:— By way of supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister tell this Assembly, as this 

investigation has been going on for a year, why was $40,000 released to Mr. Howard Thompson the 

contractor, prior to the completion of work in these homes in Cumberland House and has this contractor 

completed the work yet or has he not completed it? If so, who has requested him to do it? If he hasn’t done 

it, is the work completed, is what I am asking? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN:— Mr. Speaker, if the particular person whom the member refers to is part of the 

investigation that is underway, then I do not have as I have already indicated, a final report with respect to 

that and therefore I can give no answer. If there is any particular question in detail that he wishes to know I 

would suggest that he put the matter on the order paper and we will answer it as all other issues of that kind 

are answered. 

 

PROPOSED TAXING REGULATIONS – BILL 47 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— I notice that the Minister of Education has 

gone out of the House and does not answer any of our questions on education so I would like to direct a 

question to the Premier. I understand, Mr. Premier, today that government is meeting with officials of the oil 

industry, IPAC and CPA, to discuss the proposed taxing regulations under Bill 47. In view of the fact that 

these regulations have now been prepared, and in view of the fact that they have been released to the oil 

industry for discussion purposes, my question to the Premier is, are you prepared to table the proposed tax 

regulations in this Legislature so that newly elected members of the Legislature can peruse them and make 

comment on them? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, as was indicated to the members 

of this Legislative Assembly when we introduced Bill 47, we would undertake when we had completed our 

draft of regulations, introduce them to the industry for their comments. I think that it would be inappropriate 

at this time to undertake to convey them to the general public, as we have not yet as a government or as a 

Department of Mineral Resources, finally decided on the introduction of those regulations. It is this process, 

Mr. Speaker, which will allow us to come to a final decision in regard to those regulations and at that 

particular point in time we will make them available to the members of the Legislative Assembly and the 

general public. 

 

MR. MALONE:— Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that was raised by both opposition parties in the debate 

on Bill 47 was that these regulations would be passed in the secrecy of the Cabinet room 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

248 

 

and then discussed in the secrecy of the Cabinet room with the industry. Would the minister not agree with 

the opposition parties that in acting in this manner, you are taking away from the duly elected representatives 

of the people of Saskatchewan, their right to peruse taxing legislation, and would you not agree further that 

you are showing complete and utter contempt for this legislature by not allowing us to look at these 

regulations and make comment on them? 

 

MR. MESSER:— I don’t know in what other area that regulations are introduced to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly before they are passed. I suggest not in any other, and the member, the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Opposition in Saskatchewan, can’t have it both ways. 

We conveyed to him that we would undertake to discuss the regulations with the oil industry which they 

affect before we undertake to give final consideration to introducing those regulations. Furthermore, Mr. 

Speaker, we have not conveyed to the oil industry that those regulations are in any way a secret. I would 

suggest that the members who sit to your left, Mr. Speaker, may undertake to discuss with the oil industry 

the regulations that we have introduced to them and it is therefore up to the oil industry to decide whether or 

not they want the members of the Legislative Assembly and the opposition to discuss those regulations with 

them. I do not believe that it is the responsibility of the government at this particular point in time so the 

members of the opposition can play cheap politics with them. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Smishek (Minister of Finance) 

that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of the Finance and the amendment thereto by Mr. 

Penner (Saskatoon Eastview). 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn):— Mr. Speaker, yesterday evening when I adjourned the debate I stated that 

this Budget reflects a number of important principles. It tells the people of Saskatchewan quite a lot about 

this government and its approach towards the affairs of the province. Members opposite have been hard 

pressed again to find fault with it. They have found themselves grasping at air when it comes to criticizing 

our budgetary proposals. 

 

During the past year members opposite have been urging us to do many things, Mr. Speaker. They called on 

us to cut taxes. They wanted more money spent on our health system. They told us we should be doing more 

to stimulate the economy. They wanted more jobs. They wanted greater assistance for urban municipalities 

and the list went on and on. Well, this Budget reflects those concerns. It tackles the problems that we face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) has indicated he is not very impressed with the 

Budget. What he then says, at least that’s the way I read it, is that he and his Conservative colleagues are not 

too impressed with the across-the-board tax cuts to Saskatchewan residents, or with increased Property 

Improvement Grants or more money for municipalities or increased grants to school boards or the 4,400 new 

jobs that we anticipate to become a reality, more money for highways and the list again goes on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the vote comes on this Budget, the people of Saskatchewan will be watching very 

carefully. Members opposite have been talking about a "better way" for 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

249 

 

Saskatchewan. They have been saying that this government is not responding to the needs of the province. 

This Budget again reiterates our commitment to Saskatchewan. It is a good Budget and members opposite 

who might be tempted to vote against it should have second thoughts, I can assure you. 

 

Before offering this Assembly some specific comments on this Budget I think a couple of things should be 

stressed at this time. The Leader of the Opposition, the member for Lakeview (Mr. Malone) says, "Rather 

than ‘jobs today, energy tomorrow,’ we should have had jobs yesterday with energy today." Well, Mr. 

Speaker, one might be tempted to bring out the record to see how well they responded to those challenges 

when they had the chance. However, I will just say that their promise of 80,000 new jobs and exciting 

resource development programs were nothing more than shallow promises made in the heat of an election 

campaign. 

 

As for the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, well they have been much more vocal in the past. Therefore, I might 

just add a few thoughts to offset some of the misrepresentation which has emanated from the benches 

opposite. 

 

Since the Conservatives surfaced in this House following the last election, Mr. Speaker, we have heard much 

about what Conservative governments are capable of. They have said, give us a change. We’ll show you 

what can be done. Well, let’s look at what they can do. I am sure members of the Saskatchewan 

Conservative caucus support their colleagues in Ontario. I am sure that they applaud their efforts and I am 

sure we could expect the same if they were ever given the opportunity to govern this province. 

 

The same day of our Budget, do you remember, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative government of Ontario also 

had brought down a budget. What were the highlights? 

 

Well, health premiums increased 37.5 per cent, mining taxes to such responsible corporate citizens as INCO, 

cut substantially, virtually nothing to provide full time employment for some of the 316,000 Ontario 

residents who are out of work. Last year their Finance Minister predicted a deficit of $992 million, Mr. 

Speaker. He was only 61 per cent off base. Projected deficit this year in Ontario budget is $1.4 billion. Mr. 

Speaker, there is more, but this gives you an idea of what Conservatives can do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when all provinces and the federal government are finding it next to impossible to 

cope with economic uncertainty and the inflationary pressures that are being imposed on our economies, it is 

interesting to speculate about why Saskatchewan is able to do those things which other provinces are only 

able to dream about. 

 

Consider, for a moment, the facts about resource revenue. Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that in 

Conservative Ontario health premiums are over $500 a year and grants for schools, municipalities, job 

creation and the like are minimal when you consider that total revenues from resources, in Ontario, account 

for 2 per cent of total revenue when in Saskatchewan the level is 25 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER:— Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, want more for the people but they want less for resource 

development and resource revenue. Surely, members opposite can figure out that our programs cost money 

and this money must come from somewhere. If we recognize the fact that our resources belong to all of us, 

then surely it 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

250 

 

is reasonable to expect some benefit to be derived when these resources are developed. Our ability to keep 

pace with the public expectation in terms of programs, policies and services is a direct result of our good 

management in terms of our resource development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me just briefly to comment on a couple of issues detailed in the Budget. It is encouraging 

to note that this government is able to reduce auto premiums as a result of the encouraging decrease in 

fatalities and injuries since Safety ‘77 and our seat belt legislation has been passed. Members opposite are on 

record as opposing seat belts. I wonder if they now oppose the results our legislation brought forth? 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area of government commitment which I am particularly proud of is in the area of 

senior citizens. We all know that income security is a concern for everyone but of a particular concern for 

our senior citizens. The federal government’s record in this regard is not too impressive to say the least. 

 

Senior citizens on fixed incomes are forced to face the brunt of inflation and the effects are devastating. You 

will recall that a couple of years ago, we introduced the Saskatchewan Income Plan. This Budget will 

increase benefits under that plan by 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that is performance. Combined with other initiatives such as income tax cuts, increased 

Property Improvement Grants and others, I am sure this Budget will generate widespread support from the 

senior citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of phase one of the revenue sharing plan for municipal governments is 

particularly gratifying. I am pleased that we were able to announce that urban municipalities will get $12 

million more or an average increase of 45 per cent in three unconditional grants. I am even more pleased that 

our Finance Minister was able to make a commitment to provide a further substantial increase again next 

year. We all know that revenue sharing does not replace all grants provided by government to urban 

municipalities, but only replaces the equalization, the police and the per capita grants which were paid last 

year. 

 

I ask and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what will this mean for my constituency. For example, Weyburn will 

now receive $435,725 or an increase of more than 64 per cent this year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER:— The communities of Creelman, Fillmore, Forget, Heward, McTaggart, Osage and 

Stoughton will receive $61,712 or an increase of 61.8 per cent. Coupled with the average 11 per cent 

increase in school board grants across the province and a 14 per cent increase in the Property Improvement 

Grants, I am confident that substantial relief to rising property taxes will be effected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER:— I make this statement, Mr. Speaker, again because our ability to provide these kinds of 

increases together with substantial tax cuts is in a large part attributable to the fact that resource revenues 

now amount to about 25 per cent of the total revenue of the province compared to 7 per cent seven years ago. 

That means we now have a cushion against the ups and downs experienced by every province where 

agriculture is 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

251 

 

so significant a part of the economy. 

 

In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, programs such as Land Bank, Farm Start, Operation Open Roads, Operation 

Mainstreet, the Community Capital Fund are all examples which come to mind and which we have started 

and which are benefiting from this legislation. Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. The record is very 

clear. We have brought down our seventh budget since assuming office and I am sure you would only find a 

small minority who would not agree that tremendous progress has been recorded in a very short period of 

time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER:— Much more, Mr. Speaker, needs to be done and much more will be done. However, this 

Budget can be viewed only with enthusiasm and confidence. It would have been easy to sit back, Mr. 

Speaker, very easy and hold onto the purse strings and submit to the ‘hold the line’ philosophy gripping 

other governments across the nation. 

 

But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House have confidence in Saskatchewan. We 

have confidence in our economy; we have confidence that the legislative proposals we have brought forward 

in this Budget will go a long way in meeting the collective aspirations we share in terms of social and 

economic growth of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, because of this, this Budget will indeed provide the stimulus required and because it 

deals with those areas where positive reaction can be expected in the near future, I offer my full and active 

support to the Budget and will vote against the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, I am proud to enter this debate and 

to stand in support of my colleague, the Minister of Finance. 

 

This outstanding Budget proves once again that the Blakeney government is the most responsible and the 

most competent government in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— This Budget proves that our government, the government of the people of Saskatchewan 

has accepted the challenge, not only of planning for today, but also planning for the future of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that planning for the future of this province has spilled over outside of the boundaries of the 

province of Saskatchewan and is in effect planning and assisting the future of Canada in total. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we are the only government in Canada today that is facing that challenge, the 

only government. One just has to look at the federal Liberal government, floundering and sputtering, totally 

helpless to this point in time with its fight against inflation, with its fight against unemployment. Look at the 

Tory government in Ontario. It would be hard to find a more hopeless budget than theirs. I can’t say, Mr. 

Speaker, I can’t say I have heard many opposition voices calling from the 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

252 

 

Tory benches for us to take advice from Ontario this week, not this week, Mr. Speaker. But I can’t blame 

them. I was, as I am certain most citizens were, embarrassed by that miserable performance in Ontario. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, the Blakeney government has shown Saskatchewan and Canadian people 

alike that we are sure and that we are strong. We have taken a responsible attitude to budgeting, coping with 

immediate and short-term problems and also setting money aside when the economy is more buoyant to be 

sure that in tough times Saskatchewan and its people will have the services they need and they rightfully 

deserve. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, if either of the parties opposite had brought down this Budget, there would 

have been fewer level IV beds instead of more; no senior citizens’ package instead of an expanded one; no 

revenue sharing plan and no capital works projects to provide needed employment opportunities. They 

couldn’t have done a single one of these, Mr. Speaker, and the reason is resource management, NDP 

resource management, Mr. Speaker. Our government had the strength, the strength to stand up to the 

multinationals that were reaping all of the benefits from our resources and to tell them that it was about time 

that the people of this province saw some of the benefits of living in a province with resources. So when the 

oil prices soared in 1973 we put legislation in place to ensure a fair return on those increases, to and for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Sure the oil companies fought but they weren’t suffering. We weren’t about to cater to 

their every whim as we see other weak-kneed Tory and Liberal governments in other provinces doing. 

 

Bill 42 ensured a fair return to both producer and to owner. We had anticipated our future needs and had set 

money aside for then. But what we could not have anticipated was that the Supreme Court of Canada would 

overrule all of the Saskatchewan judges and take a new and fiercely centralistic position. But despite the 

opposition that our resource policy faced from the federal government octopus, we refused to be deferred. 

We believe that Saskatchewan people have a right to their resources, and that principle, Mr. Speaker, we will 

never compromise. 

 

We put into place new legislation that will protect the $500 million dollars plus, already collected, and will 

insure a fair return for the oil industry, and for the people of Saskatchewan in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our oil industry is now flourishing. Drilling in 1977 was double that of 1976 and there is every 

indication from the petroleum industry that increased oil activity will continue well into 1978. There is 

ongoing research into improved methods of recovery, especially for heavy oil. Negotiations are continuing in 

the hope of establishing a heavy oil upgrading facility in Saskatchewan in the future. There can be no doubt, 

no doubt that 1978 will be a good year for development of our oil resources. 

 

I don’t mind reminding the members of this House about the statement by the Minister 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

253 

 

of Energy Mines and Resources, Mr. Speaker, Alastair Gillespie, a statement which he made only a few days 

ago, that if a Tory government were elected in Ottawa, (and I say a Tory government elected anywhere) it 

will mean no upgrading facility and no energy projects, Mr. Speaker. The Tory government, the people of 

Saskatchewan, and the people of Canada know where they stand. They disagree with the proposal put 

forward by the Premier of this province agreed to by the federal government of Canada, and that is, "jobs for 

today, energy for tomorrow." 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, oil is only one part of our resource policy. We have made equally great strides in the area 

of potash management. Here too, our record shows confidence. The Blakeney government has instilled 

confidence in the mining community. The Prospectors and Mining Development Association say our 

royalties are fair. They welcome the opportunity to enter into joint ventures, and agree that Saskatchewan 

holds considerable promise for the future. One only has to look at the developmental activities in the 

Province of Saskatchewan compared to any other province in Canada, and know that it is the policies and the 

actions of this, the New Democratic Party government, which has brought about that level of activity. 

 

We are working in other areas too. Areas that are more closely associated with energy, coal, hydro and 

uranium. Policies are being formulated for the best and most responsible use of these resources. We have 

also taken steps to keep power and gas rates to a minimum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in percentage terms, the prices of natural gas increase costs to the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation have increased in excess of 22 per cent in 1974, in excess of 67 per cent in 1975, in excess of 49 

per cent in 1976, and in excess of 49 per cent in 1977. That, Mr. Speaker, is a total of 189 per cent increase 

in only four years, a 189 per cent increase in cost of natural gas to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in 

four years time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you might ask as I suggest other citizens of Saskatchewan ask: Why? Why, Mr. Speaker, 

why has SPC’s costs risen so sharply? Let us look at some of the actions of the federal government. In the 

past four years SPC has been particularly vulnerable to the rapidly increasing price of natural gas from 

Alberta. Mr. Speaker, we depend on Alberta for 65 to 70 per cent of our natural gas. Let me give you an 

example. During 1975, natural gas cost to SPC increased by 67.7 per cent, simply because the federal Liberal 

government decided it was time to increase incentives to the private sector for new explorations at a time 

when their profits had never been higher, Mr. Speaker. Only two years before the gas producing companies 

and the federal government claimed that we had enough natural gas to supply the market for hundreds of 

years. Only two years before, that was the position of the federal government and of the gas companies. 

 

In 1975, the federal government under great pressure from the oil companies, passed legislation that gave an 

additional 25 cents per mcf return to the natural gas producers. In 1976, and I ask the Liberal members 

opposite to listen carefully, the federal and the Alberta governments agreed to another across the board 

increase of 26 cents per mcf. Both of those years, Mr. Speaker, were record profit years for resource 

development companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in total, this means since 1971, the cost of Alberta gas to Saskatchewan 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

254 

 

has risen by 600 per cent. The complete and total disregard for establishing a national energy policy, by the 

federal government during the ‘60s and early ‘70s, produced these unprecedented cost increases to SPC 

(Sask Power Corporation) and other utilities in Canada. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, SPC has been able to 

shelter customers from these real costs of production . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— . . . despite the fact that the cost of fuel, natural gas, oil and coal, per kilowatt hour, to 

Sask Power Corporation, rose by 280 per cent from ‘72 to ‘77, SPC’s revenue per kilowatt hour increased by 

less than one-fifth as much. In other words, Mr. Speaker, costs of all fuel to generate electricity in 

Saskatchewan increased in a five year period by 280 per cent. The cost of that power to the consumer 

increased by one-fifth of that amount. That’s good management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— SPC has, whenever possible, absorbed increased fuel costs to the benefit of 

Saskatchewan consumers. The cost of electricity, in constant dollar terms, is lower today than it was 20 or 10 

or even five years ago, despite increased demands and expansion of the electrical system. The average 

residential user of electricity paid, in constant dollar terms, 2.5 cents per kilowatt hour in 1964. That 

consumer paid, in constant dollar terms, 1.8 cents per kilowatt hour in 1972. In constant dollar terms that 

consumer paid 1.6 cents per kilowatt hour in 1977. To put that another way, Mr. Speaker, the average 

Saskatchewan homeowner spent one per cent less of his personal disposable income on electricity and 

natural gas in Saskatchewan in 1977 than he did in 1970. I doubt that there is a single other area in Canada 

where that is the case. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly not the case in Tory Manitoba. It’s 

certainly not the case in Tory Ontario and, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly not the case in Tory Alberta, the richest 

energy producing province in Canada. 

 

In 1977 Saskatchewan Power Corporation electrical rate increases were considerably lower than a number of 

other utilities, lower than the 20 per cent increase by Alberta Power, Tory Alberta, lower than the 30.3 per 

cent increase by Ontario Hydro — Conservative, Tory Ontario, or the 47 per cent increase of Nova Scotia 

Power. 

 

Our rates remain well below the national average. In fact, the average cost of 500 kilowatt hours of 

electricity, for all Canadian utilities, is now, today, $16.89 but is, in Saskatchewan, $14.96.. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— . . . almost two dollars, per 500 kilowatt hours, less than any other province in Canada, 

certainly less than the Canadian average. 

 

Home-owners in Saskatchewan are still supplied with natural gas and electricity at less cost than in other 

communities such as Vancouver, Prince George, Grande Prairie, Brandon, Winnipeg, Thunder Bay or 

Toronto, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the actions of a responsible government. While I would like to continue talking about 

our actions as a competent and as a strong government, I’d like to also deal, Mr. Speaker, with those 

comments made in the debate by the opposition. There haven’t been many. They haven’t amounted to much, 

particularly the comments 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

255 

 

made by the recycled member for Thunder Creek, Mr. Thatcher, the now PC financial critic. The speech by 

the member was a poor one but he can be forgiven for that. The job of a critic is not easy when there’s 

nothing to criticize. I understand that the hon. member might have other things on his mind which deterred 

him from producing an able performance in this House, other things, Mr. Speaker, such as the fact even the 

local Conservatives in his riding are ashamed to have him as one of theirs, and at present, whether you’re in 

Chaplin or Tugaske or Pense, the smart money is running on Don Swinson for the PC nomination. It’s 

almost unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that it might not be the NDP, or for that matter, the Liberals who 

administer the well-deserved defeat to the member for Thunder Creek, but his own new-found friends. 

 

I won’t make that a definite prediction, Mr. Speaker, but only because I do not underestimate the ability of 

the PC leader, the member for Nipawin, Mr. Collver, to fix things up for the member. To fix things up, Mr. 

Speaker, in the same manner he offered to fix things up for at least five other members of this Assembly in 

requesting them to walk across the floor and join the Conservative Party. The member, Mr. Speaker, for 

Thunder Creek, his economic theories aren’t even as up-to-date as Adam Smith’s. Using some lost logic the 

member’s first comments in the Budget were that capital moneys spent by government don’t have the same 

spin-off as do moneys spent by the private sector. It amazes me how the contractors and sub-contractors and 

the tradesmen and the suppliers over there are able to tell if a dollar originates from the government or from 

the private sector. It amazes me further to learn that when they are in receipt of a dollar which originated 

with government they either refuse to take it or refuse to spend it or refuse to invest it and thus end the 

circulation of that money. That’s an amazing theory, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We hear what the member for Thunder Creek says the Progressive Conservatives would do if in power and 

we see in Alberta and Manitoba and Ontario what they actually do if they are in power. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— The difference, Mr. Speaker, is frightening. 

 

Who are the Conservatives and what do they stand for? In terms of political leadership they are Clark and 

Collver — the dismal and the distraught. A federal leader who is incapable of deciding which side of his 

head he should shear for a part and a provincial leader deciding how he should shear his partners. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, I want to deal for just a moment longer with the Progressive Conservative 

Leader. He and his supporters are very sensitive to the comments on the member for Nipawin, Mr. Collver’s 

personal life. They imply that somehow it is unfair for the press to point out that he has some difficulties on 

that front. Mr. Speaker, when the member for Nipawin, Mr. Collver, made the decision to become a leader of 

a political party he should have realized that he was accepting the fact that as a public figure his life is open 

to public scrutiny and I believe that that is how it should be. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— You know, Mr. Speaker, there was a line in a song which was popular a 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

256 

 

few years ago which goes, and I quote: 

 

But he can’t even run his own life, I’ll be damned if he’ll run mine. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Well I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will never give him that 

opportunity, never. The voters of Saskatchewan and of Nipawin constituency have a right to information 

about the Conservative Leader so they can assess his potential in light of that knowledge. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, where are the Conservatives in terms of dealing with the major problems of 

the day, in terms of planning? Joe Clark’s most profound and well-sounded proposal is to eliminate 60,000 

public jobs. His method of dealing with unemployment is to add 60,000 more names to the roll of the 

unemployed. A brilliant stroke, Mr. Speaker! 

 

Provincially, Mr. Collver proposed to take our potash and our oil resource companies and place them in 

private hands. This is our future and our children’s future, Mr. Speaker, and the member for Nipawin a la 

Collver says, sell it all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to be fair he has a provision thrown in there to make it sound better. He says that no one 

will be allowed to own more than 2 per cent of the shares that he issues. Mr. Speaker, 2 per cent into 100 per 

cent goes 50. So you think that you, Sir, or I, or any of our friends, or many of the people following this 

broadcast on radio will be one of Mr. Collver’s ‘Fabulous Fifty’? To coin a phrase by the recycled member 

for Thunder Creek, Mr. Thatcher, not bloody likely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives are the party of the like of Jack Horner and Stan Shumacher. They are the 

party of unfounded, irresponsible charges of filthy hospitals. They are the party of unfounded and 

irresponsible charges of mythical deals. They are the party who boast of respect for this institution and call 

for decorum only to shatter that boast and make mockery of that call by attacking the institution of you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— They are the party of Lane and Thatcher, two expatriate Liberals who had not the courage 

nor the gumption nor the support to seek the leadership of their former party, only the expedience to knife it 

as they slunk away only to become rodents moving from one sinking ship to another. At a time when 

circumstances call for, call for, Mr. Speaker, and indeed demand that governments show leadership and faith 

and take action, Conservative governments and Conservative parties are crawling into its hole of 19th 

century economic delusion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— At a time, Mr. Speaker, when ordinary people are caught in the bind the Progressive 

government of Ontario reacts by increasing their health premiums by more than 30 per cent. At a time when 

unemployment in the province of Manitoba was already snowing under its construction industry, the 

Progressive Conservative 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

257 

 

government of that province reacted by eliminating much needed public housing programs and capital 

expenditures. At a time when the dismal performance of other provinces driving their unemployed and their 

problems to Saskatchewan, the member for Thunder Creek says, draw in your horns. He says rely, and I 

quote, ‘rely on the private sector’. What he is saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we should follow suit with both 

Ontario and Manitoba and rely on such stalwart members of the private sector as INCO and Falconbridge to 

work things out for us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, we in the New Democratic Party, we in the NDP government have faith in 

this province, faith in its people, faith in its future. This Budget is an expression of that faith. It is a Budget 

of action; it is a Budget of positive action. The 1978-79 Budget has something for every segment of the 

Saskatchewan society. There is a job creation program to provide employment and at the same time services 

like highways and houses. There are tax cuts. There are improved health benefits, more level IV beds, 

ambulance services and a larger dental plan. There is the first comprehensive revenue sharing plan in 

Canada; another first for the NDP government in Saskatchewan. There is a senior citizens’ package for an 

expanded home repair program, increased income supplements and an increased Property Improvement 

Grant for all homeowners, and there is the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. That’s an impressive list, Mr. 

Speaker — a list that we are proud of. The Blakeney government has proven again that it is strong, that it is 

competent and that it is responsible and that it is due for re-election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— This is a Budget which I am proud to support and one that I am sure the people of this 

province will support. The opposition, both Liberals and Conservatives, have stated that they will oppose it 

and that opposition, Mr. Speaker, will tie a knot around their political necks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall support the main motion and oppose the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton):— Mr. Speaker, first of all before I begin my main speech I would like to 

take a few minutes of my time to introduce a member of Parliament from Yorkton and my colleague there, 

Lorne Nystrom, at the back of the House. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE CONTINUES 

 

MR. NELSON:— I would like to take, Mr. Speaker, as my theme for today, the following: that the reality is 

so often different from how it appears to be or how things are so different from the way the opposition tries 

to make them out. For example, Conservative and Liberal statements about the budgets are drastically 

different from those which anyone else has made about them. Both parties are trying desperately to make 

things seem somewhat different from what the reality really is. By knocking this Budget these two old 

groups are trying very, very hard to make themselves seem perfect in the eyes of 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

258 

 

the voter but every Saskatchewanian knows that there is nothing in this world that is more perfect than a 

Conservative or a Liberal who is found in the opposition in a Legislature or Parliament. 

 

Out of government, man it is just amazing what either of those parties would be able to do if only the voters 

would just vote them into power! But the Saskatchewan voters are just a little bit more sophisticated, Mr. 

Speaker. The voters here know that when those parties are elected to power, the little imperfections start to 

creep in. The people of Saskatchewan have had some bitter experience with the Liberals in that way from 

1964 to 1971 and they have decided on that score, but the Progressive Conservatives are newer in this House 

and we need to examine their image that they are trying to put forward. 

 

In Manitoba, for example, during the election there the Progressive Conservatives there said that they would 

reduce taxes if only the voters would vote them into government and the Manitoba people bit at that lure. 

They got hooked, Mr. Speaker. They vote out the best government that Manitoba ever had and they brought 

the worst government in that was possible. Now that the Progressive Conservatives are in power, those little 

imperfections that I spoke about before are starting to creep in — how those things were made to appear just 

a little bit different from the reality before. Once they were elected the Progressive Conservative government 

in Manitoba ran into trouble. Suddenly taxes could not be decreased. In fact, they might just have to be 

increased. There was a mess, said Sterling Lyon. Agreed — there is a mess. Sterling Lyon was made the 

premier and that’s the mess. 

 

Mr. Lyon said it would take years to straighten the mess out. Yes, I agree — four years, just long enough to 

get another NDP government elected back into Manitoba. Now that the Progressive Conservatives here in 

Saskatchewan are in opposition they are trying to gloss over those, oh so slight imperfections that appear any 

time either of those old parties form a government. 

 

The Conservative Leader, Mr. Collver, was in Yorkton last Friday; he is not here today but he was in 

Yorkton last Friday trying to make realities seem something other than what they are. I would say from what 

I heard that he tried very, very hard to make the proverbial sow’s ear look like a silk purse. Only the 

Progressive Conservatives could accept such an illusion. 

 

One of their speakers said that Randy Nelson had told an untruth in the Legislature. They said that Nelson 

said that a Progressive Conservative government would charge $10 a day deterrent fees in hospitals. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, all of us here heard the member for Eston Elrose say that — a front bench member, Mr. 

Speaker. We saw him rise in this House and we heard him say people in Saskatchewan would pay $10 a day 

to get into hospitals. It’s strange that everyone here but the Progressive Conservatives heard him say that. It’s 

strange how the Star Phoenix and the Leader Post reported the same statement. And what did Mr. Bailey 

mean by that statement? We have to examine those statements closely to see what they mean, Mr. Speaker. 

You also have to look at the performance in Conservative provinces to see what those remarks mean. Let’s 

look at a few of those statements. 

 

Speaking at a Conservative nominating convention in Prince Albert on January 12, 1977, Mr. Collver said, 

that governments should say, no, to people, to peoples’ needs. He said, and I quote: "I am sorry, we can’t do 

it." That is what he said, we can’t do it. "Could you arrange to look after yourselves?" he said. What did he 

mean by that, Mr. 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

259 

 

Speaker? 

 

Let’s look at another statement that he made in Yorkton last Friday night and echoed by the third-rate choice 

for agricultural minister in their caucus, for Moosomin, echoed yesterday by that member. He said that the 

NDP Government has programs, programs, programs, programs. I guess he means that we are wasting 

money on those programs, Mr. Speaker. I guess he means that those programs should be cut out. 

 

Watch out Saskatchewan! We had better look to see what programs the PCs would cut out. Let’s look at 

what the Conservatives did in mineral rich and industry rich Ontario. How did the PCs there make people in 

Ontario look after themselves? Why, medicare fees, as we have heard in Ontario now are charged at the rate 

of $528 a year for a family. That’s making people look after themselves, Mr. Speaker. Ten dollars a day 

deterrent fees, $528 a year medicare fees, that’s how you look after yourselves, people of Saskatchewan, if 

you vote Conservative. 

 

That is one way the Conservatives would end this business of a government spending money on programs. 

You and I would have to spend it while their friends would get off with great tax concessions and tax cuts. 

Oh, but that is not us, say the PCs. They say that they are concerned about people; they say they are 

interested in people, but it is obvious, Mr. Speaker, which people the PCs are interested in protecting and 

helping. It is obvious which people they are concerned about. 

 

The Ontario PC government is collecting $975 million in corporate income tax. It sounds like a lot, but it is a 

huge province, but they will take $1,120 million in medicare premiums, Mr. Speaker. They will take almost 

half as much again in medicare fees as they take in corporate income tax. That’s making the ordinary person 

look after himself, Mr. Speaker, while the PCs look after their special friends, the resource companies, etc., 

etc. That shows, Mr. Speaker, which people they are concerned about. 

 

The PCs tell us how much they would do for the senior citizens if only they could be voted into office. But 

remember senior citizens, you would be the ones who would be paying those exorbitant medicare fees too. 

 

Now, what is another program that is a waste of money? What is another program that could be cut? What is 

another way that they could make people look after themselves? Why, they could cut that new revenue 

sharing program for municipalities! 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton got an increase of 59 per cent in unconditional grants through the revenue 

sharing plan. A 59 per cent increase certainly sounds to me like what Mr. Collver would mean when he said, 

we waste money on programs. That must be what Mr. Collver meant when he said people could look after 

themselves, after all the PC government in Ontario left the municipalities there to look after themselves. You 

see while Yorkton got a 59 per cent increase in grants, the PC government made a 6.5 per cent increase in 

grants to their municipalities. That is much less than the inflation rate. The increase to Yorkton was nearly 

10 times as large as the cities received in the so-called free enterprise, Conservative Ontario. Yet the so-

called free enterprisers say that our increase wasn’t enough. 

 

What do they want? The whole provincial Budget? They say that we spend too much money but yet they say 

we don’t spend enough money on them and what they want, typical of the so-called free enterprisers. 

 

But what does that 59 per cent increase mean to the taxpayers of Yorkton? Why that’s 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

260 

 

an increase of $194,060. Mr. Speaker, Yorkton’s unconditional grants now total $523,059 and in 1971, the 

last time there was a so-called free enterprise government in Saskatchewan, Yorkton got the princely sum of 

$23,000 in snow removal and police grants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much, much more that I would like to have said and there are many other remarks that I 

would like to have made on the quality of the Budget put down by our very competent government in 

Saskatchewan but I see I have run out of time. I must say, though, that I will certainly be supporting the 

Budget and I shall be opposing the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce):— Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure and a sense 

of pride that I rise to participate in this Budget Debate. 

 

This government has always been a people’s government. It is no more evident than in the Budget Speech 

delivered last Tuesday. I join with my colleagues in offering my congratulations to the Minister of Finance 

for the contents and delivery of his Budget Address. 

 

There is indeed something for all Saskatchewan residents in this Budget — a $52 million reduction in 

personal income taxes, a $4.5 million increase in property improvement grants, a $4.5 million reduction in 

automobile premiums, a $6 million package including tax cuts to assist small business and industry, a $2 

million increase in Saskatchewan Income Plan benefits for senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, this is a responsible 

thoughtful Budget. Unemployment and inflation are problems that do exist. We haven’t buried our heads in 

the sand hoping that the problems will go away. We have tackled these problems because we face our 

problems head on and because we have had the foresight to plan for the economic fluctuations which occur 

in our agricultural-based economy. We can provide benefits for our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is willing to meet its responsibilities. We are prepared to do our part for our 

province and for our country. Saskatchewan, for example, requires federal policies which will assist us to do 

the following: to stabilize and diversify our agricultural base; to develop and upgrade our mineral resources; 

to generate secondary manufacturing to diversify our industrial base; to improve employment opportunities 

in rural areas and for our native population and to deal with longstanding transportation inequities, not on the 

basis of user pay but on the basis of a transportation system that will assist us in realizing our developmental 

potential. Saskatchewan for its part is working with the federal Department of Regional economic Expansion 

to promote development in this province. A number of the development agreements are now in place and 

negotiations are under way for additional agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is prepared to do its part to help recover the economy of Canada. The upgrading 

of heavy oil and the development of other energy resources in Saskatchewan can provide jobs to reduce 

national unemployment and energy to help Canada’s balance of payment difficulties. 

 

Saskatchewan’s steel industry is capable of producing a significant amount of pipe required for the Alcan 

Pipeline. Moreover the development of Saskatchewan’s manufacturing potential in industrial fermentation, 

agricultural processing, wood 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

261 

 

products and other types of resource upgrading and import replacing industries will provide further 

employment opportunities for Canadians. 

 

The new provincial Budget shows that the government of Saskatchewan is also prepared to cut personal 

income taxes, increase expenditures on capital projects and stimulate housing to provide job expansion. The 

government’s development objectives are to diversify Saskatchewan’s economic base, to increase resource 

processing within the province and to foster the industrial and commercial development of all sizes of 

centres in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have taken a big step towards achieving these objectives. The Saskatchewan economy has 

turned around during the 70s. Our economic performance since 1971 has indeed been very impressive. Mr. 

Speaker, the record speaks for itself but we must continue to work towards the economic diversification, 

balance development and new job creation. We must continue to build on our strengths, our natural 

resources, our skilled labor force and our managerial expertise and our central location in the West. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government has recognized the important large role played in particular by 

small business people in the development of this province. This province provides small business men and 

women with an excellent environment. Saskatchewan has no succession duties or gift tax, no corporate 

capital tax, no provincial amusement tax, the lowest auto insurance in Canada. After the reduction just 

announced by the Minister of Finance, we have the second lowest rate of corporate income tax in Canada for 

small businesses. As well the Saskatchewan Department of Industry and Commerce offers a number of 

services and programs for small business people including one of the most extensive business counselling 

services in Canada. In addition the government’s purchasing policy favors local industry to the extent that it 

is practical. 

 

For example, the Department of Industry and Commerce has been working on a plan to ensure that furniture 

used in provincial government offices is manufactured by various Saskatchewan firms. These Saskatchewan 

firms will be provided with basic designs and prototypes and will be invited to produce furniture made from 

wood products. Too often in the past, Mr. Speaker, we have seen similar work go to firms in other provinces. 

The plan could be extended to other products used by this government. Is it little wonder given this favorable 

climate that small business in both commercial and industrial sectors have thrived in recent years. 

Nevertheless the provincial government has recognized the need for new incentives to support Saskatchewan 

businesses. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan business people are hard working and resourceful. In communities of 

all sizes they have provided important services through good times and bad. Firms manufacturing electrical 

products, clothing, farm implements and a wide range of other products have grown up in Saskatchewan and 

are helping to build an industrial base and create new jobs. At a time when agricultural business has slowed 

somewhat and there is additional pressure on the industrial and commercial sectors, I welcome the new 

initiatives to support the Saskatchewan business community announced a few days ago by the hon. Walter 

Smishek, Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, five unique, new programs have been included in the 1978-79 Budget which are designed to 

support the development expansion of Saskatchewan based business. These programs are the Small Business 

Interest Abatement Program, the Saskatchewan Small Industry Development Program, the Management 

Development Program, the Product Development Program and the Saskatchewan Main Street 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

262 

 

Development Program. In announcing details of these new programs at this time, I want to make clear this 

government’s intention to co-operate with the Saskatchewan business community to ensure further economic 

prosperity in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, interest rates in recent years have been very high and undoubtedly have discouraged many 

business people who otherwise might have expanded their existing businesses or who might have established 

new businesses. The objective of the Interest Abatement Program is to stimulate business activity by 

reducing the interest burden on small businesses which obtain term financing to establish new operations or 

to expand or upgrade existing operations. This will be done by paying an interest abatement grant directly to 

the borrowing business to offset a portion of the actual interest paid on term financing, obtained for the 

purposes previously mentioned. Thus, the effective rate of interest paid by these businesses will be reduced. 

 

With the exceptions of farm and businesses engaged primarily in the activity of lending money, most small 

Saskatchewan businesses, with annual gross revenues of under $500,000 are eligible. Most term loans of 

$1,000 or more, which are used to establish a new business, purchase an existing business or purchase fixed 

assets to expand or upgrade an existing business, will be eligible. 

 

For eligible businesses located in centres with populations in excess of 6,000 people, the program pays a 

grant sufficient to reduce the effective annual interest rate on the loan by 2 per cent points, up to a maximum 

rate rebate of $250 to any one business in any 12 month period, on any one loan over a 36 month period. 

 

For eligible businesses located in centres with a population of less than 6,000, the program pays a grant 

sufficient to reduce the effective annual interest rate on the loan by 4 percentage points, up to a maximum 

rebate of $500 to any one business, in any one year on any one loan over a 36 month period. 

 

The program applies to term loans obtained by eligible businesses after April 1, 1978. Application forms for 

the Interest Abatement Program will be available at all chartered banks, credit unions, trust companies or 

similar financial institutions in Saskatchewan. We are receiving excellent co-operation from these 

institutions with regard to this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many outstanding examples of Saskatchewan manufacturing and processing firms 

which have started small and today are successful businesses growing stronger each year. Mr. Speaker, the 

objective of the Saskatchewan Small Industry Development Program is to encourage and assist the 

modernization, expansion and establishment of Saskatchewan manufacturing and processing industries. The 

Department of Industry and Commerce will provide interest free forgivable loans to eligible firms. Loans 

will be available to incorporated Saskatchewan firms for qualifying projects costing up to $100,000. For an 

existing firm to be eligible its average annual sales must be under $500,000 based upon the two most recent 

years of operation. The forgivable loans will vary in the amount based upon their location. For Regina and 

Saskatoon, these firms, the loans will be 25 per cent of the approved cost to a maximum of $10,000 per 

project. For firms in locations other than Regina or Saskatoon with a population of more than 6,000 people, 

the loan will be 30 per cent of the approved cost to a maximum of $12,000 per project. For firms 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

263 

 

in locations of under 6,000 in population, the loan will be 35 per cent of the approved cost to a maximum of 

25 per cent per project. 

 

The loans will be dispersed in two stages. Eighty per cent will be paid following commencement of 

construction or following installation of equipment and the final 20 per cent will be paid following 

commencement of a commercial production. Provided that the loan recipient has carried on business as 

planned, half of the loan will be forgiven one year after the final loan disbursement. The second half will be 

forgiven two years after the final loan disbursement. Applicants must have at least 20 per cent equity in the 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, technical assistance to Saskatchewan manufacturing firms can play a vital role by improving 

management skills in assisting product development. Management and product development will allow 

Saskatchewan firms to be more competitive and to expand more quickly. Under the Management 

Development Program assistance will be available under one of the following four options: 

 

1) Hiring of management advisors to identify ways to improve operation of a firm or to help make 

significant operations corporate decisions the department will provide a maximum grant of $3,000; 

 

2) Direct counselling from the department, when available; 

 

3) Various levels of financial assistance, depending on the location, for managers attending approved 

seminars and courses; 

 

4) Participation in seminars organized and underwritten by the Department of Industry and Commerce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Product Development Program, financial assistance will be provided to 

Saskatchewan manufacturers by Industry and Commerce for the following purposes: 

 

1) The development and/or the design of new products; 

 

2) Upgrading the quality and design of existing products; 

 

3) Prototype or process development; and 

 

4) Meeting certain testing requirements. 

 

For these purposes, assistance will be provided up to 50 per cent of the cost to a maximum of $10,000 of any 

one project. The department will not assist any firm with more than two projects during any one calendar 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of smaller communities are experiencing difficulty in maintaining a stable economic 

base. Their downtown cores gradually grow older. Improved transportation systems have shrunk the distance 

to the nearest large community which probably has a new shopping mall. 

 

The government believes smaller communities, which represent an alternative lifestyle for many people, will 

continue to play an important role in the economic and social development of Saskatchewan. Many of these 

communities are agricultural service 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

264 

 

centres providing the rural area with vital commercial and social facilities. 

 

The Mainstreet Pilot Project was implemented during the summer of 1977 in four towns; Leader, Carnduff, 

Saltcoats and Porcupine Plain. The project was evaluated, and has shown to be very successful. 

Consequently, I am very pleased to announce that the government will proceed with a province-wide 

Saskatchewan Mainstreet Development Program which will provide funds to businesses in eligible 

communities and to the town itself, to improve the appearance and viability of Saskatchewan towns. 

 

The Mainstreet Development Program will assist communities with less than 6,000 population. The program 

will provide consultative services and grants to offset the cost of physical improvements. Merchants can 

qualify for up to 50 per cent of the cost of storefront renovations to a maximum of $500. Grants to merchants 

will be administered by the Department of Industry and Commerce. 

 

Communities can receive per capita grants for improvements to public areas. These grants will be 

administered by the Department of Municipal Affairs. Despite the remarkable performance of the 

Saskatchewan economy in recent years, we cannot afford to grow complacent. Inflation, long range energy 

needs and unemployment are national problems which we in Saskatchewan must do our part to solve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new provincial Budget shows that this government is serious about tackling these 

problems. The reduction of the corporate income tax rate for small business from 12 to 11 per cent will save 

small business people nearly $3 million in taxes. The five new programs I have just described will provide a 

further $1.4 million in assistance. 

 

Given the incentives in the new provincial Budget the five new programs and the reduction in the corporate 

income tax rate for small businesses — I am confident that the business community of Saskatchewan will 

play an even greater role in the future economic development of the province. These programs are an 

indication of our desire to assist and promote the small business community. My department, Mr. Speaker, is 

continuously looking for ways and means to help small business and industry prosper in Saskatchewan and I 

am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the business community will welcome our approach towards a brighter future. 

Mr. Speaker, with those remarks, you will understand that I will be opposing the amendment and support the 

motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to rise at this particular time 

and to add something to the Budget Debate. I am going to use the words of the minister who has just spoken 

when he said there was something for all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. I hope to show this afternoon 

that indeed the Budget that is before us has a lot to be desired by many people in Saskatchewan and, Mr. 

Speaker, at the very beginning I want to single out in particular one industry in this province, a very 

important industry, an industry that is going to grow in its importance over the years, an industry that by the 

year 2000 will be even more important, perhaps, than it is today, an industry, of course, which has always 

been a Saskatchewan problem! And I am referring to the transportation industry in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say this: That if the government opposite can persuade the trucking industry in this 

province that there was anything in this Budget for this very important industry, I would like to hear them in 

the days ahead come up with some proof. 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

265 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the weekend I wanted to point out and I wanted to do some research on this particular 

topic to be absolutely fair, to be absolutely fair to the private independent trucker operating out of Saskatoon 

and the private independent trucker operating out of the cities of Alberta. Now we have heard a lot of 

comparisons, Mr. Speaker, in this House during this Budget Debate and so what I did was phone around and 

get some costs. Each private trucker then was to purchase a new unit and I found out that there was very little 

difference in the price of a new unit. Each of them bought a new Kenworth tractor, Mr. Speaker, at a cost of 

$50,000. But, Mr. Speaker, the man who buys the tractor in Saskatchewan, of course, pays 5 per cent, so 

automatically this means that he has $2,500 more to pay for his equipment than does a trucker operating out 

of Edmonton. And so I phoned around to see what an average run during a year would be. An average run 

was around 110,000 miles a year, Mr. Speaker. All companies and all trucks concerned, truck companies 

which I phoned, indicated that loaded, empty, winter, summer, they average in the neighborhood of five 

miles to the gallon. That’s the same in Alberta as it is in Saskatchewan. 

 

But here we come into a very important and significant expense, which is directly labelled at the trucking 

industry in Saskatchewan, a deliberate attempt by this government to keep the freight rates hauling fertilizer 

to the small rural communities, hauling the weed sprays to the small communities at an all time high. 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, imposes upon the transport industry, the trucking industry, a tax of 26.5 cents a 

gallon, which, Mr. Speaker, is the highest of any province in Canada. If you compare that to Alberta of 12 

cents a gallon it is little wonder that the goods going out to rural Alberta in the way of fertilizers, weed 

sprays and what have you get to their destination a lot cheaper than they do in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both of these units will use 22,000 gallons of fuel during the year’s operation. Now if you take 

just the difference in the tax alone imposed by the governments we see a difference, Mr. Speaker, of $3,212 

just in that one area alone, which an independent trucker must pay to this government to operate in this 

province. 

 

I phoned to get the key lock price of fuel in Saskatoon, the very cheapest I could get. The key lock price of 

fuel in Saskatoon, the cheapest I could get — there is a difference, Mr. Speaker, of 20 cents a gallon. So the 

overall cost in increased petroleum to bring the transportation to rural Saskatchewan costs a Saskatchewan 

trucker at the end of a year’s run, $4,400 more in Saskatchewan than in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister who just spoke previous to myself said that this was a responsible and a 

thoughtful government, let him go tell that to the transportation industry in this province. When he said that 

it was something for all Saskatchewan residents, let him go tell that to the transportation industry in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge this is the only government in Canada that does not have a transportation 

policy, a government which probably puts in a smaller percentage to the building of highways than any 

government in Canada. 

 

MR. JOHNSTON:— That’s a lie. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— No, it isn’t a lie. Deny it all you like. Let’s go on in the industry. 

 

At about 90,000 miles, Mr. Speaker, both trucks are going to have to replace all tires. Basically there wasn’t 

much difference in the price between Edmonton and Saskatoon and we are only going to replace the tires on 

the tractor unit itself. This can be done for a 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

266 

 

cost of approximately $1,800. But again, the Saskatchewan trucker must pay the 5 per cent, which makes it 

another $90,000. So I looked also to the cost of licences, registration and insurance and I asked both to give 

me the licence, the registration, the bond and everything else that goes with it for an 18-wheel unit, licensed 

at 18,000 pounds. To the surprise, perhaps, of the members opposite there was little if any difference and all 

it would have amounted to in the cost in both provinces was somewhere in the neighborhood of $2,700 with 

something like $8 difference. So we can say that is a negative amount and we won’t count it. 

 

What I am trying to say, Mr. Speaker, is that the private man operating a truck on a run in Saskatchewan 

bringing goods out to rural Saskatchewan, the difference at the end of 12 months operation is in the range of 

$7,000. I have not, Mr. Speaker, taken into account the fact that we have lower weight restrictions in 

Saskatchewan which brings the profit down of the Saskatchewan operator. Of that $7,000 difference, Mr. 

Speaker, there is $5,802 which goes directly to this government. So, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite 

stand and read their well-prepared speeches with such clichés as responsible and thoughtful, something for 

all of Saskatchewan residents, you’re going to have a very difficult time taking that to the transportation 

industry, the trucking industry in this province. Go tell that to the people who must bear the cost of your 

thoughtlessness in waging a war against private industry in this province. This government ought to be 

ashamed, ought to be thoroughly ashamed, of the manner in which they are treating the transportation 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Who pays for this? Who pays for this, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan have to pay for it. The 

farmer who wants a load of chemical fertilizer from the plant he ends up paying for it. The person who has 

ordered in advance his fertilizer needs for the spring, he is going to pay directly to the truck driver who in 

turn simply handles the money and turns over to this government $5,802. Mr. Speaker, that in effect, is just 

one single truck. So when you talk about a Budget being thoughtful, when you talk about a Budget being 

responsible, you haven’t even begun to touch the needs, particularly of rural Saskatchewan, who depend so 

much on the transportation of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to get into another topic, a topic which I consider to be of great importance. The 

government continues to announce capital expenditure programs. I am going to suggest to the government 

the money they are about to spend is going to be spent in the wrong way. I wish there were more ministers 

here to listen to what I have to say. Let’s suppose that you have $10 million that you are going to spend in 

one of your pet government capital expenditure programs. The short-term effects are there; I’ll admit that. 

Everyone will admit that. Go ahead and build yourself another mammoth skyscraper, another gigantic office 

building. No one will deny the fact that it has a short-term effect. It brings labor there, it brings contractors 

in — many of them come from out of Saskatchewan, by the way — and for a short term you have an input 

into the economy. What this government opposite forgets is that when you have finished the building you are 

not just finished. You have to have furniture for the offices, you have to provide the building with heat and 

lights and, of course, you have to staff them. So, in the long run, your capital expenditure project in this year 

1978 could well turn out to be a detriment to the government ten years down the road. Yes, even less than 

ten years, even within two years. 

 

Let’s see how that same amount of money could be spent on the Saskatchewan economy, to not only bring 

you the short-term effects but to bring long-term effects to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, during 

the early 1950s most of the schools in Saskatchewan were under construction at that time. It has been 

approximately 25 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

267 

 

years since the major school building program in Saskatchewan took place. All across Saskatchewan at the 

present time, local government boards such as school unit boards are facing mammoth projects, a great 

amount of money that they require to bring these buildings back to their original state, particularly in the debt 

for roofs. 

 

Now the minister of Education, the former Minister of Education, got up in this House and made a big 

speech about the government grants to roof some schools. I first thought it was good until I found out that 

nobody could qualify for it. Let’s say you took the $10 million and you went to local governments such as 

school units and said, look, you are going to have to have a major renovation program, you have roofs that 

need to be fixed, you have the structural part of the building that needs to be looked at. So you put out the 

money to the local governments, you employ the same number of people and, therefore, you stimulate the 

economy just the same way as if you are building a large government office. Overall, the long-term effects 

are there with you because the local governments don’t have to go out and tax the people to draw in this 

amount of money to bring about the necessary repairs to local government buildings. 

 

I know from experience, Mr. Speaker, that part of my Budget at the present time just in repairs alone, to 

bring the buildings up to a satisfactory condition amounts to more money, Mr. Speaker, than the 7 and I 

emphasize 7, than the 7 per cent increase in grant which my jurisdiction received, not 11 per cent, 7 per cent. 

There is a fundamental difference, Mr. Speaker, between those who believe in the system of free enterprise 

and those who believe in propagating a strange socialist philosophy upon the people of Saskatchewan. Let’s 

take the money to where it will do the most good and let’s take the money to where it will have a long term 

effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to mention another topic about government expenditures. I want to suggest to the 

Minister of Education, and while perhaps I have some sympathy for him this afternoon, I do not have any 

sympathy, Sir, for some of your planned projects and some of the projects which are going on at the present 

time. Oh, you’ll hear me all right, every word of it. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have, and your Department of Continuing Education has purchased a number of films 

which I understand are being used at the present time and have not been used in my particular area but they 

have been used throughout Saskatchewan. And whether they are on loan to the Community Colleges or not, I 

can’t say, perhaps you can answer that question. I’m not too sure as to the source of these films, but I would 

like to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that I am not against such films being shown, providing that somebody 

else has put up the money, but if you are going to take the taxpayers’ dollars of Saskatchewan. Not only to 

those who perhaps are adhered to that party opposite, but to people who aren’t particularly fond of that brand 

of socialism, and to distribute to Community Colleges such movies as Who Pays The Profits, which is an 

introduction to the multinational corporations, and Hard Times In The Country and its multinational and 

food production. 

 

I wonder what difficult time the Minister would have in being able to go to the people of this province and 

justify your expenditures in the purchase of these films to spread or propagate your own political doctrine in 

a very cowardly way. Ah yes, Mr. Speaker, and the final one is multinationals, multinationals and home 

politics and they have done a film up as a portrait of a multinational and they have put beside their Cargill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps if you were sole bent in your desire to destroy a system which has brought us where we 

are today, and that is a system of free enterprise. The free 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

268 

 

enterprise system in North America puts food out to people cheaper than any other system in the world and 

it’s always very noticeable, Mr. Speaker, that when you come to the people and you come to this House and 

you show them their deliberate attack on the private industries such as trucking, how nervous does he get 

sitting there. They do not like for someone to look into their intrinsic desire. You know you can talk all you 

like about the support to private business. The minister in charge of SPC when I ask him the question in the 

House, he said he would guarantee no more than 8 per cent increase in natural gas to private residents, but he 

would not stand, he would not say that he would guarantee no greater than 8 per cent to private business. He 

would not make that commitment, he wouldn’t make a commitment that he wouldn’t increase the price of 

natural gas more than 8 per cent to the curling rinks, the skating rinks in Saskatchewan. He wouldn’t make 

that commitment that he wouldn’t increase it more than that to the institutions, your hospitals and schools in 

Saskatchewan. Ah, Mr. Speaker, the actions of the governments speak much louder than words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to another concern which is facing us in rural Saskatchewan and indeed in all of 

Saskatchewan, namely your capital expenditure programs, your grant programs and we will soon have to 

have a Department of Grants, just to look after the various types of grants. I’m wondering, I’m wondering, 

Mr. Speaker, if it would not be better for all governments, not only the government of Saskatchewan, but 

governments across Canada to get away from this type of taxation in which they tax the people heavily on 

one hand, handle the money for a while, then turn it back to the people in the form of grants. Now I’m not 

criticizing the grants, everybody has to have grants. Schools have to have grants to operate; hospitals have to 

have grants to operate. I’m wondering if governments, including this government opposite — and it’s a 

criticism I have of all governments — if we’re not getting too much in the way of manipulating people’s 

money for the sake of politics. Surely more and more people, more and more people, Mr. Minister, are 

viewing the grant structure as such. If you examine them across Canada, you can find some cases for the 

dollar that goes out in grants it has cost $1 to administer it. Right in this province we proved in this House, 

as I proved during the last session, during Committee of the Whole that one department, it cost them 50 

cents to administer every dollar in grants, right with this government. So you see, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

politicians in general are not placing enough trust in the intelligence of the people opposite. You can take 

from one pocket and you can give to the other but in the transaction there’s a few big crisp bills missing. The 

people are beginning to doubt that a great deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that I will not be supporting this Budget. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Minister of Revenue, the Minister for Municipal Affairs and the Minister of Highways, would take a 

good look at . . . . (Interjection . . . — What about me?) I only mention one industry, that you are really 

taking to task to the tune of $5,800 a year in direct taxes to that one single trucking firm. Yet you people . . . 

for every truck rather, not an individual firm, an individual truck . . . .Yet you people will do nothing about 

the highest tax rate on that trucking industry of any province in Canada, in a province which needs 

transportation perhaps more than any province in Canada, you saw fit to burden the people in this province 

with the highest taxation in that area bar none, of any province in Canada. This government should be 

thoroughly ashamed of that. 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek):— Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to speak in the 

Budget Debate and I wish the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) were here. I would like to thank him on 

behalf of the southwestern portion of the province for negotiating with the people in Ottawa and as a result 

will have the road to Fort Walsh 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

269 

 

upgraded during the next year. I am not quite sure yet to the extent that the work will be carried out, or 

exactly what they mean by upgrading, but certainly the rural municipality in that area who have been 

absorbing the costs of upkeep during the last few years will appreciate the fact that the road is being taken 

over and will be upgraded. I am sure also that the tourists who are visiting southwestern Saskatchewan 

during the next year will appreciate it as well. 

 

Yesterday as I was travelling back to Regina I had the opportunity to listen to three speakers opposite on the 

radio. I was really quite amazed. I was just wondering why they hadn’t compared their speeches before they 

began because there was almost an identical recitation I guess you might say, of all of the so-called promises 

that came out of the Budget Speech. Each one of them proceeded to itemize the same various tax cuts here, 

tax cut there, went through the list, itemized one by one. They made no mention of course of any of the 

increases. In fact the whole tone of the Budget has really amazed me when you take and read it. When they 

have a tax increase, say for instance in power, they said there will be no increase in power this year. If I 

remember correctly when I got my telephone bill in January there was an increase of about 17 or 18 per cent. 

The increase had already taken place and so, therefore, the rest of the year there will be no tax increase. Then 

the way in which the tax increase for Sask Tel was justified — they used the word ‘only’, there will be only 

an increase of 8 per cent for Sask Tel. 

 

Then you take a look at the next Crown corporation, or the section for natural gas — indicated there will be 

only 8 per cent increase. All increases, of course, being justified by using that term ‘only’. We began to 

wonder then when we have these increases of say 8 per cent exactly what that means to people who are 

negotiating with the government. When the offers are on the table there, I understand that they don’t 

approach more than the 6 per cent level. But when we have increases by government, 8 per cent seems to be 

justified. 

 

I think it was the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McNeill) who indicated that they were going to be building 

a new hospital in his area. He proceeded to say that of course medical care in Saskatchewan was being 

improved by the building of many new hospitals. I just began to wonder, is it the building of hospitals that 

improves medical care or is it possibly the number of beds? We have a hospital down in our area that was 

built for 44 beds. We have an occupancy ratio now of 19 point some beds that we have recognized under the 

ADC formula. It’s not the number of hospitals that we have; certainly the number of beds would be much 

more relevant than the number of hospitals. In our area we also, as I know in other areas of Saskatchewan, 

were very disappointed with the Budget, the announcement, or no announcement that there would be any 

recognition for Level IV care within the hospitals of the districts in which the people reside. We in our 

southwest still have to take our people to Swift Current when we have ample room right within our own 

hospitals to take care of them. 

 

I realize that with some of the rules and regulations that are set for Level IV care now, we may not have all 

the necessary equipment in the hospitals but I would also like to indicate that possibly some of the 

requirements that are listed for Level IV could be revised. With a revised rate it would certainly be much 

better if we could keep these people home, in the hospital, in the area in which they have been living all their 

lives. 

 

You heard the member for Shaunavon yesterday indicate also the same problem that he has in his area and 

we certainly would like the government, in future, to consider the establishment of Level IV services within 

the communities that have space in their own hospitals. In other words, we would like our Level IV people to 

be able to stay in our 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

270 

 

hospitals. 

 

I know the Minister of Health argues that the cost is prohibitive but then on the other hand, he is putting 

additional beds for Level IV care in other places. Once the capital cost is there, and you’re going to have the 

operating costs. I just cannot see the reason why this can’t be established. 

 

I recognized that in your Budget it says that there would be some increased benefits but I don’t think you’ve 

ever indicated that we were going to be able to keep our Level IV people. In fact, I recently read a letter that 

came from your office, dated this month, which indicated the fact that the hospital boards could take some of 

their beds that they’re presently using under acute care and transfer them over to Level IV care. Certainly 

that is a very unsatisfactory situation. The minister must realize that if you’re going to remove beds from the 

acute patients, then, of course, you’re going to be reducing medical care services in the area and certainly the 

hospital services. 

 

I also listened to the member for Regina Rosemont with certainly the very, I might say, discouraging story he 

had with regard to the person who was laid off after 35 years of service with the Canadian Pacific Railway. 

As I listened to him, I began to think of what was happening in the area, and about the young fellow who 

came to see me, not more than a couple of weeks ago. He used to work at the Ingebright Sodium Sulphate 

Mine at Fox Valley. We might also remember what happened last fall here — I believe it was in the — or 

last spring at Bishopric. Here we have a sodium sulphate mine, a Crown corporation, owned and operated by 

the province of Saskatchewan, which employed 20 some people and what did they do? They closed the 

mine. What happened to 20 some people that were working? Some were offered transfers. Certainly Sask 

Minerals knew that some of these people, because of their situation within the community, couldn’t accept 

these transfers. Here we have, Bishopric closed down. Now what happened at Ingebright located near Fox 

Valley with a staff of 70 some people? You laid off 17. These people are walking now, in the streets of 

Maple Creek and Fox Valley and Golden Prairie; they’re young people without jobs. They’re just as destitute 

as your CPR worker. Who is responsible for this? Certainly it’s the government of Saskatchewan. They tell 

me stories about last year at the plant — they put in an evaporator that cost some $40,000; this year they took 

the cutting torches and cut the evaporator out. They can’t understand management that seems to be wasting 

money. They would like to have some justifiable reason for their dismissal. They feel that the government 

certainly has not taken them into consideration. We hear a lot about INCO and what INCO did in Ontario. I 

certainly don’t condone what INCO did in Ontario but you shouldn’t be throwing rocks if you live in a glass 

house. 

 

You’ve been doing the same things in your sodium sulphate mines. Just take a look at Ingebright. Take a 

look at Fox Valley. I can assure the members opposite that there aren’t that many jobs in that area. 

 

These people have one alternative. They’ve got to leave the area. They’re either going to have to go into the 

cities of Alberta or come into some of the cities of Saskatchewan hoping that they can find work. These 

aren’t all single people. These are married people, young married people with families, just turned out on the 

street. They got a notice, and wham — they were finished. 

 

The Minister of Mineral Resources and his $5 for senior citizens! I noticed that it indicated in the Budget 

that the program started in 1975 and the payment of that was $20. Now, three years later, what’s he giving 

them? He’s giving them another $5, five bucks, Minister of Agriculture, but what’s he taking on the other 

side? 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

271 

 

I just talked to an older fellow who had a power bill last year that was 30 some dollars and went to 40 some 

dollars per month. Already he ate up more than the five per cent or the $5 that the minister gave him. My 

goodness! Five dollars! The amount is really so low that it’s almost insignificant for these people. Then, 

what really bothered me is that when you take a look and the Budget indicates that all senior citizens that are 

single and are eligible, if they receive payments from the Old Age Security Plan, the Guaranteed Income 

Supplement Plan or the Salary Income Plan, the first two being operated by the federal government, they 

receive $3,433 a year. This is what the Budget states. They don’t make any mention of the fact that of the 

$3,433 per year $300 comes from the province and the rest of it comes from the federal government. If I 

remember correctly, the federal government’s programs both the Old Age Security plan and the Guaranteed 

Income Supplement plan have the COLA clause built right into the plan, the cost of living clause. Every 

three months there is a revision, as the cost of living goes up so goes the benefits to the plan. What do we get 

here? Five bucks and we wait three years to get it. Five dollars in three years. Then we are concerned about 

people, we are concerned about the old senior citizens — particularly the Minister of Education with his 

sanctimonious sort of holier than thou approach his, in that speech and voice as it came across the air waves 

in Saskatchewan. I just couldn’t understand how a man could really ridicule and poke fun at other levels of 

government and other governments within this province when the record of this government is such that they 

give five bucks over three years to senior citizens in this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STODALKA:— We have also heard in the Budget some of the increases that have been allotted for 

education. Most of the school boards in the province of Saskatchewan haven’t had time to complete their 

budgets and will be doing so but I can tell the Minister of Education right now what has happened in one of 

the school units in our area and he can take a look at the Leader School Unit. I am sure the minister has 

received representations from the people who are living in that Leader School Unit. 

 

Last year the Leader School Unit employed 80 teachers, a staff of 80 teachers. This year they have indicated 

to towns within their community that they are going to have to do some staff cutting. They simply indicate 

that the funds are no longer there to carry the staff that they had in the past years. They have gone to all of 

the villages and the towns within the school unit and have indicated to each of them what their staff cut was 

going to be. I would just like to inform the members opposite that they are indicating that they are going to 

be cutting 10.5 teachers out of a staff of 80; 10.5 teachers out of a staff of 80, that is the cut that the Leader 

School Unit has taken to its people. They have given the reason. The reason they have given to these people 

in the Leader School Unit is certainly a lack of funds. They cannot support — agreed the enrolment is full — 

what has been the effect of this cut of 10.5 teachers? 

 

Take the town of Mendham; they have been told that they shall no longer have a high school, their high 

school is going to be closed. The village of Prelate has been told that next year its high school will be closed. 

Lack of funds, it can’t operate. These are the things. They have gone to each of the schools and I have a great 

deal of sympathy with the school unit board that had to make these cuts. The funds weren’t there and they 

had to make some very, very difficult decisions and I can assure you that because of the lack of funds they 

are the ones what have to go out; they are the ones that have to face the public; they are the ones who receive 

the animosity of the public when the amount of tax is not as substantial as it should be. 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

272 

 

Again today, we had some questions for the Minister of Education, and it is too bad that he is not here. We 

had a little rally around here by the students from the university. Just to review some of the facts about 

university tuitions here in Regina and a similar pattern in Saskatoon, why are they here? I would just ask the 

members opposite to compare the university tuition fees in the colleges in Manitoba, compare the university 

fees and the colleges over in Alberta and average them out and see what they are. I will assure you that if you 

do this you will find that these students are paying $114, approximately $114 more per student. 

 

Now what effect is this going to have, $114 more? Most of our universities now would like to keep their 

enrolment up. If you were a young person in Saskatchewan who had an opportunity or wished to go on to 

university and you were having one of the problems of being short of funds, where would you decide to go 

next year? Would you stay in a university in Saskatchewan, one in which you have the luxury of paying $114 

more or would you decide to seek an institution elsewhere? Most other costs of living would probably be 

identical and certainly I think you can see these university students have a grievance with the government 

because of the fact that they are not giving enough financial aid to the universities. 

 

The minister says grants went up 10 per cent but 10 per cent of what? This is the question, 10 per cent of 

what? It is easy to say grants went up 10 per cent but clearly it is not sufficient. You can’t say that the Board 

of Governors at the university are mismanaging. If we have to charge over $100 more than they are charging 

in the neighboring provinces there must be something wrong. There must be a shortage of funds. Why don’t 

we do it? I don’t know whether you are aware that if we abolished tuition fees in the province of 

Saskatchewan entirely, if you abolish the tuition fees entirely, Mr. Member for Rosemont, it would cost 

about $10 million. Do you know how much your support for education has fallen in the last number of 

years? You have fallen by 3 per cent, about 3 per cent of the total budget of this province. If you want to put 

that in the level of the terms of the total budget then and the total Budget now that is about $54 million less. 

If we had to retain the same percentage of funding for education that we did in ‘71, there would be $54 

million more available for education than there is now. What did you do with this $54 million? As I 

indicated earlier the total cost in 1976 of all university tuition fees was $10 million. 

 

There is another area in which I personally can’t justify and would like the minister to probably comment on 

and that is the difference in fee structure between the technical institutes and the universities. If you enrol in 

a technical institute, the one in Moose Jaw, or in Regina or Saskatoon, the sessional fee is approximately 

$138 per semester. If you double $138 per semester that’s about $276. So we have the technical school 

students paying $276 per year in situations in which the enrolment of the classes are not 150 as they are in 

some of the university classes; in which you certainly have a lower per pupil/teacher ratio in the 

undergraduate classes, a situation in which you don’t have near the cost of some of the equipment that has to 

be in these facilities, then why are they paying $276 and yet the students of the university are expected to pay 

$570 plus last year. I understand this to be a 9.5 per cent increase placed on top of that. Why? These are 

things that certainly there seems to be some level of discrimination as to why one student, one post 

secondary student received a much greater support than does the other one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other things that we could say about education and certainly we are going to reserve 

them until such time as we have the Estimates in the Department of 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

273 

 

Education. 

 

In conclusion I again would like to mention, I think you can see from my comments I will not be supporting 

the motion to adopt the Budget but will be supporting the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.R. KOWALCHUK (Melville):— Mr. Speaker, like all members on this side of the House, it is a 

proud moment for me to be able to rise in this Budget Debate in support of the budgetary proposals, which 

by the admission of many members even from the opposite side, are good, are positive and popular. One 

would think it is an election year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague the Minister of Finance is to be commended for this Budget. It is a responsible 

document, and reflects without doubt the confidence we share in terms of the economic growth and stability 

of this province. I have listened to numerous budget debates made in this House, budget speeches, through 

my four years in opposition and my seven years on the government side, but never, Mr. Speaker, I say 

‘never’ have I witnessed such a weak, listless and totally inadequate examination of a budget as that 

performed by the Budget critics, both Liberal and Conservative. But, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t surprise me, 

nor did it surprise any member on this side of the House, and I am certain that it didn’t surprise the press nor 

will it surprise the people Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, it was a top-notch Budget, bold, forward-

looking, imaginative, progressive and practical steps taken by the Finance Minister — if indeed..let me 

repeat if expected by these opposition critics it nevertheless caught them flat-footed and so disoriented that 

they were left stuttering and reaching for words. And why not, Mr. Speaker? They never dreamed that a 

Budget could be or would be produced so bold in scope and so fitting for the times. 

 

If you, Mr. Speaker, or any Saskatchewan citizen watched the TV performance of these so-called critics, 

Liberal and Conservative, on the late night news on March 7, you wouldn’t have had to have the sound 

volume turned on at all to recognize the floundering performance. These critics were merely talking, they 

really had nothing to say and that what they said carried no force or conviction. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOWALCHUK:— The expression on their faces told all, Mr. Speaker, particularly the Conservative 

critic. As already mentioned today, the newly recycled member for Thunder Creek, who looked like he had a 

job to do that was most distasteful. From the dazed expression on his face, Mr. Speaker, he looked as if he 

had been poleaxed, as indeed he had been by this NDP Budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOWALCHUK:— The Liberal critic for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner) at least had the good sense 

to admit what even the most obvious could see, the strong points of the Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is more than a bit interesting that Saskatchewan should move ahead with cautious optimism 

at a time other provincial governments are cutting back from this program, slashing that budget, restraining 

that expenditure and raising that tax. It makes me proud to be associated with a government which has the 

foresight and determination to disregard this cloak of despair and frustration and meet the 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

274 

 

challenges of the day with positive action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right across Canada we have the same story. The federal Liberal government through its 

inaction and arrogance, has admitted it doesn’t have the answers to inflation; has admitted (and it can’t help 

but admit) to record unemployment, and to many other obvious ills plaguing this nation. In the Maritimes we 

keep hearing about the frustration they face. In good old Conservative Ontario all we hear about is an 

incredible 37 per cent jump in health premiums. There were tax cuts for the multinationals like INCO but for 

the common people elimination of the sales tax on storm windows, Mr. Speaker. Those of us who were here 

and remember Thatcher’s Liberal budget of 1968 when some 1,100 new and increased taxes were imposed, 

the tax cuts were dramatic, Mr. Speaker, if you recall. Taxes were taken off buggy whips and turkey saddles 

in that budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Conservative Ontario who in last week’s budget burdened the Ontario sick with an astounding increase in 

medicare premiums of $528 per family of three, took off the burden of taxes for the common man in the 

purchase of storm windows. How reminiscent of the Saskatchewan turkey saddles of 1968. 

 

In good old Conservative Manitoba residents are finding out very quickly what it means to be living under a 

policy of protracted economic restraint, much to their sorrow. 

 

Even in the mecca of Tory Alberta things are not so rosy with rising mill rates and reduced educational 

budgets. And from across the mountains, British Columbia residents continue to pay the price of having a 

so-called free enterprise government which does not have the fortitude to bring forward the kind of policies 

and programs necessary to revitalize a sluggish and despondent economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I challenge anyone, including members opposite, to go before the public and condemn these 

budgetary proposals contained in this Budget. Mr. Speaker, this Budget really poses a dilemma for 

opposition members. They know they have to find fault somewhere, but they can’t seem to get a handle on 

what to say, what area to attack, what part to ridicule. 

 

As I have already indicated, the member for Thunder Creek’s analysis of the Budget was disjointed and 

illogical, if you want to call it that. Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that the Conservative Party is having a 

difficult time improving their credibility when they consistently show their ineptitude when it comes to 

matters of finance. Of course it is not necessary for me to lecture the Leader of the Conservative Party about 

finance; his record is there for all to see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a fundamental principle underlines the general approach followed in this Budget. At a time 

when everyone says, "Hold the line", "Tighten the purse strings", "Cutback" and so forth, this government 

sidestepped this approach in favor of policies and programs geared towards stimulation of the economy. Yes, 

but that means deficit financing, says the Liberals and the Conservatives. Of course it means deficit 

financing, Mr. Speaker, and so it should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard opposition speakers, Conservatives and Liberals saying that they disapprove of 

deficit financing. The member for Moosomin said in debate yesterday, "We (the Conservatives) disapprove 

of deficit financing." Typical Conservative disregard for people, particularly people who are vulnerable to 

the perplexing 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

275 

 

economic disparities and inefficiencies that affect them — the unemployed, those on fixed incomes, the 

aged, the young and so on. Typical right wing solutions, Mr. Speaker, do nothing; apply in strict rigidity the 

principles of the so-called free enterprise system. They say the free market place, fully backed by these 

Conservatives, will take care of all these ills. What a charade, Mr. Speaker! What a hope for our humanity of 

the province and of the country. The Conservative record of free enterprise in the free market place in all our 

western history has repeatedly proven that all it was capable of doing in an economic crisis such as we in the 

western world are now experiencing, was bringing stagnation, depression, hunger and starvation. And yet 

today we have once again the free enterprise Liberals and particularly the Conservatives once again 

attempting to foist on the unsuspecting people the same old arguments that somehow the free market place 

will solve the economic problems facing the country today. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, what a hope! 

 

If ever there is a need for deficit financing by governments, it is now. Not like the Conservative province 

who deficit finance in good times, Ontario is a good example, they deficit financed all the way through and 

then not having an alternative have to continue deficit financing in difficult times. Mr. Speaker, many 

Saskatchewan industries, many Saskatchewan professional and trades people would still be here in 

Saskatchewan today adding to its economic strength and many of our urban and rural communities would be 

stronger and more viable today, if in the late ‘60s and early ‘70s the Thatcher government would have been 

less concerned about a balanced budget. Yet, Mr. Speaker, yes, Mr. Speaker, there are times to save and 

there are times to spend and create a deficit and Saskatchewan has shown how and when this should be done. 

Mr. Speaker, how was this possible? How was it possible for any provincial government in this day and age 

to drop personal income taxes, increase homeowners grants, drop the corporate income tax for small 

business, generate 5,800 new jobs, reduce auto premiums, improve grants to senior citizens, pump more 

money into municipal governments, health, agricultural and education? How was this possible? Mr. Speaker, 

six or seven years ago we couldn’t have done it. If the Liberals were still in power it wouldn’t have been 

done and it wouldn’t have been possible to be done. If Conservatives had been sitting in these benches it 

wouldn’t have happened. Then we ask why this New Democratic government was able to do it? Mr. 

Speaker, the answer is found in two different areas. One, our policy respecting resource development and 

secondly, our rejection of the free enterprise policy that to get the economy rolling give all the breaks, all the 

incentive all the initiative to the private sector especially to the big boys. With regard to resource revenue, 

Mr. Speaker, when we formed the government in 1971 total resource revenues coming into the coffers of this 

province as we well know were less than $33 million. This year these same revenues will increase to $462 

million or more. Mr. Speaker, this is money that would not have been available today had it not been for our 

resource taxation policies, policies which members opposite so vehemently opposed and are still opposing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government had not had the determination to ensure that we got a better deal from 

resource development, we too would be faced with record unemployment, spiralling property taxes, hospital 

cutbacks, 37 per cent health premium increases and ruthless program cuts. 

 

Members opposite do not like to talk about it, Mr. Speaker, but the facts are before us. This Budget reflects 

our New Democratic Party commitment, it shows what is possible and it totally deflates the arguments of 

members opposite who say that we should never have become involved in the development of resources. Mr. 

Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind at all, that time will prove that the New Democratic Party was once 

again 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

276 

 

correct on the issue of resource development as we are doing. Mr. Speaker, whenever the Canadian economy 

is discussed, two fundamental problems keep rearing their ugly heads, inflation and unemployment. And the 

Budget addresses itself to these same problems. We in Saskatchewan are fortunate. We have more people 

working today than at any other time in our history. We continue to have one of the lowest unemployment 

rates in Canada, and yes I heard just last night on the news that we are equal to the unemployment rate of 

Alberta, rich oil Alberta; we are moving forward. This Budget will, when its full effect is reached, create an 

additional 5,800 jobs for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, that is an objective to be proud of. 

 

Inflation continues to rear its ugly head. Our across the board tax cuts to all Saskatchewan people will help 

dramatically in our effort to stimulate economic activity and retail trade. This $34 million back into the 

pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers will indeed have a positive impact. Mr. Speaker, this Budget’s attention 

to local government and property taxes is equally gratifying. By increasing property improvement grants, the 

new revenue sharing program, increased foundation grants to school board by over $20 million and so on 

and on. Mr. Speaker, throughout the whole Budget the message is the same. It can be done. Governments 

can fight inflation. They do have the capability to counteract the pressures which inflation inflicts and all it 

takes is commitment. 

 

Look what we have done for senior citizens, Mr. Speaker. Increased pension supplements, $3 million more 

for the senior citizens home repair program, and significant increases in grants to residents of special care 

homes. Mr. Speaker, something really to be proud of. The same can be said for our farmers. Even though 

yesterday the opposition tried to impugn that really nothing has been done. Agriculture has in the past and 

will in the future continue to play a vitally important role in the economic and social development of this 

province. I might add that this will continue to be the case despite Otto Lang, and maybe that problem will 

be resolved come next federal election. Mr. Speaker, the farmers today are facing a tough and a rough time. 

The record incomes of the last few years are but a dim memory. Grain and cattle prices are dangerously low. 

There is a degree of despondency in some quarters, yet as is the case with our farmers, they know that 

tomorrow is another day and tomorrow hopefully will bring better news. The government recognizes that 

farming today is a big job. It takes a lot of commitment. It takes a lot of money. Since assuming office in 

1971 we have done whatever possible to improve the stability within Saskatchewan agriculture. We have 

brought forward policies and programs directly aimed at this important segment of the population; programs 

that have repeatedly been said, such as Land Bank, Farm Start, plus a host of others. These have all shared 

one common ingredient to improve the agricultural economy, keep our family farms viable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no provincial government can do it all. It is a collective responsibility. I sincerely hope that 

when Trudeau’s travelling road show gets back to Ottawa, they remember what they heard when they were 

here. The Prime Minister said it was important for them to come out west. Mr. Speaker, that is right but it is 

more important for them to do something positive for a change. I shudder to think what will happen to the 

agricultural commitment, in particular, if we elect two more members from Regina Wascana and Regina 

South. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Budget again offers much needed assistance to agricultural Saskatchewan. Over $4 

million in new programs will be provided. Money spent on marketing and processing will be increased to 

close to $.5 million. Money spent on improving grazing lands will be increased by over 50 per cent and 

funds for research 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

277 

 

will be increased by $1.3 million. In addition to this, livestock programs will receive an increase of more 

than $8 million. 

 

I realize that I have not spent too much time detailing the many budgetary proposals contained in this 

Budget. However, I feel that it is important to review them in the general context. I again submit to this 

Assembly that this Budget would not have been possible without a New Democratic government, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not to be construed as a boastful statement but rather, as one based on record. If the people 

of Saskatchewan and the people of Melville constituency and other constituencies think for a moment that 

members opposite are capable of the same type of approach, they are wrong. Members opposite voted 

against our resource management policies. They dug their heels in and fought bitterly when we brought in 

legislation to protect our rightful position on oil royalty. They have gone out of their way to dismiss some of 

our social programs as frills and they have collectively joined in a chorus to tell us to stop spending. They 

say we should exercise restraint. What they are really saying is, on the one hand that we should spend more 

and on the other hand, that we shouldn’t increase Property Improvement Grants; that we shouldn’t give 

municipalities and school boards more assistance; that we should hold the line with pension benefits to 

senior citizens; we should let farmers fend for themselves as free enterprisers. Mr. Speaker, that is their 

position, Conservatives and Liberals. Make no mistake about it and I think the people of Saskatchewan will 

and do recognize that fact, Mr. Speaker, because I do not believe in such a narrow way of thinking; because I 

have confidence in this province and in its people, it is a great privilege to offer my full and active support to 

this Budget and my unqualified opposition to the amendment as was proposed. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue):— Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to participate in the Budget 

Debate. I congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Finance, for his presentation and the content of the 

Budget which was ably delivered on March 7 last. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the contributions, if they can be termed as such, from the hon. 

member for Thunder Creek, the Progressive Conservative financial critic (Mr. Thatcher). He sounded and he 

looked exactly like the Liberal financial critic in the Budget Debate one year ago. Mr. Speaker, in case the 

crowded galleries and the people in the House come to the conclusion that that’s strange, I would like to 

remind them that he was the Liberal financial critic one year ago. I did find one fact in his rather long and 

tedious exposition. He did admit that the federal authority in this country has followed a policy of constant 

deficit budgeting for some 20 years or more. He wanted the provincial Budget balanced, a fact, Mr. Speaker, 

which has occurred in 18 of the last 21 Budgets in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that budgetary surpluses would be arrived at and a budgetary surplus would occur, he 

wanted reductions in gasoline taxes and sales taxes and income taxes and every tax you could imagine. 

Trying to find any economic logic in the Progressive Conservative financial critic’s remarks, Mr. Speaker, is 

about as fruitful as attempting to nail a blob of jelly to the wall. The Liberal financial critic this year, the one 

this year not last year, criticized the New Democratic government for alleged failure to deal effectively with 

inflation. How realistic or valid is the hon. member’s criticism, Mr. Speaker? Anyone who has any training 

in economics knows that the Keynesian theory, simplistically stated, ensures that governmental authorities 

run surpluses in prosperous times and deficits in difficult times. That is a logical approach to stimulate the 

required economic activity when there is a downturn in the economy. 

 

The failure to do that, Mr. Speaker, clearly accentuates the cycles and the economic 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

278 

 

difficulties which ensue. In the fiscal years ending March 31, 1957, right through to the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 1977, the last fiscal end, 21 in total, there were 18 surpluses in Saskatchewan totalling $198 

million in round figures and there were three deficits totalling $28 million. I would remind the members 

opposite that that deficit of $22 that occurred a year ago would not have occurred had this government not 

paid out $31.5 million to the beef producers of this province. Now if they oppose to the payment of that sum 

of money to the beef producers you are obviously in trouble, then they have some validity in their argument 

with respect to the deficit that was incurred. 

 

Administrations headed by Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, yes, Ross Thatcher and Allan Blakeney, all 

have showed good sound physical responsibility during their periods of office. During the same period from 

1957 to 1977 inclusive, the federal government in this country produced 18 deficits and 3 surpluses for an 

accumulative deficit totalling almost $30 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a government expends in excess of its revenue flows, it creates some inflationary 

pressures in the market-place. That’s a foregone conclusion. Every truck, every tractor, every combine, every 

automobile, every TV set and a vast majority of all other manufactured goods purchased by Saskatchewan 

residents flow over our borders from central Canada or from overseas markets. 

 

There is, Mr. Speaker, simply no way any Saskatchewan government could protect its citizens adequately 

against those inflationary pressures created by the lack of good fiscal responsibility at the federal level which 

has occurred for the last 21 years. And, Mr. Speaker, that situation has not occurred merely as a result of the 

actions of the present Trudeau administration. The responsibility for that trend must also be shared by the 

Pearson and yes, the Diefenbaker administrations during their periods in office. 

 

One can, Mr. Speaker, be classified as an optimist or a pessimist and it is said that an optimist is as often 

wrong as the pessimist, but he’s happier during the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not have any burning desire to be classified in either of those camps. I want to assure this 

House that I am cautiously optimistic about Saskatchewan’s economic prospects for the remainder of the 

decade and on into the 1980s. What I really want to be classified as is a realist and I think that’s important 

for every member of this House to feel that he is classified in that category. The major responsibility and 

effort of any governmental authority should be funnelled toward attaining sustainable economic growth. 

Slower economic growth has severe implications — one of which is the impact on gainful employment. 

Failure to provide reasonable expectation of gainful employment will inevitably, Mr. Speaker, mean a return 

to the out migration patterns which we, in this province, experienced with such devastating effect in the late 

1960s and the earlier portion of the current decade under a Liberal government in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, statistical analysis of economic indicators is a primary prerequisite of good economic 

management. One must not only know why one is going in a specified direction but how to get there 

effectively and utilizing the available economic tools. Saskatchewan personal income in 1970 was $2.1 

billion. Last year it was $6.4 billion. It has more than tripled in seven years, an increase of 300 per cent. No 

one can effectively or honestly argue that that is not well above the inflationary rate. Construction 

expenditures have risen from $475.6 million in 1970 to $1.5 billion in 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

279 

 

1977, again, more than three times in dollar value. Private and public investment have risen from $864 

million in 1970 to $2.8 billion in 1977, again, Mr. Speaker, more than a three-fold increase. The net value of 

commodity production from 1970 to 1977 has risen from $1.4 billion to $3.8 billion. Now that is a bit less 

than the three-fold increase but that occurred after a significant downturn in the agricultural economy in this 

province, related not to production failure but to price failure there was a significant decline of $438 million 

in that particular year. I want to stress, Mr. Speaker, that that downturn did not occur because of production 

failure, it occurred because of price failure. We rarely ever suffer production failure. 

 

Opposition members, Mr. Speaker, are well aware that the government of this province cannot control price 

levels in international markets. In 1976 in this province we had the largest crop in our history and of the best 

quality in our history, yet farm income that year on a net basis dropped from $1,471,000,000 in the preceding 

year down to $1,148,000,000, a drop of $323 million. An additional drop occurred in terms of net farm 

income between 1976 and 1977. Our estimate is that the net farm income was down to $905 million at the 

end of 1977. Although the final statistics aren’t as yet in, it will likely be very close to that particular figure. 

That again represents a further decline of $243 million. Members of this House should adequately be aware 

of the fact that when farm income, dropping not because of production failure but because of price failure 

within a two year cycle is dropped to about 50 to 60 per cent of its volume in the preceding two years, that 

creates problems in relation to the financial position within this province because, of course, agriculture is a 

basic industry. We anticipate farm cash receipts will exhibit some improvement in 1978. Nevertheless it’s 

likely that the net farm income will again decline in the current year, simply because of rising input costs 

which cannot be controlled within the province. Most of those costs are imported. Realized net farm income 

may well show a further decline in the current year. However, Mr. Speaker, before anyone adopts too 

gloomy an attitude with respect to those statistical facts they should look at the fact that the realized net farm 

income in the year 1970, the last year we had a Liberal government in this province, was $222 million. That 

would be about one-quarter of the realized net farm income in this province in the current year and would be 

approximately one-seventh of the 1975 net realized farm income, the best year ever experienced in our 

agricultural history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural community, indeed the entire Saskatchewan economic community, has some 

stabilizing factors in co-operative and credit union movements. The Wheat Pool has distributed in excess of 

$120 million in patronage refunds since 1973 within this province. I doubt very much if most of the 

members of this Assembly were simply aware of that fact. The Federated Co-operatives have a consumer 

retailing system and have added millions more to the purchasing capability of Saskatchewan communities. 

Credit unions are approaching handing handling 50 per cent of the banking business and supply hundreds of 

millions of dollars per year of reasoned home based credit for the commercial life of our communities. 

Assets of the credit union movement in the province now exceed $1,750,000,000. Currently, Mr. Speaker, 

agriculture, our basic industry, as I have previously indicated, is suffering some cyclical downturn not 

because of production failure but because of price failure. That fact, in turn, affects the construction industry, 

another major factor within the provincial economy. Yet construction remains relatively buoyant. One might 

well ask the question, why? The fact, and I hope the opposition members are alerted to this, is simply 

because the governmental authorities of the province of Saskatchewan have exhibited sufficient good 

economic sense to advance public projects from the drawing boards to construction projects as the impact of 

cyclical agricultural downturn occurs. That is a fact of life. What has made it possible for the government to 

take this 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

280 

 

approach? 

 

Mr. Speaker, two reasons predominate. Resource development when measured in value of production has 

had a four-fold increase in the last seven years and the indicators point to a continuation of that trend. In 

addition, Mr. Speaker, despite severe criticism, the central government authority in this province has had the 

economic good sense to increase revenue flows from resources, not three-fold in line with the general 

increase of the provincial produce but a fourteen-fold increase in seven years, from $33,000,000 to 

$462,000,000 — an increase of more than 1,400 per cent. It has been that base which has permitted a fiscally 

responsible stance to be maintained in the budgetary process in this province even in difficult inflationary 

times. 

 

Realistically, we should acknowledge the evident national and international economic storm clouds. They 

are there and to ignore them will not prompt them to go away. The key point is for us to realize that a 

getting, grasping economic philosophy in our world of the ‘70s is a recipe for economic botulism and that in 

fact means economic demise and death. What is needed is a caring and a sharing economic order. The 

opposition may well reply that that is an idealistic interpretation of economic need. In my view, Mr. Speaker, 

they are wrong. Bluntly put, it is a brutal necessity which can no longer be ignored. 

 

In early Biblical history a group designated as Christians set up a society in which they shared and made the 

requirements of life available to the inhabitants of their community on the basis of need. Now you may argue 

that that was a naive approach. Orthodox theologians felt that while the experiment was laudable, it was a 

mistake. I doubt if it was a mistake. I think we have been committing economic errors ever since by failing 

to adopt at least that central approach. We, in fact, make the mistake, Mr. Speaker, of permitting what we 

term enlightened self-interest, which in reality is imply another word for selfishness to operate our social 

system. 

 

Production, it is becoming increasingly and more readily apparent and is only satisfactory if it can be 

satisfactorily distributed. Practically speaking, we must seek out that sharing economic order in which co-

operatives and credit union have a major role to play. Until we do, we are not likely to have a world where 

every child will have enough to eat, a place to stand with dignity, and a capability of being unafraid of the 

dark of night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the main remarks to the Assembly that I would like to give at this particular time in 

the Budget Debate. However, I would like to digress briefly and make some response to some comments 

made by the hon. member for Wascana last night when he promoted the idea of the government issuing a 

premium savings bond. This is a project that I think has some merit. In my view it makes some eminent 

sense. An individual investing in a premium savings bond cannot lose his or her original investment. The 

probability of winning a prize in a prize draw enhances the probability of retaining the investment in the 

scheme for a prolonged period of time. It provides the governmental authority with loans at low interest rates 

beneficial to all residents whether they purchase the securities or not. Great Britain has had a scheme of this 

nature since 1956. They have sold in excess of 3 billion pounds or about $6 billion in terms of Canadian 

money and they have retained and I get these statistics periodically, they have retained 2,206,000,000 or 66 

per cent of that investment over most of that period. Their retention rates are abnormally high. Similarly, 

successful schemes are in operation in New Zealand, Sweden and Ireland. We can learn from their 

experience. There are some problems, of course, for a province contemplating this type of a security issue. I 

note that the member last night held up a ten pound premium savings 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

281 

 

bond. I’ve had one of those for a long time, plus some more. I also have one of the New Zealand issue. I 

want to inform the members of this House, that on three occasions I have won prizes in that bond scheme 

and my actual return in relation to my investment, over the period of time I held it, has worked out to 51 per 

cent per year. Now that is not assured obviously in the sense that I might not have won anything. But the 

point that is important is the fact that with those bonds I cannot lose the original investment. It’s not like 

buying a lottery ticket. It’s totally different than simply going out and buying a lottery ticket. I personally 

have a real bias and I am quite willing to state this frankly and bluntly to anyone, I have a bias against lottery 

tickets and I simply won’t buy them, but this is a different approach. It’s a logical approach, it’s a reasoned 

approach. I stated when I began to make a few remarks with respect to this particular item that there is a real 

problem for a province to attempt to do that sort of thing. It’s related to the administration of the scheme. If 

you look at the people who have been successful in relation to this scheme it has been countries like Great 

Britain, New Zealand, Sweden and Ireland and they are all unitarian governments, they are not federal 

associations, they do not have provincial jurisdictions within them. That kind of scheme can best be 

marketed through a post office system and obviously there is merit in them doing it at that level. It should be 

noted that all those countries utilize their postal systems not only in terms of dissemination of information 

but in terms of sales promotion and redemption of bonds. Such a vehicle, of course, is not available to the 

province. I would disagree with the hon. member for Wascana with respect to such a scheme interfering with 

lotteries. I would hope it would; interfere with lotteries I would hope it would reduce the estimated $16 

million that people in this province now spend annually on lottery tickets. That in fact, Mr. Speaker, is one 

of the most regressive types of tax imaginable because it falls most heavily on lower income groups who feel 

they are in a poverty rut in any event and try to use that vehicle in an attempt to escape it. I welcome the hon. 

member for Wascana’s conversion to the cause. I hope he will keep it up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure it has become readily apparent to the members of this Assembly that I will oppose the 

amendment and support the main motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour):— Mr. Speaker, we agreed earlier that we would return to oral 

questions and it might be appropriate to do that in light of the fact that the hour is growing late. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Normally we would be dealing with a return to the business we passed over earlier 

today at a later time this evening. However, the members have requested that we return to it at this time. We 

will continue with the balance of the question period. The member for Moosomin. 

 

DEMURRAGE CHARGE 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the Premier. 

Yesterday in your reply to the ramblings of the member for Regina South (Mr. Cameron), you stated that you 

had spent the weekend in Regina and had in fact met with Cabinet Ministers. I would like to ask the Premier, 

did you in fact raise the question of the serious problem of demurrage charges on the west coast with the 

Cabinet or the Prime Minister while they were in last weekend? 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

282 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— I had a discussion with the hon. Mr. Lang on some transportation 

issues including the demurrage issue. I think Mr. Lang’s views on this are fairly well known. He regards it as 

a cost of doing business and that accordingly the cost in some sense has to be borne by the industry. I am not 

now reflecting Mr. Lang’s views, he will reflect those himself . . . (interjection) . . . I am quoting what I 

understood him to say on the radio, not anything he said to me in our conversations. He was on the open line 

and dealt with the demurrage question. Anyone who wishes to find out this view on the demurrage question 

can get the script of the open line. Suffice it to say that I did raise a number of transportation issues with Mr. 

Lang. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying then, Mr. Premier, that in fact that you 

believe that these costs should be reflected to the producers of western Canada and in particular our grain 

producers here in Saskatchewan? In light of the reply that you gave to me a week ago today when I raised 

this question in the House, you stated that you had been in politics 17 or 18 years. I wonder if you would not 

agree, Mr. Premier, that you have been rather ineffective in all those numbers of years in bringing about 

some effective changes to lower the costs of these high demurrage charges in the West Coast for our grain 

producers? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Yes, that indeed is accurate. Let me be clear when I am attempting to quote Mr. 

Lang’s views given on the open line show. I am not quoting the views of the government of Saskatchewan. I 

would have thought most members would have recognized that Mr. Lang is not a member of the government 

of Saskatchewan and that we have differed from time to time on issues, including the transportation issue. 

With respect to the matter of demurrage, I think the relatively higher costs of demurrage incurred in the last 

little while have been due to I believe, a lack of delivery, primarily by the railways, primarily by the CPR 

because of difficulties of getting cars in southern Saskatchewan. They attribute it to snow. I would have 

thought that snow would have been something that might have been anticipated in the winter in 

Saskatchewan but the CPR takes a different view. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— I just wanted to follow up the questions on education 

to the Minister of Continuing Education before he ran out of the Legislature in the middle of the question 

period. He brought up some rather extraneous issues like, SGIO and so forth. I would like to ask him why he 

believes that $500 million spent on potash — he doesn’t have $50 to give to university students. Is he aware, 

for example, that the tuition fees in the Saskatchewan Technical Institutions are $138 per semester. Last year 

the tuition fees in the University of Saskatchewan were $584. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Per semester? 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— No, for the year. I didn’t say per semester. If the Premier will listen carefully, he 

will get the answer. I would like to ask the minister if he realizes that the university enrolment in the 

province has remained relatively static as a result of these high tuition fees? Is there any deliberate policy on 

behalf of the Department of Continuing Education to encourage students into the technical field rather than 

the university field? I ask that in sincerity because certainly there is a great need for these kind of students. Is 

it a deliberate and conscious effort to direct students to the technical fields rather than the university level? If 

so, it would appear so and can he justify . . . 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

283 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order. 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— Can he justify the reason for it? 

 

MR. FARIS:— I don’t know which question the hon. member wants answered but I am sorry that he wasn’t 

here earlier obviously or wasn’t paying attention when I gave the House the information that the grants to the 

university sector in this province last year, in exceeding 10 per cent, were the highest percentage increase of 

any province in Canada. Perhaps he wasn’t aware of that. I also point out that the student aid which we give 

to our students in this province, whether they are going to universities or to technical institutes, was 

increased by the province from zero dollars under the government which you were a member of, to $1,800 a 

year. I can also say that in a very short time we will be announcing further increases in that kind of 

assistance. So we encourage students to make their free choice and those students who have the need are 

given very generous support in this province, certainly one of the most generous of any province in Canada. 

 

In regard to the university sector, the member has mentioned that there has been some slight increase in 

university enrolments and that’s very true. The fact is that the university enrolments peaked around 1970, 

declined for a while and have climbed up now until they are about, on a full time equivalent basis, something 

like 5 per cent higher than they were in 1970. During that same period of time, university faculty and staff 

have been increased by something like 28 per cent. So you can see that the funding, the support that in the 

last seven year period the university sector has received from this government has been more than adequate. 

They are being treated much more handsomely than they were under your government. 

 

Now the fact is, as I pointed out, that university students, technical college institutes, no matter what they 

happen to choose, are better treated on a whole in this province than any province in Canada. I give you the 

example, for instance, of car insurance. I know the members don’t want to hear this sort of thing but the car 

insurance rates here would be approximately $300. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order. These are getting into the habit of long questions and long answers and I 

would now observe that we have gone more than twice the period of time that we had set aside for questions 

and I see — are there any ministerial statements? 

 

STATEMENT 

 

HOME INSULATION PROGRAM — "WARM UP SASKATCHEWAN" 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— When the Budget was presented last week there 

was a general reference made to a new home insulation program for the people of Saskatchewan. This 

morning I unveiled the details of this homeowner conservation initiative called "Warm Up Saskatchewan". It 

goes without saying that energy conservation is a collective responsibility. The benefits of our action or the 

consequences of our inaction will be realized by all of us. This program is a positive response to one 

important part of our energy conservation initiative and contains a number of measured designs to assist the 

homeowner in upgrading the energy conservation qualities of his principle residence. 

 

We will be offering interest free loans of up to $1,000 to Saskatchewan homeowners. This money will cover, 

not only the purchase of insulation, but also a variety of other 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

284 

 

materials needed to prevent heat loss in the home. Homeowners can also use these loans to cover the labor 

costs of installing insulation materials. Participants will have up to 36 months to repay and, for the 

convenience of the homeowner, the loan will be repayable through the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s 

billing system. I would certainly encourage as many homeowners as possible to participate in this venture. 

Not only will the public save substantial sums of money in interest charges but, by improving the insulation 

standards of their homes, they will also get more out of their heating dollar. The money they save on their 

heating bills will help pay back the interest free loan. 

 

I might add that details of the loan program will be distributed to SPC customers during the latter part of 

March and early part of April. Once the loans are available non-SPC customers will be invited to contact the 

corporation’s district office in their area for more details. 

 

There is, however, another important part of this program. Beginning immediately community colleges 

across the province will be offering home insulation courses to the public as well as to insulation contractors 

and suppliers. This course is designed to assist the homeowner and the industry to be more fully 

understanding of the whole question of home insulation and its advantages. 

 

I feel that ‘Warm Up Saskatchewan’ will contribute to the overall objective we all share in terms of energy 

conservation in Saskatchewan. I can assure you that the provincial government has attached a high priority to 

this venture. That is not to suggest that it constitutes the sole thrust of our energy conservation initiative but I 

am confident that it will contribute most favorably to our long range conservation goals. In addition, this 

program will act as a stimulant to the economy providing manufacturing and labor opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people. And that, very briefly, is what ‘Warm Up Saskatchewan’ is all about and I am 

confident that the people of this province will respond to it. I am hopeful that we will all be able to derive 

important energy savings as a result of our ongoing commitment in this area. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I only want to respond briefly . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I think the members must realize that if the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) 

doesn’t rise he has missed his opportunity. 

 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— I realized I should rise but the time is after 5:00 o’clock and we 

could not have the opportunity to respond to the statement which was read by the minister until 7:00 this 

evening. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I think we should go ahead for the sake of continuity and try to respond to it now. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Do I understand you, Mr. Speaker, that you want to go on past 5:00 o’clock with a 

response to the statement? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I think the members should go ahead and we should . . . Order! Order! . . . I think we 

should conclude the item we are dealing with before we call it 5:00 o’clock. 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

285 

 

MR. BAILEY:— The thing, Mr. Speaker, which I ask if we could not be able to do it after supper is that we 

haven’t had a chance to read the statement, we haven’t had a chance to make a response other than the 

statements the ministers mentioned this evening. I think that’s highly unfair to a certain degree because 

normally we have an opportunity to do so. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I would remind the member that he is not speaking on the statement’s reason but he has 

attempted to make a point of order of some nature and I think the point of order is not valid, nobody has a 

chance to read the statement that I am aware of. The chance to respond is after the minister makes the 

statement. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— The minister has made a statement which he has called it ‘Warm Up Saskatchewan’ and 

in the statement itself there are a number of things and I hope that we would have an opportunity later to ask 

the minister some questions. For instance, I did not, in listening to the minister reading his statement have an 

idea whether this does include homes that are presently under construction. That’s very valid to young 

people of Saskatchewan who are presently building, are they going to be will they be permitted to take 

advantage of this particular program? Another question which I have, Mr. Minister, which was not answered 

in the reading of your statement was; will there be limitations according to the personal income of the 

individual, that is, is it only going to be those of say $10,000 on. Is it an overall grant structure? I mean the 

statement in itself left a lot of unasked questions which it’s fine to read the statement in the House but there 

are at least twenty questions which the statement leaves unanswered and if it’s going to be like a lot of 

government programs which you had before, for instance, the program to repair the homes of the elderly and 

when you get into it for a constituent to see if they apply, if they are eligible, then you find out that they are 

not. 

 

MR. MESSER:— Are you against it or for it? 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Certainly, I’m for it, but I’d like to know and I think it was proper that the minister in 

reading the statement to this Assembly should have given some details as to who is eligible for the support. 

If it is going to be like the federal insulation program it is going to be of little value to the people of 

Saskatchewan because it’s going to be a very select group and I wish that you had made this statement and 

been able to answer these questions at the time which you were reading the statement. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, my comments will be very brief. First 

of all I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s very appropriate that the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation introduced this bill, because now he is trying to warm up people because nobody can afford to 

pay for the natural gas, he’s raised the price so much. And, Mr. Speaker, I say that in all sincerity. He’s taken 

the thousand dollars that he has taken from the people that are paying their power bill, he’s doubled their 

power cost in the last year and really he’s giving them very little. But I want to say to the minister and to the 

government that I think that this, perhaps, has the sound of a good program. And I think that innovation in 

energy conservation, by all governments, is an essential feature in the next few years in Canada and in the 

world. I think the energy crisis has been brought home to us, very, very apparent. The Federal government 

has instituted this kind of a program — a different aspect and a different philosophy. It hasn’t worked as well 

as it might. And perhaps in concert with the federal or the national program, this program may make that 

program a more positive program. It may make people utilize that program much more than they do now 

because of the grant formula, from what I understand in the federal program does not 



 

March 14, 1978 

 

286 

 

very often, pay the total costs of the insulation requirements in homes in Saskatchewan and western Canada 

particularly because of the severe cold weather in Canada and the high insulation requirements. So that by 

taking the grant from the Federal government and also the interest-free loan from the provincial government, 

this may make it possible for the vast majority of Canadians who own older homes in particular, which were 

not built under CMHC requirements, with the insulation requirements that are now a part of the regulations, 

these people may be able to go out, provide the kind of insulation that their home is necessary to have. And 

perhaps it will make a contribution in the conservation of energy as well as making it a more comfortable 

home for people in Canada and in Saskatchewan in particular. I congratulate the government on this 

program. I hope it is successful. I hope it encourages people to take advantage of the federal program as well. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO BETTY JEAN BEGGS 

 

MR. KATZMAN (Rosthern):— Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I’d like to have the Assembly 

join me in congratulating a team that represented Saskatchewan at a youth championship in Toronto this 

week and one of the participants was the high point youth of Canada. At that show was a young girl by the 

name of Betty Jean Beggs of Estevan. It was the Canadian Quarter Horse Youth Championship; there were 

approximately 2,500 horses there. It is the second largest horse show in North America. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:00 o’clock to 7:00 o’clock p.m. 


