
























































Hansard: May 17, 1978


2943 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 17, 1978 

 
The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

MOTION 
 

Reports of Committees 
 
Mr. W.J. G. Allen (Regina Rosemont): Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Anderson, the member 
for Shaunavon: 
 

That the first report of the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers be 
now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 
Mr. M.J. Koskie (Quill Lakes) moved, seconded by Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): 
 

That the first report of the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations be concurred in. 
 

Mr. McMillan (Kindersley): As the seconder for this report, I would like to say that the report that is 
tabled in this legislature is an accurate reflection of those things that transpired while that committee 
met, but it in no way reflects the disappointment of those of us who sit as opposition members in the 
committee with not being able to deal with issues before Crown Corporations that are a little more 
current and perhaps a little more appropriate to discussion of a committee of that nature. 
 
The problem could no better be exemplified than by the Crown Corporations Committee we examined 
yesterday, Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, in which one complete fiscal year of 
operation of that corporation has transpired between the end of the year in review which we were 
perusing and the current session of the legislature today. 
 
We were more than two years behind in our questioning as a result of the fact that the report submitted 
was fur current to March 31, 1977. The questions that we wanted to put to the minister were restricted 
because of the fact that we were not allowed to ask questions in that committee in the year under review. 
I would like at this time personally and on behalf of the Liberal Opposition to lodge a note of 
disappointment and urge the government at the first opportunity (which it has not done in the past) to 
expand the terms of reference of that committee so that we may play a more meaningful role in the 
scrutiny of our Crown corporations on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): Mr. Speaker, responding to the comments made, I think that this year’s 
operation of the Crown Corporations Committee has indicated the total futility of the operation of that 
committee. The fact is that the government has, in the last several years, gone on a massive spending 
spree beyond the review of this Assembly. It became evident both in the Crown Corporations and the 
Public Accounts 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2944 
 

Committee. I think, to have the public have any opportunity to try to find out where literally billions of 
dollars are going, that that committee has to be totally restructured. The motion made by the hon. 
member for Yorkton, that this be passed on to Ottawa, the same system, I think, would make a mockery 
of parliamentary review of government spending. I think that that Crown Corporations Committee and 
its operation has made a mockery of our ability to review the expenditures, particularly in the resource 
industry. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): I only want to add a very small comment. A few years 
ago, one of the most significant improvements in the procedures in the Legislative Assembly in the 
province of Saskatchewan was the change in the method of handling Public Accounts. Those of you 
who were here a few years ago will recall that Public Accounts used to be handled in an identical 
manner to Crown Corporations. It was public, the press was there, it became a political debate; very 
little factual information was provided. It was then that a committee was struck of both sides of the 
Assembly; a year was taken to study it under the chairmanship, I believe, of the former Speaker’s father, 
Mr. Brockelbank, and Hammy MacDonald was the co-chairman. They came up with a report and 
recommendations which initiated the current Public Accounts procedure, which would be in camera, 
with a report whereby officials of the civil service can be called, can be questioned factually, as well as 
the minister himself. 
 
I would like to suggest to the Premier and the government that it is now time that the government of 
Saskatchewan call a special legislative committee of all parties in the Assembly, ask them to review the 
procedures of Crown Corporations and come back with a meaningful recommendation so that this 
committee can fulfil its job on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E.L. Cowley (Provincial Secretary): Mr. Speaker, I want to make a very few comments in 
response to the members opposite. This is in essence partially a return to the debate which started off the 
Crown Corporations Committee this year; a debate in which I think members from both the opposition 
parties participated. 
 
First of all, with respect to some of the comments of the member, Mr. McMillan, for Kindersley, with 
respect to timing in that the Crown Corporations Committee, like the Public Accounts Committee, is a 
committee for reviewing events that have occurred, annual reports which are there before it. The place 
for the debate or the discussion if you like, questioning of ministers with respect to current activities of 
Crown corporations is in the question period in the House under motions, etc. I think that is as it should 
be and that the Crown Corporations Committee, like the Public Accounts Committee, has been and is set 
up to inquire into events that have occurred in annual reports that have been tabled in this legislature. 
 
I think it is also well to remember that the Crown Corporations Committee is a creature of the 
legislature. The terms of reference of the Crown Corporations Committee are not set by it but by this 
legislature. If one examines the review that takes place in other jurisdictions in Canada with respect to 
Crown corporations, the procedure used here, the opportunity for members of the opposition and 
members of the government to question and look into what goes on and what has gone on in Crown 
Corporations Committee, I think is unparalleled in Canada. And while one can always argue (and 
perhaps with some justification) that it needs to be improved, one looks at Ottawa where Crown 
corporations are virtually not under public scrutiny at all and they only 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2945 
 

come up from time to time, more or less at the whim of the government, before committees. That 
certainly is not superior but vastly inferior to this committee. If this system is some kind of a mockery, I 
don’t know how one would describe the system in Ottawa or indeed the system in other provinces. 
 
With respect to the comments of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, the suggestion that we 
restructure the Crown Corporations Committee along the lines of the Public Accounts Committee, the 
in-camera thing. I think that has some merit. I certainly will ask my colleagues to consider the comments 
and the suggestions of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. I think there is a great deal of merit to the 
suggestion. I don’t think it would matter whether we were in the opposition or the members opposite 
are. When you have a committee like the Crown Corporations Committee there is a great deal of 
political posturing that goes on as opposed to questions and investigations into the operations, whether 
they are being done in a wise and judicious manner, etc., just because of the fact of the type of 
committee it is and open to the press. 
 
Now, I think on the other hand (perhaps the members of the press would put this better than I would) 
there is an argument on their part or an argument on the public’s part, that they should be there to watch 
the proceedings as well. But on balance, I think that if one looks at this particular committee and 
compares it, as I say, with other jurisdictions in Canada, I think it stands up well in comparison. Now it 
may not stand up well in the view of the members opposite, to the ideal which they might see and there 
may indeed be some suggestions for improvement that could be looked at. 
 
Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): Mr. Speaker, responding very briefly to the Provincial 
Secretary, as a member of the committee, I would like t make one or two pertinent comments. Comment 
number one is that this is my first and last term as a member of the Crown Corporations Committee. My 
observation of one year is that it was a total waste of my time and everybody else’s time who was there. 
The committee is structured in such a way that the government is required to answer only what they feel 
may not be damaging to their political interests. Granted, some ministers are much better than other 
ministers and in many cases the Crown corporation that is up, the tone of the matter is determined to 
some extent by the minister and his flexibility. Some ministers, I would comment, were excellent, some 
were not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would comment in terms of the committee that if you are going to have a committee to 
look at a situation which, I suppose, is tantamount to what I have out at the ranch where you close the 
gate after the horses have run away, which is what really we are doing there, then, at least, give us some 
teeth. This committee has no teeth and consequently is of absolutely no value and I, frankly, see no point 
in ever it sitting again. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Allan: Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Nelson, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on Regulations be now concurred in. 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2946 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. M.J. Koskie (Quill Lakes): — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the House, I would like this 
afternoon to express a warm welcome to some 30 Grade Twelve students and their chaperones from 
Drummondville, Quebec. These students are here on an exchange visit with our Grade Twelve students 
at Muenster who earlier this year at Easter time spent some 10 days down at Drummondville. Today the 
Quebec students are accompanied by some of the Grade Twelve students from Muenster. Three of them 
that I notice there are Brian Dopler and Bill Ross and Darrel Beaver and their bus driver, Benno Cory. 
 
I want to say that this exchange was made possible by a federal grant known as Open House Canada. I 
think it is important in our times and in the particular time of Canada that students from various parts of 
Canada can have this type of exchange. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that on behalf of all members here 
that I want to again welcome them to the province of Saskatchewan. I hope that they enjoy their visit 
here to the legislature. I hope that they will have a safe journey home and that they will take back with 
them a better understanding of this part of Canada. 
 
I want to at this time, Mr. Speaker, call on the member from Kinistino who might be able to say a few 
words to these students in French. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): Monsieur L’orateur, aujourd’hui ca me fait plaisir de entroduire un group 
d’eleves de Grade Douze du Drummondville. Ils sont assis dans la gallerie a votre gauche. Comme ca 
me fait toujours plaisir a cause de mes parents vienne de la province de Quebec. Ces toujours proche de 
mon coeur guand il y a quelqu’on de la qui vienne nous visite. J’espere que votre visite ici va developer 
une meilleur comprehension des problemes entre Quebec at les autres provinces, parce que on veut 
toujours que vous restez avec nous. Aussi je voudrais dire que je souhaite que vous vous rejouissez de 
votre sejour ici. Je voud souhaite un bon voyage de retour. Merci pour etri venu. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: I believe there is a group of students here from Saskatoon Westmount who are just 
arriving in the Speaker’s gallery. They attend Bishop Klein School in Saskatoon. I understand there are 
60 Grade Eight students. I want to ask all members to join with me in welcoming these students from 
Bishop Klein School in Saskatoon Westmount constituency. I hope they have an interesting and 
informative day in the legislature and a safe trip back to Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Cancer Commission 
 
Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. I have 
here a letter that was delivered to your office yesterday and a related news 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2947 
 

article in today’s Leader Post in which a Dr. Mallik makes some rather serious accusations as they relate 
to the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission and the Blair Memorial Clinic in particular. Would the 
minister immediately implement a judicial inquiry into the whole matter of cancer care in Saskatchewan 
as the Watson Report does not have to be made public? 
 
Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): In short, Mr. Speaker, no I am not considering initiating 
a judicial inquiry. We have taken all the appropriate steps to inquire into the alleged difficulties at the 
Allan Blair Memorial Clinic and indeed the Saskatoon clinic. Dr. Watson has all the credentials to be 
able to do an adequate and excellent job for us. He has already begun his work. I am confident that the 
results of that will assist us in providing advice in anything we need to do as he may recommend. I want 
to say to the member opposite that Dr. Mallik’s resignation, as he may very well know, is not new nor 
surprising. Dr. Mallik has been threatening to resign for almost two years. To that extent, I think, 
probably it is helpful to the commission to know where it stands in this particular situation. If the 
member opposite wants to deliberately attempt to discredit the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic in the eyes 
of those people who may happen to use it, he may very well do that, that’s his choice. But I want to 
suggest to him, Mr. Speaker, that it is very much in keeping with an editorial in the Star-Phoenix of 
yesterday where it said the Tories spend all their time trying to pick at straws in order to try to make a 
haystack . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, Dr. Mallik is quoted as saying that if a member of his family had cancer, he 
would not take him to the clinic for treatment. I have here another letter sent to your office April 24, 
1978, which indicates there are 14 firings, resignations, or early retirements from the Blair Clinic since 
1976. Will the minister not admit that this is proof enough that morale and the general climate at Blair 
Memorial is in fact serious and that what we need is a juridical inquiry to sort out the whole mess. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, I have never suggested that there has not been some difficulty with 
morale. Indeed there has been. I would also like to assure the House that in the last several days and for 
the last week or so that that has been very significantly improving because of the steps that we have 
taken to try to resolve the problems that the member opposite talks about. 
 
Now I may also say as he points out in the letter that I received from Dr. Mallik yesterday in which 
certain allegations are made, that those allegations, most of them, are inaccurate. One of them deals with 
the high energy treatment facilities in Regina. I want to let the House know and the members opposite 
from the Liberal Party will know, that the high energy facilities were installed in the Saskatoon clinic a 
few years ago, on the advice of the medical staff of the commission. 
 
At that time it was decided by the commission that one would be installed in Regina at the Allan Blair 
Memorial Clinic when the need was there and when it was justified. The commission has received this 
request and it asked Dr. Mallik some time ago to provide documentation but up to the present time that 
has not yet come. 
 
Mr. Berntson: Is the minister now telling us that the prescribed medical staff of the Blair Memorial 
Clinic is now normally eight, as I understand it, and is the minister telling us that as of June 2, I believe, 
we will be sitting on three medical staff at Blair Memorial Clinic. Is the minister telling us that that is a 
significant improvement over the last 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2948 
 

week? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: I said there was a significant improvement in the morale because the staff at the 
Allan Blair Memorial Clinic appreciates the sincerity of the steps that we are taking in trying to meet the 
concerns that have been expressed to us. The member points out the number three, I don’t know where 
he gets it. With Dr. Mallik’s resignation, he will not leave until the 2nd of June, there is a vacancy of 
four people in the clinic. I have previously in this House referred to the recruitment by the commission 
for new staff; there has been that recruitment; there have been interviews and offers have been sent to 
four recruits and the commission is very optimistic that they will accept because they showed a 
considerable amount of interest in coming to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to also direct a question to the 
Minister of Health. Some two months ago I first introduced this subject of the Blair Memorial Cancer 
Clinic in the estimates. At that time the minister assured me there was no difficulty. Dr. Mallik makes 
two very serious accusations. The first one is that patients who are suffering from cancer in the province 
of Saskatchewan do not receive proper follow-up. Number two, that there is inadequate staff to provide 
proper care for cancer patients now suffering from cancer in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly 
at the Blair Clinic. Is that a fact, Mr. Minister? What is the government doing to try and improve and 
look after this state of emergency because cancer patients have to be treated now and, if you don’t 
follow up and have early detection, it can cost very many lives? What is this government doing and what 
is the Department of Health and the minister doing about it? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, there is every effort being made to assure that there is the necessary 
follow-up being made on patients who have or are receiving care at the clinic. There has, as I have 
indicated in the past, been some doctors put on contracts from private practice who are providing a 
service as needed. There are referrals being made to private practitioners, so the follow-up to the greatest 
extent possible is being provided. There is no denial of it, a shortage of three positions, one more in 
June. But also and the member should not neglect to point that out, a recruitment program which it 
appears will soon fill those four positions which are vacant. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Dr. Mallik also makes a second serious accusation that 
the Cancer Commission, because of changes in legislation introduced by the NDP government two years 
ago, now eliminates any opportunity for medical staff to have an input in the Cancer Commission 
themselves. He accuses the Cancer Commission of running a $5 million business with amateurs. In other 
words, that the Cancer Commission is inadequate; it lacks knowledge; it lacks experience to handle the 
problems of cancer treatment in the province of Saskatchewan. Is the minister intending to review the 
act, review the legislation and ensure that medical practitioners and those who provide the service will 
be included in the Cancer Commission to make those vital decisions that are required? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Well, Mr. Speaker, I deny that there is not an opportunity for input. Surely, the 
member opposite knows that in the operations of the Cancer Commission there is constant consultation 
with the members of the medical staff, with the medical director by the Cancer Commission and 
recommendations and advice are considered as directed to the commission. I know that there are also 
some allegations by some people, and I hope the member opposite is not tying himself to those 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2949 
 

allegations about the people on the Medical Care Insurance Commission being amateurs. Well, I don’t 
want to be associated with the kind of allegations that would say, for example, the chairman of the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission, Dr. Amies from Moose Jaw, or the Cancer Commission, or Dr. 
Rusnak from the Plains Health Centre in Regina - there are three positions in that commission - I, for 
one, would not want to be associated with the allegation that they are amateurs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: They are eminently qualified physicians who know a great deal about the field of 
cancer, who know a great deal about the field of medical health care and doing an outstanding job for 
the province of Saskatchewan and will continue to do that with the help of all of the people involved, 
including the physicians in question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: Mr. Speaker, would the minister not admit that the Blair Memorial Clinic has been a 
festering sore on health care in Saskatchewan for some two or three months and will the minister please 
remove his blinkers. The only amateur is himself and will he not admit . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: . . . his colleague, the Minister of Finance, and request the funds to provide the proper 
equipment, particularly in the field of radiology that has caused this resignation and one of the very vital 
factors in the complete breakdown of morale and medical services in the Blair Memorial Clinic and stop 
being stubborn and unplug his ears to the criticism of this House. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, I think it’s the member opposite who should remove his blinkers or 
unplug his ears. If he were only to be listening and wanted to be in any way rational about the comments 
and the questions he asks, he would have already recognized that every step that is available to us is 
being taken to resolve some of the problems that are apparent in the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic. In fact 
we have brought in someone from outside of the province to take a look at it and help us from doing 
that. There is not a shortage of equipment in the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic. There has never been a 
shortage of equipment in the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic and any equipment that has been requested 
has been provided as soon as possible. The resignation that he refers to is not based on the lack of 
equipment even though it may very well be alleged in that particular letter. So all of the assumptions that 
the member opposite makes are wrong and I want to again restate to this House that every effort is being 
made by the Cancer Commission and by the people involved with the clinic to provide the best possible 
care while we are going through this period in which there needs to be recruitment to fill the positions 
that are not filled at this time. 
 

Cable TV - Wiring of Condominiums 
 
Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of the Environment): Mr. Speaker, last Monday I took notice of a question 
from the hon. member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) concerning Sask Tel’s method of wiring 
condominiums. The hon. member raised three or four questions that I would like to reply to as briefly as 
possible. 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2950 
 

First of all, he asked if there is an internal dispute between Sask Tel and Cable Regina regarding the 
method of wiring condominiums. I want to assure the hon. member that Sask Tel’s method of extending 
coax cable to condominium units is to treat them as individual residences. In effect the drop will be 
installed and terminated in each separate residential unit. I want to assure him that this method was 
agreed to by Cable Regina at a meeting with them two to three months ago. Using this method only the 
subscriber requiring repair or installation service would need to be consulted. 
 
The second question he raised, is the Sask Tel method contrary to CRTC policy? Mr. Speaker, I want to 
assure the hon. member that Sask Tel’s method of wiring condominiums is not contrary to the CRTC 
regulations. CRTC has agreed to Sask Tel having ownership of the drops and the inside wiring is the 
responsibility of the licensee, using the hon. member’s example, Cable Regina. 
 
Thirdly, are there any problems between Sask Tel and Cable Regina on previously agreed to methods of 
wiring apartment blocks? The answer is an emphatic no. The method that will be used is that Sask Tel 
will terminate one drop in a central secured located in each apartment building and a panel is provided in 
this central secured location that provides a common access for all Cable Regina services with a separate 
common access for all CPN services will are to be installed by Sask Tel. There is no dispute. The 
method was agreed to two to three months ago. There are ongoing discussions with Sask Tel and Cable 
Regina. 
 

Saskatchewan Cancer Commission 
 
Mr. Lane (Qu’Ap): A question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health. I might advise the Minister of 
the Environment to be in the House tomorrow so that I can question him. But to the Minister of Health, 
you have received a list of the senior personnel and qualified personnel who have resigned or have been 
fired, dismissed or taken early retirement, which was sent to you some time ago by Dr. Mallik. 
 
The interesting thing, I suggest, is that this goes back to basically, 1976, that the problems have been 
going on in the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic and can the minister give any justification of why he has 
turned a blind eye to these problems that have been before him in a very serious manner for the last two 
or three years? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Well, Mr. Speaker, there has not been a turning of a blind eye. There was the 
Johnson Commission which made its report and regardless of what is alleged by some people, all of the 
recommendations except for some that are not possible to do for various reasons, all of those 
recommendations have been implemented. The government, either under my ministry or the two prior 
ministers before me, has followed up on them and has taken the steps that were recommended in order 
to improve the working of the Cancer Commission and the clinics for which it is responsible. Those 
things have been implemented and therefore there have been significant changes in the operation. 
 
The member mentions a list of people who have resigned or have been dismissed. I want to tell the 
member that not that many on that list have been dismissed - people in agencies, over years and you can 
go back ten years if you want, he will find have resigned and go to other occupations. The Cancer 
Commission and the people working in the cancer clinics are no different. Maybe in their most recent 
times there has been an unusual number, a larger number of resignations, I don’t deny that. But as I have 
said, we have as a government taken the appropriate steps to meet the situation 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2951 
 

and to do what we find necessary in order to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan are receiving the 
kind of services that they have a right to expect. 
 
Mr. Lane (Qu’Ap): A supplementary to the minister. Dr. Mallik has made a, what would be a very, 
very serious accusation and that is the lack of follow-up. I say that, if I may preface, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe it is statistically proven that those who have cancer that has been cured have a 10 per cent 
greater risk of a second type of cancer, 10 per cent greater than the average citizen. The lack of 
follow-up indicates that those people face potentially a very serious problem in the fact that the 
secondary cancer cannot be discovered. 
 
We had a debate in this Assembly approximately a year ago - we consider this more serious - would the 
minister join with me in having the Assembly call before the Assembly and give witness to the 
allegations made by Dr. Mallik, the director of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission before this 
Assembly so that we in the opposition and the government may get to the bottom of what is potentially a 
very serious health problem. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, no, I will not consent to that request by the member because he is 
undergoing a deliberate and malicious attack on the cancer clinic in his attempt, in true tradition of the 
Tory caucus, to discredit in the eyes of people who must utilize this kind of service, a very important 
service, which is difficult as the member well knows for people who find themselves in the 
circumstances where they get cancer. The member opposite, joined by his colleagues is not helping 
those kind of people by making allegations, Mr. Speaker, that he knows he cannot substantiate, that he 
picks up out of letters, that he picks out of newspaper reports. I think it is time that those members 
opposite had some sense of responsibility and stopped that kind of a deliberate and a malicious attack to 
try to mislead people and colour a situation to the extent that this does not exist. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: Mr. Speaker, I want to ask another question of the Minister of Health. Dr. Mallik 
makes another very serious allegation and I would like to ask the minister, would he not agree that it is 
not the members of the opposition who are attacking the minister or the cancer clinic, it is the doctors in 
medical practice who work there; not us. Dr. Mallik says that there is poor planning in the renovations 
under way and that the new equipment that is so badly needed and required, according to Dr. Mallik, 
that the specifications in the renovations are not adequate to include the new equipment when it comes 
and all the renovation money will be wasted. Can the minister comment on that; is that a fact or not? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: No, it is not a fact. It is absolutely not true. Mr. Speaker, the high energy facilities 
that are referred to in that letter have not been denied in Regina. That is a fact. But to date, as I have 
indicated earlier to another question, no solid request has been forthcoming from the clinic or from Dr. 
Mallik. Indeed, recently Dr. Mallik was asked by the commission to prepare a report (the commission 
asked) to prepare a report on the need for high energy radiation at Regina and to date he has not so 
provided or prepared that report for the commission, which asked for it. There is an expansion at the 
Allan Blair Memorial Clinic, which the members may be familiar with. The first phase of that expansion 
will be completed in September; in September the second major phase of that expansion will take place. 
In that expansion, all considerations and provisions are being made for the installation of the new 
equipment which may be necessary at a future point in time. I want to assure the member, that is not a 
problem, all that has been looked after. The suggestion in that 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2952 
 

letter is wrong. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that it would appear that 
everybody is wrong except the Minister of Health of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, would the Minister of 
Health also not agree that all the highly specialized health services in the province of Saskatchewan have 
severely attacked the government; last year it was the University Hospital in Saskatoon; this year it is 
the cancer clinics. Dr. Mallik makes another recommendation and I think it is a very sound one. He 
suggests that the Cancer Commission should resign, a new one should be appointed, to start with a clean 
slate. Anybody that has only three doctors left out of nine, because one is sick and completely incapable 
of providing the medical services that are required, completely incapable of doing the follow-up which 
is so necessary to the health of cancer patients, then it is time that the Cancer Commission resigned and 
resigned immediately . . . Would the minister agree? 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 
 
Mr. Berntson: Would the minister not agree that his confidence in the Cancer Commission is not well 
founded in light of the fact that it took upwards of 21 days for the staff at Blair Memorial Clinic to get a 
meeting with the Cancer Commission, after spelling out very, very serious allegations and suggesting 
that a crisis situation existed at the Blair Memorial Clinic? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: No, Mr. Speaker, I will not say that I have lost confidence in the Cancer 
Commission. The members know (maybe he doesn’t know) that in the legislation, as amended by this 
government, establishing the Cancer Commission as it pertains to the establishment of the Cancer 
Commission members, there is a turnover annually of members, because no one can serve beyond a 
certain period of time. As the times expire we will consider the membership on the commission. I am 
fully confident in the works of the Cancer Commission as it is now. I think it has done a good job. I 
think the member is wrong. I know the member is wrong in his allegations that everyone in the cancer 
clinic is attacking the commission. That is not the case at all. There happened to be two or three doctors 
in the cancer clinic - I know others have signed other letter who have made those kinds of suggestions, I 
just happen not to agree with them. 
 
Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, would the minister not admit that he has, in fact, lost control of the whole 
situation by virtue of the fact that when I brought this letter to your attention about a week ago, at which 
time it was 26 days old, you had not even been made aware of its existence? Would the minister not 
admit now that he has not been kept abreast of the situation with cancer care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: No, I would not admit that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. First of all, would the minister 
agree that apparently the government of Saskatchewan has a fixation on potash and power and oil to the 
heartless neglect of the medical requirements of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. MacDonald: I don’t know why you people find that so amusing because Dr. Weldon and Dr. 
Mallik and none of the other medical practitioners in the Blair 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2953 
 

Memorial Clinic found it amusing. Would the minister now also tell this House whether or not it is a fact 
that as of June 2 there will only be three medical practitioners at the cancer clinic providing service, 
according to Dr. Mallik, because one is ill? Can he tell us if he is willing now to sit down immediately 
with those medical practitioners who are there to provide some emergency services and to ensure that 
the patients of Saskatchewan are properly being looked after? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Well, Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to provide the member an assurance that 
appropriate emergency services will be provided because indeed they are being provided now. There 
have been doctors, private practitioners, who have been engaged by the Cancer Commission to provide 
the kind of service that possibly would not be provided because of the vacancies that exist in some of the 
positions. That is already in place, Mr. Speaker, and I am only too happy to inform the member of that. 
 
The member says there will only be three medical people on staff on June 2. That’s wrong; there will be 
five. It’s true there is one who is ill at the present time. I don’t know the circumstances of the illness; he 
may very well be back by then. If not, there is the contract with the private practitioners to look after that 
as well. 
 
The member also says the government neglects the health program because of potash and oil. I just want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, that if it had been them and had they not collected the oil revenues that this 
government did, they would probably be in a position on this side where they would be cutting out 
programs altogether because they wouldn’t have the revenues to pay for them. 
 
Mr. MacDonald: A final supplementary. Would the Minister of Health not agree that apparently the 
Minister of Health has a terminal case of neglect as far as cancer is concerned in Saskatchewan? Would 
the minister also tell us that Dr. Mallik also indicates that one of the real festering sores in the clinic, and 
one of the reasons for the lack of morale, which is so serious in the clinic, has been the firings of certain 
members of the clinic, one that he refers to specifically and the demotion of others. 
 
Can the minister tell the members of the House that the dismissals and the demotions and the removal of 
certain medical people in the cancer clinic was at his instigation or at the recommendation of the Cancer 
Commission itself? Can he tell us that? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Well, maybe the member has sat on the opposite side of this House for too long, Mr. 
Speaker. He seems to forget how the Cancer Commission operates. The Cancer Commission operates at 
arm’s length in the government and the Cancer Commission employs two personnel who work in the 
cancer programs of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Cancer Commission, such as Dr. Amies and Dr. Rusnak and others determines who is hired, who is 
fired and who is promoted and that is what they have been doing, Mr. Speaker. I, as the minister, 
certainly have had no involvement in that, nor do I have any intention of having any involvement in that, 
otherwise why have an independent Cancer Commission, Mr. Speaker. That is not the way this 
government operates. Maybe that is the way his government used to operate, or the Tories over there 
might operate, but we don’t believe in that kind of an operation. 
 

MOTION FOR PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Re Blair Memorial 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2954 
 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the PC Opposition): Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion, that 
due to the comments of the Minister of Health, today, that an emergency situation does exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, order! 
 
Mr. Collver: I have asked for leave, Mr. Speaker, to put a motion and I would like to place the motion 
and see if leave is granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: Could the member give me a moment, please? Could the member make the motion, 
please? 
 
Mr. Collver: Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion, which I am certain that all members of the 
House will support: 
 

That this Legislature pursuant to Section 25 of The Legislative Assembly Act command and compel 
the attendance before this Legislature of the chairman of the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission, Dr. 
D.R. Amies to assist this Legislature in determining whether a serious health problem exists, as a 
direct result of the many resignations from Blair Memorial. 

 
I move, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson). 
 
Leave negatived. 
 
Mr. Collver: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: Does the member have a point of order? 
 
Mr. Collver: Yes, I do. The point of order is quite simply this. I didn’t hear the members opposite say 
no. I didn’t hear anyone say no. I wonder if Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, order! It is necessary for me to hear members say no if leave is not given. I heard 
members say no, therefore, leave is not given. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE - DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES - VOTE 23 
 

Item 1 continued 
 
Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): Mr. Chairman, a question to the Minister of Mineral Resources with 
respect to the on again off again development of the heavy oil plant at Lloydminster. I would like to ask 
the minister very simply where it is? 
 
Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): There are discussions ongoing with a number of 
industry people as well as governmental people, federal governmental people, industry people, primarily 
Husky Oil, a couple of other independent companies as well. The member may well be aware that there 
was an unexpected turn of events when Husky, who had been intimately involved in pricing out the cost 
of the upgrading facility, upon reviewing the dollars that were used in costing out that facility, decided 
that they were somewhat modest in their initial estimate of around $520 million. The cost now could be 
as high as twice that, in excess of $1 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2955 
 

billion. That certainly presented some unforeseen problems in regard to the returns that one might expect 
to attain through the upgrading process. There are now endeavours to see whether that can be trimmed, 
whether or not some other technology in regard to the process that may be used for upgrading the oil 
would bring about some economies, that just weren’t there before. The discussions are ongoing between 
officials representing the government of Saskatchewan and to some degree the Crown corporation, 
Saskoil and the other potential and interested partners in the venture. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Who else is interested and potential beside Petrocan if they are even still interested? 
Who is interested beside the government of Saskatchewan and Saskoil? 
 
Mr. Messer: The member is well aware of certainly the provincial government being interested, Saskoil 
being interested and active, the federal government being interested and involved in the discussions - 
certainly Husky, also Petro Canada. I don’t think it will come as any surprise to the member that Gulf 
Oil is also indicating an interest and involved. 
 
Mr. McMillan: So you are telling me that Saskoil is interested; the government of Saskatchewan is 
interested; Petrocan is interested because that is the federal government’s input. Husky Oil you just 
finished telling me wasn’t the least bit interested in the project as it was initially proposed and I would 
question you a little later about whether they are interested in anything now. Suddenly we hear about 
Gulf Oil, I don’t recall ever hearing them even having given it a serious sniff; they may have raised their 
eyebrows because there was a little potential activity in the heavy oil refinery business but other than 
that I have never heard anyone from Gulf Oil say they were at all seriously interested in getting involved 
in it. Potentially you have two partners who may be serious about proceeding with it at this time, Saskoil 
and the government of Saskatchewan, Petrocan - I would like to ask you what Petrocan’s interest is in 
the whole operation, whether it is an equity interest of substantial nature or whether it is a peripheral 
interest in an equity manner or what exactly their interest is in the whole project. 
 
Mr. Messer: It is unfair of the member to assume simply because the cost of the upgrader escalated 
considerably that Husky is no longer interested. Certainly I have not said that. I do not believe that 
Husky has said that. Husky is still very much interested in the heavy oil activity in the province of 
Saskatchewan and the upgrader. We have, not just Saskatchewan government and Saskoil; we have the 
federal Government of Canada; we have Saskoil; we have Petrocan; we have Husky and we also have 
Gulf. If he wasn’t aware of Gulf being interested, I make no apologies for that. I don’t undertake to 
broadcast who is interested in the upgrading facility and the enhanced recovery of heavy oil. The 
member asked more specifically what interests Petrocan has. We haven’t reached the level where we 
have decided as to what the partnership and/or what the input of each partner will be. But Petrocan is 
certainly interested in enhance recovery of heavy oil in Saskatchewan and are also interested in 
involving themselves in the upgrading facility itself. In fact, I think, it is fair to say that they spent some 
significant sums of money, probably millions of dollars undertaking feasibility studies in regard to 
upgrading processes that might be considered for the upgrader in Lloydminster. So that, I think it is safe 
to say having spent that kind of money that they are certainly very much interested in an upgrader in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, I would like to ask the minister then, when was the last time you or your officials 
specifically met with Husky Oil or Gulf Oil or Petrocan with respect 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2956 
 

to the development of a heavy oil refinery? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, it is interesting that the member should ask that question. My officials met with 
Petrocan in Calgary yesterday. My deputy minister just this morning had a lengthy conversation with a 
senior representative of Husky in regard to the upgrader. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I would like to know what tack you are taking now, because Husky Oil has indicated to 
you that they are more than a little gun shy about their original estimate, in view of the fact that it has 
doubled in about three months time; it has gone from $520 million to over $1 billion. What approach are 
they taking now and do you feel there is any significant opportunity to get the same heavy oil project 
going that you had initially anticipated? 
 
Mr. Messer: I remain optimistic. There are certainly some implications because of the accelerated costs. 
The timeframe will certainly have to be extended somewhat because of these unforeseen difficulties. I 
remain optimistic as do, I believe, all the rest of the parties who have shown an interest in the upgrader. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, will you tell me what leads you to be optimistic. Now you can’t be optimistic 
about the initial format you had hoped to follow and that was to have probably a 50 per cent equity by 
Petrocan or more; a minority equity by Saskoil or the Saskatchewan government in one form or another; 
a minority by your technological partner, whether that would have been Husky Oil or a conglomeration 
of Husky Oil, Gulf Oil and other minors. What format do you expect reasonably to achieve now? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, as I said, the basis of the optimism certainly has to emanate from the ongoing and 
current discussions between all of those parties. They are all putting some very significant manpower 
into these discussions; they are expending some significant sums of money to come to a conclusion, 
satisfactory conclusion; in their resolution of some of the problems that are outstanding in regard to this 
whole upgrading facility. We see very keen interest in the land sales in the heavy oil area, certainly that 
optimism emanates from the fact that there will be an upgrader at some time. I had very keen 
competition for the federal-provincial moneys which were being made available to assist in the 
enhanced recovery of heavy crude oil. We see new technology being developed, because the industry is 
involved and enthused about not only recovering greater quantities of heavy oil but that in the future we 
will have an upgrader here in Saskatchewan to upgrade that oil. Now, I don’t know what else I could 
base my optimism on. We have got some of the leading industry people in the oil field talking to us 
about an upgrader. We think that those talks are credible and we think that we are making progress. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, the only thing that you have to base any optimism at all on now is the potential 
you have of sucking Petrocan into some shady little Saskoil deal in the refinery business. Certainly on 
the basis of your initial proposal you appear to be unable to attract Husky Oil or Gulf Oil in a serious 
manner. You tell me that you have negotiations or discussions going on now. I would like to know the 
intent of those discussions at this time to decide on the type of project which you might proceed with 
now that the first one has been scrapped or whether the discussions you are having are in the nature of 
ironing out problems with getting something on stream? Are you still in the planning stage of even the 
type of facility you can put up? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, again let me say that I want to remind the member if he would 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2957 
 

take the time, I don’t happen to have a copy here, that the last edition of Oil Week, a periodical 
expressing points and views of interest to the oil industry, an article in that last edition where Husky is 
saying or indicating interest, I may say for the benefit of the member for Kindersley, indicating interest 
and also indicating that perhaps from their point of view it may be better to start with a two-stage 
process. I know that this is not entirely new but they say perhaps a tandem operation whereby we start 
initially with an upgrader that would process 500,000 barrels a day and then escalate that to a second 
stage of 500,000 barrels a day or more. Pardon me, I should be saying 50,000 in each instance with 
ultimately the 100,000 barrel per day target. That would be by a flux coking process. Petro Canada has 
indicated that perhaps a hydrocarbon process might be more economic and they are spending some 
money in regard to that particular technology. These industries are continuing to convey to us ways and 
means that they think we can attain the best economics of an upgrading facility in the province. 
 
Mr. McMillan: The question of whether or not it was to be a one stage or a two stage operation, I say, 
you knew that months ago because you didn’t have the oil to start 100,000 barrel a day operation. 
Particularly in view of the facility that is going into Cold Lake and the fact that you only have 45,000 to 
50,000 barrels of oil in Saskatchewan. Now that situation will undoubtedly be improved if the drilling 
starts to get back to the neighbourhood of 500 to 1,000 this year. Most of that work will be done in a 
heavy oil pool that could take advantage of a refinery in Lloydminster. There is no doubt but to suggest 
that that has suddenly become a topic of conversation between those interested partners, whether or not 
it will be a one stage or a two stage, you never did have 100,000 barrel a day plant going ahead there. 
You told me that many weeks ago that the plan was not for 100,000 barrel a day because I asked you in 
this House where you were going to get your oil in view of the fact that you only had at most 50,000 
barrels potential in Saskatchewan. You said, well, it was never our attention to actually build one that 
was initially 100,000 barrels a day. So those comments aren’t even appropriate at this time. So what you 
have said to me is that any discussion or negotiation that is going on between any of the potential 
partners with respect to an operation is not at this time to determine where it would go or who would 
share what equity or who is responsible for the operation but really whether or not there is even a system 
available which would make it economical to go ahead with an operation in Lloydminster? 
 
Mr. Messer: With all due respect to the member that’s what we have been discussing over the last 
several months, are the economics of the upgrader. We felt that we were proceeding rather well with the 
initial cost. I am not blaming anyone for an error that may have been made in regard to the actual 
costing out of the upgrader but that’s the problem that we are left to contend with. The member says that 
there are problems with 100,000 barrels a day delivery; that’s a matter of opinion. Certainly we have to 
be aware of the fact that we would be scratching it to get 100,000 barrels per day but there are some 
industries and some spokesmen of industry who are not concerned about that. They say given the 
opportunity, given the land play, that they would be able to assure that delivery of well in excess of 
100,000 barrels per day by the time the upgrader was built. Now, I am not saying that all the industries 
speak that way but there are certainly some industries and industry spokesmen that have that level of 
confidence. We tend to be a little bit more cautious in regard to assuming a certain level of production 
can be delivered to the plant which we haven’t yet proven up at this time but there is an optimism there. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, what you have, in fact, said is, to date there is no evidence to indicate that we 
have the economic situation today which would allow us to go ahead 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2958 
 

with the heavy oil plant in Lloydminster. The potential partners, at best, are researching some way to 
proceed economically and, if they are researching some means of getting ahead with this project on the 
economics of it, that means there is no evidence at this time to indicate that they could go ahead with it 
at this time. 
 
Mr. Messer: May I respond to the member by saying that the project is a long-term project. The project 
is a 20 or 25 year plus project, the lifetime of the project. We are certain, as I think the industry is 
certain, that the attractiveness over that period of time is there. What we want to make certain now is 
that the project is, in fact, going to be attractive from year one, initially the project is not going to have 
problems. The project is going to be able to assure all of the parties involved that they will get a fair 
return on their investment. That is what we are undertaking to approve at this particular point in time. 
 
I don’t know where the member gets his negativism in regard to this project because, again I say, the 
industry, at least the industry that is interested in heavy oil has not expressed that. Even industry that has 
not involved itself directly in the upgrader is much more enthused now than it ever has been in regard to 
the extraction of heavy oil. They are enthused because they are optimistic about the establishment of an 
upgrader which will be able to handle some of the product that they produce. I think it is unfair for the 
member in his remarks to this committee to undertake an attitude of doom and gloom and say that this 
is, in fact, the attitude of the industry because certainly that is not the case. It is not what is being 
expressed to us. 
 
The member for Kindersley has some oil activity in his constituency. I just happened to be looking at the 
Kindersley Clarion, dated May 10, and I am sure the member has seen it. I see there in bold type, ‘$10 
Million Oil Program’, for the Kindersley area. I just want to quote a remark made from that. It is all 
based on the assumption that there is going to be heavy oil activity and I think an upgrading facility, 
although, it does not specifically say that, but one of the most significant industries that will be active in 
expending some of those millions of dollars is Causenoil (?). The construction superintendent said that 
his company expects to spend about $6 million sinking around 75 holes in two regions, Coleville and 
Dodsland. He closes in saying and I quote: ‘It is going to be quite a boom this summer.’ He goes on to 
say that he even expects a higher level of activity next year. 
 
Now all of this is heavy oil activity. I think that just goes to prove the point that the industry, even 
though some of these companies that are active in the actual extraction of the oil are not going to be 
directly involved in the upgrader, they are optimistic that if they can find greater pools of heavy oil and 
improve their recovery capabilities, there is going to be an upgrader to process that oil. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, if the minister thinks that these people are going out and drilling oil in 
Saskatchewan because of the potential for a heavy oil plant in Lloydminster, he has got crude oil on the 
brain. There is no private industry in this province that will risk that kind of capital investment over the 
next few years on the evidence that they can receive from Husky Oil or Gulf Canada, or that minister or 
Saskoil or Petrocan or anyone that a heavy oil plant is coming. You might be lucky to get it in 25 years 
with the kind of approach you people use. 
 
You are going to be saved from your present dilemma by technological improvements in the oil industry 
over the next few years. That is as sure as you sit there, itself the industry will solve some of the 
economic problems associated with the extraction and refining of heavy oil. It isn’t going to take 25 
years to find an economic way to put a 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2959 
 

heavy oil plant in Lloydminster, but I will tell you the way you people operate, it is going to take a heck 
of a lot more than the next one or two years. You have been unable to give me any evidence whatsoever 
to suggest that the people of Saskatchewan can expect a heavy oil plant of any kind in the next five to 
ten years. You talk about a 25 year program. I suspect that means 25 years before we get the heavy oil 
plant. The drilling that is taking place in the Kindersley-Dodsland area, specifically, is heavy oil drilling 
because nobody knows that there is any other kind of oil there. Any drilling that would take place there 
would have to be for gas or heavy oil. All right, that’s number one. 
 
Number two - one of the reasons they are proceeding is because of the ability now to take advantage of 
federal government assistance for the tertiary recovery of heavy oil . . . federal-provincial like Sask 
Housing, 75 per cent federal, 25 per cent provincial, but we take all the credit. O.K. you’re involved. I 
say things have improved dramatically under your ministership. You may be the only one there that has 
a semblance of private enterprise sanity in your entire body and that is certainly being reflected in some 
of the action in the oil business because you have dramatically reversed the position of your colleagues 
with respect to the oil industry in Saskatchewan. I say for the benefit of the oil industry and the benefit 
of the people of Saskatchewan, but that argument can be made somewhere else and those accolades, 
however small they might be, have been directed to you at other times. Don’t try to connect the 
development of heavy oil in Saskatchewan to date with the potential development of a heavy oil refinery 
at Lloydminster because the two at best are only peripherally connected. Those people who are drilling 
for heavy oil in Saskatchewan this summer already have a market for that heavy oil and it isn’t the 
heavy oil plant in Lloydminster, believe me there. 
 
I would like to ask you one further question. What is the capacity of the new Cold Lake institution and 
how will that affect any potential development of a heavy oil refinery in the Lloydminster area? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, let me say to the member’s remarks - he says, don’t try to connect the level of 
activity now enjoyed in Saskatchewan for heavy oil with the upgrading facility. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Peripherally. 
 
Mr. Messer: Well I asked him and he says peripherally. I ask the member then, what is the reason, what 
is the reason for the increased activity? It is not because of the export market as he suggests because he 
knows full well that the Federal Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources has already said that that 
export market will not continue. He keeps on going like this. I don’t know whether he thinks it’s going 
to be processed in the East. That’s not practical either, because you are not going to be able to transport 
that heavy oil to eastern Canada. What is the explanation if it isn’t because there is an optimism that 
there is going to be heavy oil activity here in the province of Saskatchewan? Tell the member, heavy oil 
activity and it will continue and it will increase, because they are confident that there is going to be an 
upgrader in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Granted, we have got some problems; granted its going to take some time to work them out. But these 
people have expressed through their level of activity a confidence that we will be able to overcome that. 
Because they are not banking on continuing to export that forever or to continue to transport it to eastern 
Canada for processing. That is not the future and that is not going to give them the best returns. Now the 
member, I guess, 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2960 
 

can assume any kind of an attitude he wants, but we are confident that heavy oil is going to continue as 
far as activity is concerned. The industry is confident of that; they are confident that we are going to be 
able to negotiate an upgrader at some point in time in the not too distant future and I don’t know what 
else I can tell the member. If he wants to preach doom and gloom here in the legislature and about the 
province of Saskatchewan he, the member for Kindersley, is the one that is going to answer for it when 
people will ask him at some point in time, why it is we have all this activity and why it was that he was 
so negative and not wanting to participate or encourage that activity for Saskatchewan industry. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I would like to ask the minister, what impressions he has left the oil industry with in 
Saskatchewan with respect to firstly, a guarantee of a rate of return on any development of a heavy oil 
industry. Now, I am under the impression that you conveyed to Husky Oil and/or other interested parties 
in heavy oil involvement, that their investment, their equity in the operation would have tied with it a 
guaranteed rate of return for a given number of years. Is that not a fact? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, let me firstly say that I can’t speak for the industry as to what their impressions may 
be. I would suggest that the member appears to be speaking on behalf of the industry (if he hasn’t 
already undertaken to talk to them). Before he assumes that attitude, perhaps it would be wise for him to 
now speak to the industry to see what their impressions are of the present status of the government of 
Saskatchewan in relation to their activities in this province and how pleased they are. I might say that I 
get no indication of their being displeased and the discussions that are ongoing I think, ratify that 
feeling. I don’t know what else I can really tell the member. If he wants something more precise, I think 
the best means of being able to obtain that or acquire that, has to be from the industry itself. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Did you ever convey to the industry on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan or any 
of the agencies that you represent, that there was some potential that the industry could get a guaranteed 
rate of return on any investment they might have in a heavy oil refinery? 
 
Mr. Messer: No. That was suggested by the industry but I did not convey to them that we would be able 
to give them that assurance. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Did you ever discuss with the industry the possibility of the circumstances surrounding 
the extraction of heavy oil from Saskatchewan and transportation and delivery of that heavy oil to other 
markets, if they weren’t in fact prepared to get involved in an equity manner or a technological manner 
in the development of a heavy oil plant? 
 
Mr. Messer: Now, I don’t know whether the question, if I have really clearly interpreted it. If the 
member is asking whether industry has come to us and said, we are not interested in supplying oil to the 
upgrader, therefore what assistance would you give us in transporting it to some other marketplace - if 
that in effect is the member’s question, the answer is, no. I might say, for the benefit of the member that 
one does not have to be part of the upgrading facility in order to deliver oil to it for upgrading. There is 
no such condition and I think that it would be attractive with the upgrader there, for an extractor to 
deliver it to the upgrader rather than undertake to find an export market for it in its original state. 
 
Mr. McMillan: As the minister is well aware, for example, if Husky Oil wants to build 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2961 
 

a heavy oil refinery there are many, many reasons why they would rather build it in Alberta on the 
Lloydminster side in Alberta than in the Saskatchewan side. Many reasons. One of the only reasons why 
they would build it in Saskatchewan or get involved in Saskatchewan is because the bulk of their oil is 
on the Saskatchewan side. 
 
Now, that in itself is not incentive enough for Husky Oil to build on the Saskatchewan side. My question 
to you, specifically, did you ever convey to Husky Oil, in any manner, that there was a possibility they 
would not be allowed to export heavy oil outside Saskatchewan for development in a refinery on the 
Alberta side? 
 
Mr. Messer: Absolutely not, Mr. Chairman. I am really disappointed, for the first time, really 
disappointed in the attitude and the comments of the member for Kindersley. Because, Mr. Chairman, he 
is saying that there are many, many reasons that Husky shouldn’t want to build in the province of 
Saskatchewan, many, many reasons. 
 
I would say that the first and foremost has to be the member for Kindersley, in his comments, because 
they have been purely and totally negative, negative, about the upgrading facility up to this point in time. 
I would think that as a Saskatchewan citizen, especially as a representative of a community that has 
heavy oil potential, that he would want to undertake to assist, if possible, in establishing an upgrading 
facility in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we have been in this committee for something approaching a half or three-quarters 
of an hour and he has said not one thing positive, not recommended one thing positive. His total 
comment, his total attitude up to this point in time has been negative and I think that is a disgrace. I 
think that is unfortunate that the electors of Kindersley have undertaken to elect a person to represent 
them, when they have a significant future in heavy oil, that he is doing everything within his ability to 
discourage the enhanced recovery of heavy oil and the establishment of an upgrader in Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to that member, Mr. Chairman, that Husky, that the other companies that I have identified have 
shown keen and optimistic interest in the upgrader being located in Saskatchewan. As far as upgrader 
discussions are concerned we are further ahead than any other organization talking at the present time in 
Canada, about an upgrading facility. I don’t know what else we can do. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Let me say to the minister, some constructive suggestions to get out of these little 
problems he has. My day to govern in this province will come as well and I may very well some day sit 
in your chair, Mr. Minister, and I tell you the day that happens we will be a darn sight closer to heavy oil 
refineries in Saskatchewan than we are today. 
 
While I sit in opposition it is my responsibility to criticize on behalf of the public any actions taken by 
this government not in the best interests of the public in Saskatchewan. I have been probing you for 
one-half hour to 45 minutes to try and establish some ray of optimism for the development of the heavy 
oil industry in Saskatchewan and all you can do is criticize me for asking you those questions. 
 
You don’t have any positive suggestions to give to the people of Saskatchewan about the development 
of a heavy oil industry. And I say while you are the minister and while 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2962 
 

your government sits in this House as the government, we have very little hope of ever getting that 
industry. If you want a positive suggestion about getting the oil industry, then resign, move over. If you 
want to hear a positive suggestion from the people of Saskatchewan, change the government and we will 
be a darn sight closer to getting a heavy oil refinery. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: For whom? 
 
Mr. McMillan: We have some problems we will be talking about with respect to your Fresh Water Fish 
Marketing Corporation, too, my little friend. 
 
Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): Now, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Mineral Resources in replying 
to the comments of the member for Kindersley was most accurate when he stated that he was negative in 
his approach and he has good reason to be negative in his approach. When you are down and out and 
hurt real bad it is about the only thing you can do, I guess, is shout and holler. 
 
Most importantly, Mr. Chairman, the minister responsible for Mineral Resources is in a position to be 
positive, be positive about the Department of Mineral Resources. I would like him to be more positive in 
terms of the production in Saskatchewan of natural gas. Here, where we have questioned you many 
times as to why the cost of gas is high and ever increasing in Saskatchewan, your reply is, because that 
terrible Tory Alberta is charging us so much for it. 
 
I would like you to tell us how much you make over and above what you imported from Alberta number 
one. Number two, I would like you to try and justify why you spend $986,420 in data, statistics, policy 
planning and research and only $86,560 in the development of natural gas in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, Mr. Chairman, the member asks, what do we make on natural gas. It is a bit difficult 
to answer that general question. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation makes a modest return on natural 
gas because one of its endeavours is to provide gas as reasonably as possible, at as reasonable a cost as 
possible to consumers in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have, in the past couple of years, made a somewhat higher profit than we had predicted or 
anticipated. That was primarily due to low water flows and in some instances, even though we had not 
wanted to, we had to generate electricity with natural gas and the consumption of gas, because there was 
a small margin of profit on that return, a somewhat greater profit to the corporation than we had 
expected. 
 
Now the member talks about the amounts of money that we spend on natural gas development - 
$560,000, so it would be $980,000 that we spend on policy planning and research and data and statistics. 
I take it he is adding those two votes together. I have to convey to the member that a significant portion 
of the money that is spent on natural gas not only comes from the . . . you know, you mention the 
amount that was made available to the Natural Gas Development Conservation Board. That was just to 
finance the board. The significant amount of money that is spent on natural gas (I see the member 
chuckling to himself because I think he also has read down at the bottom of the page on Vote 8 under 
petroleum and natural gas) a very, very significant amount of that $1.2 million is spent on natural gas. 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2963 
 

I might also say that in the subvotes that he makes mention of in the Vote 3, planning and research, a 
portion of that $249,000 is spent on natural gas. I might also say that some of the other votes that are 
contained under this department, the Oil, Gas and Conservation Board is another vote where money is 
spent on natural gas as well. So that it is inaccurate to assume that we only spend this modest $60,000 or 
$86,560 under Vote 4 on natural gas activity and development. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: Just one more question, Mr. Minister. It is nice to see you agree then, that it isn’t all 
because of the pricing that Alberta sets on its gas that you import. But further, Mr. Minister, I wonder, 
could you tell this Assembly why you aren’t developing more gas wells in Saskatchewan? Why do you 
rely on 60 per cent of our gas being imported from Alberta? 
 
Mr. Messer: I have conveyed to this Legislature and certainly to Crown Corporations on a number of 
occasions that we believe in allowing term security of energy for Saskatchewan, not only in gas but in 
oil and coal. We believe, because we have a limited supply of gas, if we were to depend totally on 
Saskatchewan gas, we would be out of gas in, I imagine, five or six years, eight years. We think it is 
therefore more reasonable to extend the lifetime of that supply by supplementing gas from Alberta. We 
think that we can cushion some of the increase in prices that are set by Alberta and the federal 
government and I’m not criticizing them for that. They have an energy that is valuable and I have never 
undertaken to in any derogatory way, criticize the province of Alberta for the price that they like to 
receive for their gas, but because we do have gas here which we can extend for perhaps 15 or 20 years, 
we can give a longer term assurance or feeling of stability to the Saskatchewan consumer and that we 
can always supplement some of the gas that we consume by deriving it from Saskatchewan which we 
can price at a lesser level, and which we do, than does the province of Alberta. Therefore they will have 
an assurance that the gas price may not fluctuate as significantly as it would if we were totally dependent 
on outside gas. We think that is good planning and I think the consumers of Saskatchewan would agree 
with that. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: Mr. Minister, the long range planning is much similar to that that the federal government 
took with regard to oil. They said, well why should we develop our own resources, the tar sands for 
instance, when we can import cheap Arab oil? That situation prevailed for quite some time and then the 
roof fell in, so to speak, and oil prices went away up. Gas prices, in consequence, went away up as well. 
 
The long range approach that you are taking now, Mr. Minister, is much similar. You are saying, well 
we’ve only got an eight year known supply in the province of Saskatchewan so we are not going to 
really look all that hard or try to develop our own resources that we may have. You know, you say that 
you have got an eight year supply. Well I think if you look around, if you do some research and some 
planning, that you have a lot of money allotted for here, I think you will find that there are a lot more 
reserves than eight year in the province of Saskatchewan. You could take that into consideration and not 
rely so heavily on Alberta, because you can’t be assured that Alberta will continue to supply you gas. If 
you are going to take that approach then your arguments are unjustified in criticizing Alberta at any 
point in time for these so-called modest profit margins that you have in Saskatchewan being reflected in 
the high cost which Alberta is charging to you. 
 
I don’t know whether there is a definition for modest profit. I don’t know how much that is. I wondered 
if you might have been more specific. I’d hoped that you would have 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2964 
 

been. I would ask you to be if you can. I just wanted to make that point, that if that is the approach that 
you are going to take, to rely on Alberta, for 60 per cent of our requirements and just sit on your supply 
in Saskatchewan, then I don’t agree with you, Mr. Minister, that that is good long range planning. I say 
that if we have it, if there is any hope of having gas supplies in Saskatchewan, let’s do all we can to 
develop it and not take the approach our federal government took with regard to our oil supplies. 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, Mr. Chairman, that may be the member for Moosomin’s opinion. I am surprised to 
hear that; perhaps he has some information that we don’t have. But his alluding to the fact that Alberta 
may not be supplying us with gas comes as a shock. I wonder if the member has any specific 
information, because that is certainly a departure in attitude of Canadian provinces in regard to the 
provision of energy to other jurisdictions of Canada. Not only Saskatchewan does that, but certainly the 
province of Alberta does. I am surprised and shocked if there is some policy that is in place in Alberta or 
one being given consideration to that they would shut off gas to the Saskatchewan border. That is a very, 
very, very serious matter. 
 
I believe that the long-term plan that we have in place is proving to be beneficial to Saskatchewan 
citizens and I think that it will continue to be beneficial. We do not rely entirely on Alberta extraction. 
We supplement that with our own gas. We are active in the exploration and development of gas, not 
only in Saskatchewan, but in Alberta as well. We have proven up and developed some extensive 
reserves of gas in the province of Alberta, which gives us assurance, that in fact we would have gas 
available to Saskatchewan, or the revenues of that gas in order to offset higher cost gas for the province 
of Saskatchewan and its consumers. 
 
The member made mention a few moments ago of the moneys that were allocated to the Natural Gas 
Development and Conservation Board, and he will be aware that approximately a month ago I tabled, in 
this Legislative Assembly, a report by the board that in most instances, I believe, 16 out of 20, 16 out of 
20 recommendations that they made, the government agreed to them so that we could improve, to even a 
greater extent, the orderly exploration and development of natural gas in this province. I think that the 
board should be commended for its endeavours and I think that that is going to enhance the security of 
Saskatchewan gas. I agree with the member that I would hope that we do have something greater than an 
eight year supply and perhaps this activity will bring about some discoveries that we are not now aware 
of. That will certainly be of significant benefit to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, do you not think that the small gas producers 
in Saskatchewan, that are supplying gas to the province (in the case of 1977 40 trillion cubic feet), do 
you not feel that these are the people who are being punished for bringing gas on stream? This 
represents 40 per cent of what SPC uses now. Are they not being punished and discouraged completely 
from further gas exploration and production? 
 
Mr. Messer: My answer to that has to be, no. I think that the producers in Saskatchewan who are 
producing and selling gas to the corporation are receiving a fair return. I think that if producers are 
subject to some punishment, at least currently, that now applies in the province of Alberta where there 
was some very, very significant encouragement to undertake to explore and develop gas. They 
responded to that encouragement and found some vast quantities and significant reserves of natural gas. 
Now they are being punished because there is not a market for that. They have that gas in storage, 
tapped and can’t find a market for it and have real significant 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2965 
 

problems as far as cash flow is concerned. Our policy was not to encourage that kind of development 
and have that gas sitting in reserve. We realize that once it is found then the pressure is on you to put it 
into the system, to consume it, and that would just deplete our reserve of gas in a premature way. We 
felt that was dangerous. I think no, but those producers who are in Saskatchewan and selling gas now 
that they are not being punished. 
 
Mr. Larter: Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, these gas producers and many of them that have brought in 
gas wells one of their beefs is, that many of these gas wells are capped, particularly in western 
Saskatchewan, but they are supplying gas to Mineral Resources or SPC anywhere from 25 to 40 cents. 
You have indicated under your new regulations that this would be increased sometime after 1980 and 
progressing on. Do you not agree with this cheap gas supplied by Saskatchewan producers you were 
able to reduce the selling price to SPC to 74 cents per thousand cubic feet by using Saskatchewan gas to 
subsidize what you buy from Alberta. In essence, SPC makes a 300 to 400 per cent profit on gas just 
because Saskatchewan producers are subsidizing the gas that you are bringing in from Alberta. 
 
Mr. Messer: That is not at all correct. To suggest that SPC makes a 300 or 400 per cent profit on its gas 
is totally unfounded. In fact, if the member was in Crown Corporations, and I believe he was, he would 
know what the profit and the return to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is for natural gas and the 
return on the investment of the system which is required to deliver natural gas. Either he is in error or he 
is trying to mislead the House that SPC would attain anything close to 300 or 400 per cent profit on its 
natural gas. Let me say that even though the price of our natural gas in Saskatchewan to the producer 
appears to be modest, when one takes into consideration the royalty rate that is applied to the gas in 
Alberta, there is not all that significant a difference between what the producer is receiving for gas there 
and here. I admit that it is somewhat less. It certainly isn’t what some people would like to believe it to 
be because they do not take into consideration the very, very high royalty that Alberta charges, which 
we do not charge in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Larter: Mr. Minister, I would like to ask again, do you not think though that the Saskatchewan 
producer is still subsidizing the gas you buy from Alberta - he is still subsidizing the users of gas in 
Saskatchewan by the price that you pay him? 
 
Mr. Messer: I am sorry, I didn’t get all the question. 
 
Mr. Larter: Mr. Minister, I am just asking you if you do not feel that with the price that you pay the 
Saskatchewan producer he is subsidizing the user of gas in Saskatchewan compared to the price you pay 
for gas in Alberta? 
 
Mr. Messer: No, I do not. In answering that question, I want again to remind the member that we had a 
very credible independent board in the makeup of the Natural Gas Development and Conservation 
Board. I think the individuals who are on that board come with the best of credentials. They made, I 
think, a very enhancing and credible report to government. They considered the pricing of gas. I think 
they considered it quite extensively. They made a recommendation to the government as to what the 
price should be. We agreed with that price; that now is what the price is here. I don’t think that it is 
really legitimate for the member to then undertake to criticize the government or suggest that we are 
subsidizing the consumer of gas in Saskatchewan at the cost of the producer when we simply did what 
this independent board proposed to us. I think that they were correct in their recommendations. They 
were certainly 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2966 
 

knowledgeable of the situation and the producer of Saskatchewan gets fair return and the consumer in 
Saskatchewan gets gas at a fair price. I don’t think that we could have it better. 
 
Mr. Larter: Mr. Minister, just one more question. I think you received a letter from a Mr. Mercier, from 
University Gas Company Limited in Calgary. In this letter Mr. Mercier was denying a report by the 
Leader Post as being misquoted and in this letter to you he was denying a Mr. Taylor’s article in the 
Leader Post of April 18. You state that we are conserving some of our gas and some of our energy for 
the future. I would just like to read a small portion of this letter from Mr. Mercier with the IPAC view of 
your conservation of energy and what they think is so wrong about it. In chastising Mr. Taylor he said 
he foresaw a change in the encouragement offered to the industry in Saskatchewan. Mr. Mercier said: 
 

My comment was that sooner or later the Saskatchewan government would have to make some change 
or it would never know the extent of its resources. I have also told Mr. Taylor that I felt Saskatchewan 
treated all oil companies, big and small, in the same manner. 

 
This essentially was the total interview and from that Mr. Taylor, or someone in your newspaper 
fabricated the article. This is a letter to the Leader Post with a copy to you. For the record: 
 

It is my opinion that Saskatchewan essentially treats all oil companies the same. Whether it is an 
American major or a Canadian independent, or for that matter, a Saskatchewan independent, there is 
little incentive to invest in Saskatchewan. The administration rightly, should be concerned for the 
conservation and preservation of energy for the Saskatchewan residents now and in the future. It 
would accomplish this better by obtaining from the private sector an adequate exploration and 
development program to tap its reserves. For that, it will have to create some reasonable regulations. 
My deep roots in Saskatchewan and my conviction that its southern and eastern sectors hold 
substantial natural gas reserves are not enough to justify any substantial involvement at this time. 

 
But he is concerned with the climate and they take a different view than this government. All the 
geologists and everybody, they say that there is more gas there and you have stifled the exploration in 
Saskatchewan. I think Mr. Mercier speaks pretty well for the whole oil industry, when you say the oil 
industry favours what you are doing right now; it is still the climate that is keeping these people out. 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, Mr. Chairman, that may be the opinion of Mr. Mercier. I think that there are some 
differences of opinion within the industry with regard to that. I said to this committee earlier that if we 
were to undertake to encourage a significant increase and I think that there is going to be a modest 
increase in the exploration and development of gas. If we were to go beyond that, we would in effect 
have a surplus of gas, at least a short-term surplus and then there would be encouragement to move that 
surplus to some other market and it doesn’t make sense to me and I don’t believe it makes sense to the 
consumers of gas in Saskatchewan when we have modest quantities of gas, by comparison to Alberta, 
that we should be encouraging quick development of that gas which ultimately leads to exportation of 
that gas to the U.S. or wherever, and then find ourselves within a matter of years again in a short supply 
of gas without any reserves and depending wholly and totally on Alberta; that is just not 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2967 
 

good planning. It may bring about some boom years for a short period of time but ultimately, the gas 
industry in Saskatchewan will pay the penalty and certainly the consumer of gas in Saskatchewan will 
pay the penalty for a lifetime. We just don’t agree with that. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: I just received a letter that I am going to have to respond to and maybe I can ask a 
question or two that will clarify it, what I have to say to the person who is writing. It is in the are where 
DSWK are doing some work in the Prelate area and Gulf are also doing some work in that particular 
area. It involves the payments that are made to farmers for the number of acres that are involved in the 
well site, I believe they take approximately four acres of land. In this area here, I believe the fellow from 
DSWK, the offer to the individual was $432 for permission to come in and drill on the site and the Gulf 
offer, just rather close to the area was $1,460. The person was rather alarmed at the difference between 
the two and actually he was the one who was dealing with DSWK. So he proceeded to take his case to 
the Surface Rights Board, to an arbitration hearing, and after the arbitration hearing was over with the 
person was awarded $932. The only problem was that when he got the bill from the lawyer it was 
$1,409, which indicates that if he would have initially settled, he would have had $432 in his pocket 
rather than having to pay the difference between $1,409 and $932. My question is, why would there be 
such a discrepancy between the two settlements in that area? Secondly, is there some sort of an appeal 
mechanism so that if you are not satisfied with the award that was given on behalf of the Surface Rights 
Board? 
 
Mr. Messer: I must admit that I am probably in a poor position to answer the member’s first question as 
to why the discrepancy. I think I just have to simply assume that it is the company’s anxiety or 
aggressiveness in wanting to acquire a drilling site, and/or the size of the company and perhaps the 
volumes of money that they have to work with. There are some smaller, independent companies who are 
probably much more conscious of the dollars they have for their exploration program vis-a-vis, I think 
you said Gulf, or whatever it is, which is capable of allocating some pretty large sums of money and 
there is a very significant differential between what they will pay to a person and they maybe think it is 
worth it because they don’t have any flack but have good public relations and whatever else. Now there 
may be other reasons for it but I can’t really speak for the industry. 
 
I am surprised at the significant of the bill. I don’t profess to speak for the legal profession. I must admit 
that they are noted in some instances for being able to charge as well as for being able to offer their legal 
advice, but $1,491 for a dispute like that, without knowing all of the details, seems to be significant. I 
don’t know for certain, perhaps I could inquire as to whether or not there is yet another appeal that might 
be undertaken but I think, generally speaking, that has been considered the court of last appeal and I 
think, generally speaking, that has been acceptable to the community that finds itself located where there 
is oil activity. But I can inquire to see whether there is some other recourse that might be considered but 
my officials certainly don’t know. I’ll make an inquiry of the Attorney General’s department and I can 
convey, then, the answer to you. 
 
Mr. Stodalka: I would like you to check into that, you know, if you can. Another part of this question is 
this, you are really indicating then there is no sort of set formula. I suppose it is sort of a pressure tactic 
of the person who is coming in and dealing with the individual farmer. If he happens to be dealing with 
some company like Gulf, which is a large one in this case - DSWK, I understand is a very small 
company - but the farmer himself, then, what rights has he got? Can he say, no. I won’t take that $432 
and 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2968 
 

therefore you can’t drill on my property? Can he refuse and keep them off the property or what? 
 
Mr. Messer: Well, if that situation comes about in all instances it would then come to the Surface 
Rights Arbitration Board and they would have to deal with the matter. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 8 agreed. 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Larter: Just one question, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, why would the potash management appear 
here? Is this something to do with exploration under Mineral Resources? Why would potash 
management show up here? 
 
Mr. Messer: It was created a number of years ago as a separate entity for the collection of dues to the 
government by the potash industry. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
Item 10 and 11 agreed. 
 
Mineral Resources - Vote 23 agreed. 
 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation - Vote 52 agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN - VOTE 26 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McMillan: Mr. Minister, in many respects being the critic for the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan is much like, I suppose, as if we had one opposition member in Saskatchewan to peruse 
the activities of the entire government because you have in fact established a duplicate government in 
northern Saskatchewan to that of the one in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
That government carries on practically every conceivable manner of business, every conceivable social 
involvement, economic involvement and in many respects, political involvement in people’s lives in 
northern Saskatchewan. It spends twice as much money per capita in northern Saskatchewan as is spent 
in southern Saskatchewan. It has about ten times as many employees in northern Saskatchewan as it has 
in southern Saskatchewan. It is a momentous task to try to keep pace with the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan with its many varied branches, divisions and agencies. 
 
It is even further complicated by the apparent that reigns supreme from one day to the next within the 
administration of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and its relationship to local governments, 
whether they be LCAs, LACs or the NMC. It is impossible in many respects to tell who is doing what at 
what time. It is impossible to get any accurate determination of where government vehicles are heading 
at what time and for what purpose. You have created a maze of government bureaucracy in northern 
Saskatchewan unparalleled in Canada, no doubt. It is something that the federal 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2969 
 

government couldn’t even come close to duplicating. 
 
Mr. Romanow: Stop the politics and get on with the Estimates. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I’ll tell you my friend that if I was the Attorney General of this province with some 
semblance of responsibility for what goes on in your cabinet I wouldn’t be in a hurry to get to the guts of 
the problems in DNS. I’ll tell you that right now. You are like the minister. You want to take a good shot 
of courage before you come in here and get before the public in Saskatchewan with your estimates on 
DNS. 
 
The big question on this side of the House is where do we start? We can start, I think, by paying the 
minister some small attribute for his somewhat misguided intentions in northern Saskatchewan and that 
is indeed a qualified compliment, the best I can do. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: I am wounded. 
 
Mr. McMillan: That wound is small compared to the one you will suffer by the end of the Estimates, let 
me assure you of that, my smoke-jumping friends. 
 
There is no doubt that if we want to provide services in northern Saskatchewan on a par with those 
provided in southern Saskatchewan, we have to overcome some great . . . No, not disparity. We have 
some great natural obstacles to overcome. Geographical problems reign supreme in northern 
Saskatchewan and probably for the most part, present the most fundament problems in the development 
of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It is difficult to criticize any capital expenditures which help obtain for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan a more advantageous position in their development, socially and economically, in 
northern Saskatchewan. It is difficult to criticize capital expenditures on roads in northern 
Saskatchewan, on the provision of health services, educational services, water and sewer facilities, 
telephones, power, etc. And you won’t find members of this opposition criticizing the government for its 
attempts to try to bring those services to the people of Saskatchewan. In many ways, this minister is 
fortunate that Saskatchewan has had as much general revenues coming into the coffers as it has, because 
it has put that minister in a position where he can attempt to overcome some of these problems. 
 
Our quarrel of course is the method in which you approach the entire situation. We said when the DNS 
was first established that that approach might have some merit, to set up a separate branch of 
government to deal specifically with northerners’ problems. We said it had some merit. What have you 
done? You haven’t set up a separate branch of government, you set up a separate government. The 
Premier doesn’t know from one day to the next, from one week to the next, from one month to the next, 
what Ted Bowerman is doing in northern Saskatchewan (and mind you, many of the other people up 
there wonder what you are doing there too and every time you show up there, they say, what’s he doing 
here?) but I’ll tell you, the Premier and your own cabinet doesn’t know what’s going on up there. They 
have no more ability to gather information from you than we do. All they know is that on occasion the 
Premier feels required by some sense of obligation to the people of northern Saskatchewan to tour the 
communities. It is generally done in conjunction with a project which he and you can get in and take all 
the political glory you possibly can, whether you spent the bulk of the money or whether the federal 
government spent the bulk of the money. Other than that, you are a shadow 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2970 
 

premier in Saskatchewan for one geographic area and that is all of those areas that fall north of that 
boundary line for the DNS. 
 
I would like to begin by asking the minister exactly how many residents there are in his own little 
pseudo-province in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. G.R. Bowerman (Minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan): Mr. Chairman, the 
member was careful to attempt at least or appear to attempt to walk the narrow political line and not get 
himself too involved in whether he was for the single agency approach or for the positive aspects of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan or whether he was not. He was concerned about being careful so 
he didn’t create a problem for the next Liberal candidates that might appear in the Athabasca, 
Cumberland constituencies. But forgiving him for that particular sleight of hand, I want to suggest to the 
member that in his observations about whether or not there should be a single agency or whether or not 
the method or how we should approach northern Saskatchewan with respect to the management and 
administration of the problems there and programs there, while he did indicate he was not satisfied with 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, he didn’t lay out any alternatives or any alternative 
suggestions as to how it might be done. 
 
Basically, in Canada today there are three approaches to the development or to the administration and 
management of the northern districts in various provinces in Canada and the Northwest Territories, 
which are governed basically by the federal government and to some lesser degree, by territorial 
governments. 
 
But one could go the Alberta route, which is one of the routes which he has proposed and has been used. 
The Alberta approach to it was that you fill a bag full of money and give it to a certain individual group 
and away you let them go. They would design their own programs and solve their own problems and 
resolve it in that way. The only thing that occurred with the Alberta program after they had once done 
that was that about two years they would do all the funding and the program fell apart and they haven’t 
subsequently found a solution to that problem. 
 
You could go the Ontario route which is an agency or a co-ordinating agency they call it, and they have 
given it about $24 million as I understand it and it doesn’t do anything more than reside in the southern 
part of Ontario and at tempts to co-ordinate the various departments of government, spending its $24 
million on that approach. 
 
Then you can take the approach that we have taken in Saskatchewan and establish a single agency 
approach, which puts, as the member has indicated, the programs basically under one administrative 
head or one department and they are giving the authority and the responsibility to that department and to 
that ministerial authority, to carry out the mandate for the programs with respect to the northern district. 
 
I want to go through if I may, Mr. Chairman, just some other information which I think will not only be 
useful to the member but as well to the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Wipf), who will 
obviously be interested in the information. One of the concerns is what has been alleged to be a large 
bureaucracy, an overburgeoning bureaucracy in the north. I want to give you some comparisons. The 
administrative costs, as far as the department is concerned, as a part of its total budget is about $3.7 
million or 7.2 per cent. In other words, the bureaucracy, as it is referred to by the members opposite, is 
running equally as efficiently as any departments in government and I would suspect much more 
efficiently than some of the other departments in the 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2971 
 

other provinces of Canada and Canada itself. Particularly, roughly 7.5 per cent, let’s say, of the 
department’s budget is in administrative services or in administration. For a department which is as 
decentralized as is the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, spreading itself across a geographic area 
which is approximately equal to the southern half of Saskatchewan, and having an administrative cost or 
a comparable cost, I think this is significant and I think it is commendable for those who administer the 
department in that respect. 
 
I want to turn for a moment to another example of how the budget of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, the $72 odd million, which is contained within both capital and operating, provides for 
about 857 man years, both permanent and non-permanent employees. About 50 per cent of these are 
northern native people and people who live in northern Saskatchewan. So it is providing not only a 
service in terms of getting provincial programs in place in northern Saskatchewan, in a very difficult 
geographical area of our province, but it is also committed to the providing of employment for northern 
citizens, giving them a chance to get into some of the job opportunities which are available to most other 
persons in the province. I suggest that taking that record in relationship to other areas of a similar nature 
- let me tell you what it is in the Yukon Territories, for example. 
 
In the Yukon Territories that has a population of about 24,000 people, it has 1,300 employees and it has 
a Budget of $108.4 million. 
 
Mr. Wipf: It is getting up there. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Yes, it is. It is considerably higher than northern Saskatchewan. With respect to the 
Northwest Territories, there is a figure around which does include Indian Affairs employees, which is 
not totally relevant to what we are doing in Saskatchewan. In the Northwest Territories there are 8.800 
employees for a population of 42,000 people. Let me suggest to you that this is with a budget of $450 
million. That is $450 million for a population almost equal to what we are doing in northern 
Saskatchewan, for a population which has as its basis of bureaucracy almost 8,800 people or over 8,000 
employees, administered by the federal government, with some assistance from the territorial 
governments as well. 
 
Ontario, as I have already indicated to you, have what they call a co-ordinating agency which 
administers the programs in the northern parts of Ontario for which they budget about $124 million, as I 
understand. 
 
I want to leave that for a moment and just go to some of the programs which I think will be important 
and will be informative for the members opposite. Economic Development is a program that has 
received some criticism and some of it is justified. Nevertheless when you move into an area where you 
are the loaner of last resort, where no one else will provide loans or any funding at all, credit unions, 
banks or any other institution - our record over the years of operations, 490 some loans were made to 
persons who would not otherwise, principally not otherwise, be able to receive funding or receive loans 
of any kind. That has placed northern people into operation in northern Saskatchewan. About 411 small 
business enterprises have been started; about 340 of these are still operating. It has created about 1,500 
jobs, or about 500 man-years of employment. The rate of success is really not too bad considering it is 
the loaner of last resort. It is loaning to people who don’t have collateral. It is loaning to people who 
really don’t have very much of a year-round income, but a seasonal kind of income. When we compare 
that the arrears in that area to total loans is about 15 per cent and that the 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2972 
 

approved write-offs up to this point in time are about 8.7 per cent, to the total loans, I think that that is a 
fairly good record. I could give you the statistics comparing that with the other jurisdictions which are 
operating roughly in the same area. 
 
When we go into project management and look at the jobs which have been created there in terms of 
housing, in terms of construction, in terms of school construction and so on, not only again are we 
providing a service; we are providing an employment opportunity for an area which has basically been a 
very, very high area of unemployment, an area which has taken a considerable amount of public 
assistance to maintain that particular area of the province. 
 
Some have been critical about what they suggest at least to be extravagance, to the excessive costs in 
terms of the construction. Let me just give you a few brief statistics. For example, in house construction 
in 1973 - I’m talking about 650 to 700 houses, house construction in northern Saskatchewan, in an area 
which has transportation, communication and other isolation kinds of problems - the average cost per 
house was running at about $21.65 a square foot. I think that was very comparable. In 1973 it was 
running about $21.65 a square foot. In 1978, we are running at about $50 a square foot. Now you can 
compare that with any of the house constructions programs in the cities, Regina, Saskatoon and Prince 
Albert, or in some of the smaller urban centres of Saskatchewan. I think we will fare very favourably 
with respect to that. 
 
Mr. McMillan: . . . 150 per cent more! 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Well, 150 per cent more but it is 150 per cent more in the same areas in the South. All 
I am suggesting to you is that we are comparable. I think a good deal of the credit goes to the people in 
the department who have been able to manage those kinds of statistics in the face of considerable odds. 
 
Let me talk about school construction. There was a question raised in the House earlier this year by the 
member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, who suggested that we were flying gravel with the water bombers 
and seeing whether or not we could deliver it to Stanley Mission, and suggesting that there was an 
extravagance and a waste in terms of the school construction cost. The school construction costs are 
averaging, this is on an $8 million capital budget, averaging about $85 a square foot for school 
construction. Now that ranges from $56 a square foot to about $114 a square foot in some of the areas 
which are more isolated. But let me suggest to you, and I really challenge the members opposite to test 
out whether or not that’s a comparable cost per square foot for school construction in any part of 
Saskatchewan or in any part of Canada. I suggest to you that our figures compare very, very well with 
respect to what is happening in the other areas. 
 
In road construction, basically, we are doing the same thing. We are comparing favourably with the 
Department of Highways’ construction units. Not only are we comparing favourably with other 
government construction projects but we are comparing very favourably with the contractors who are 
bidding for school construction projects or road construction projects or whatever have you. So, Mr. 
Chairman, I think that we fare very well with respect to that. 
 
It might be of interest to members across the way that just looking at the social services expenditures per 
capita in relation to the North, we compare very favourably there and, in fact, since the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan has been in existence and 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2973 
 

has carried out the programs in northern Saskatchewan, the rate of social assistance has been 
dramatically reduced to the point where today we stand very competitive with - Well, the member 
shakes his head but I can tell you that comparing ourselves from 1973 when the dependency rate was at 
about 30 per cent as compared to 1977-78 when it is 16 per cent, I say that’s a dramatic decrease in the 
providing of social assistance to people in northern Saskatchewan. Particularly, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Department of Indian Affairs operating in the same area in which we are operating, was operating in 
June of 1976 with a dependency rate of about 46 per cent and we are basically operating with the same 
kinds of persons and the same kinds of environment and so on. So I think that there is a great deal to be 
said for what we have been able to do with the single agency concept or with the single agency approach 
in administering the programs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only that but I would like to report while I am on my feet, Mr. Chairman, the fact that because of the 
expenditures in the area of health, providing sanitary conditions, providing a potable water supply, 
providing for a proper sewage disposal system and providing for health units in the various isolated 
communities in the North, that our decline in hospital admissions is 17.2 per cent from 1973 to 1976. I 
think that that is a dramatic figure for anybody to consider as well. In the same period relative to the 
South, taken from the figures of the Department of Health, the decrease has been 3.5 per cent and, of 
course, a much more stable kind of health situation in the South. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that while there are other statistics which I would be most happy to provide the 
members with, provide this Assembly with, I will wait for their comments with respect to it. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, as the member for PA-Duck Lake says, we’ll just be embarrassed to ask questions 
after that. I would like to ask the minister again because although his memory might be very, very good, 
it is very, very short. I asked you how many people resided within the boundaries of your jurisdiction, 
residents, and I would like you to answer that for me the next time you get up unless you can hurl that 
number across the floor. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Mr. Chairman, 25,000. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Twenty-five thousand. I would like to ask the minister how he arrived at the figures that 
he is only spending in the neighbourhood of $3 million on administration in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
I did a quick addition right out of your estimates on administration, only permanent position, that is all. 
It comes to over $8 million in salaries alone, salaries and expenses. Not $3 million, over $8 million, 
unless you don’t want to consider those people in the health services branch, and social services branch, 
administrators, or the academic education branch. Social services branch, permanent positions, $1.5 
million right there alone. You don’t even count that as administration. They are all the same, every one 
you go down. Resources branch $1.6 million in salaries alone. You don’t even count that as 
administration. You spend over $8 million on administration alone; don’t tell us it is $3 million. I 
suggest, maybe you didn’t know. I wouldn’t be surprised. Maybe you think back to the day when you 
get this thing established and you only had several hundred employees, but that situation has changed 
dramatically since then. Talk to the people who do your hiring. You have over $8 million worth of 
permanent staff alone. 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2974 
 

Here is another interesting little figure, and that is how much money you spend under other personal 
services. Now I would be really interested to know exactly what those expenditures are for and I would 
assume that much of it is for people that you don’t have hired under permanent services, but that are 
hired as casual, temporary or part-time staff. I would be interested to know, for example, academic 
education branch $142,000 in salaries. One of the more modest ones, but other expenses include over $1 
million. I would like to know how much of that goes to the payment of temporary, casual, part-time 
labour? That is an administration expense that you haven’t listed. You have only been out by close to 
300 per cent in the first figure you gave us. If that is any indication of how the estimates are going to go, 
it is going to be the biggest laugh in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, again, you told me you have 25,000 people who reside inside your area. 
The budget this year is, roughly, $75 million. So you are going to spend about $3,000 per capita on your 
residents. I would like to know how many civil servants reside within the boundaries of that operation, 
provincial civil servants who work for DNS? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Well, Mr. Chairman, the fact that the member has picked out the salaries of various 
numbers of people doesn’t indicate that that is the administrative cost. Does not at all suggest that is 
what it is. Nevertheless, it is a point that doesn’t need a great deal of time spent on it. 
 
With regard to the population figures, somewhere between 25,000 and 30,000. I can’t tell you what the 
population is, other than about 50 per cent, as I already indicated, about 50 per cent of the total 
departmental employees are persons who have not, in our interpretation, become northern residents 
living there 15 years or half their lifetime whichever is the lesser. So you can subtract from that total of 
857 man-years about 300 or 400 and you can subtract that from your population and that is what about it 
would be. 
 
Mr. McMillan: How many civil servants do you have working for your department? Permanent or 
part-time? How many man-years of employment have you budgeted for for this year? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: In permanent positions 472; temporary 51; casual, 17; labour service, 317 for a total of 
857. That’s what I told you at the outset. 
 
Mr. McMillan: All right, these 857 people work directly for your DNS and are under the jurisdiction of 
those people working directly for the DNS. How many other positions in northern Saskatchewan do you 
fund, from your estimates, either provide grants for the employment of, or people that you pay the 
cheque to for work that they are doing for you, for work that isn’t directly connected with you? For 
example, you might provide a grant of $100,000 for house construction and some would argue - all 
right, well, just the number of positions that you provide grants for. 
 
Now you are providing a grant of $25,000 for example, to a local community in the North to hire a 
community planner. O.K., that’s a program that you people have. You put out a press release on it and 
you said that you hope other communities will take advantage of it as well. How many of those positions 
do you create? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: That is a figure that we wouldn’t have precisely and it is a figure at which we could 
only guess. If you provide a grant to the community to do a certain kind 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2975 
 

of research, either for municipal services or for water and sewer programs or for whatever the 
community decides is its greatest or most important issue, I don’t know whether they would hire two or 
three people with a grant. It would be very difficult, if not impossible, to give you an accurate or a close 
estimate even, of what that might be. But to get within the ballpark, I don’t think it would be any greater 
than 25 or 50. My officials say that it would not be 25. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I may get back to those employment statistics in a little while. The one other issue that I 
would really like to point out - the points I would like to take issue with you (there are several of them). 
Number one, you say that your house construction averages you $50 a square foot and you are quite 
impressed by that after comparisons with the rest of the province. I’ll tell you that the average house 
construction cost in Saskatchewan for a 1,000 foot bungalow, three bedroom, is about $30 to $32 per 
square feet. That is an absolute fact. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: No. 
 
Mr. McMillan: All right, that is an absolute fact. You are at $50 per square foot right now and I’ll tell 
you, if you don’t believe me, check with the construction industry. 
 
The other area that I would like to quarrel with you on - not so much a quarrel but you love to lump 
these things together. Now you say there are only 16 per cent of the people within DNS who are 
receiving social assistance of one form or another. I would like to know how many people are on the 
staff of DNS, simply given a title and then paid a salary as an employee when you have created that job 
simply to take someone off direct social services payments and put them in a position. I will give you a 
few examples. Going through on the order in council here, time after time after time we see people who 
have been hired as co-op management advisors. I was really interested in that position you created 
through order in council for the North. Now you may have some particular reason for appointing these 
people and I would like to know what it is but I hope you are honest with me. I don’t think it is because 
you wanted to hire somebody simply on a daily basis to advise Co-ops and to help manage their affairs. 
You have hired these people as Co-op management advisors, one after another of them. You pay them 
all in the neighbourhood of $900 or $1,000 a month. I’d like to know what those people do, on a daily 
basis. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Let me go back to the matter of - and I am not going to dispute this - but I want to 
clarify the record and there aren’t very many in this Chamber who will disagree, that is if you can build 
a house for $32 to $35 a square foot in Saskatchewan today, you are doing an exceptionally good job 
and you must be doing it yourself. Nevertheless, be that as it may, the figures are - go to any contractor 
you want, go to any kind of housing construction program that you want and the figure of $32 to $35 per 
square foot is just not around today. 
 
With regard to the Co-op management advisor and what he does, a Co-op management advisor is not a 
new position. They have been around since at least the 1950s; I suppose they were around when the 
Department of Co-operatives was first established somewhere along 1948. You will find in the 
Department of Co-operatives Estimates that there are some of those people in there as well. We have in 
the North, 11 of these Co-op management advisors and one of the reasons why we have order in council 
appointments is simply because we are attempting to use persons of northern ancestry, persons who may 
not meet the educational qualifications of the Public Service Commission but nevertheless are 
northerners and 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2976 
 

should be employed in areas of that kind and have a particular ability and skill which is not accounted 
for in the job specifications of public service commissions of today. So the Co-op management advisor, 
what do they do? They deal with local fishermen co-operatives, they deal with local store co-ops, they 
deal with local handicraft co-operatives, they work with any other locally established co-operatives, or 
they promote people working together and establishing themselves in small co-operative businesses. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I would like to first clear up one thing with the minister. With respect to the $30 to $32 
a square foot figure, I got that from your Minister of Housing. If you would like to ask him about it, go 
right ahead. The kinds of houses that they have been building under the Native Rural Residential 
Program are exactly the same type of housing you have been building in La Ronge. Now that was $30 to 
$32 per square foot. Now, I am sorry to have embarrassed you there; your bruised ego may be assuaged 
slightly by knowing that they had a $9,000 over-run average on each house they constructed. Many of 
them were built for less than $30 to $32 per square foot by unskilled organizations that were in the 
construction business. So I wouldn’t be bragging about building a house for $50 a square foot, when 
your own minister has been bragging about building them for $30 to $32 a square foot. I believe he may 
even be averaging the price of some of La Ronge homes when he included that figure; we got into that 
in Sask Housing. Maybe you’ve been working on the houses, Mr. Minister, but I don’t doubt then that 
the cost would go to $50 a square foot. 
 
I would like to pursue one other question with you. I am under the impression as a result of questioning 
in the Public Accounts Committee that the DNS spent over $3 million last year in taxi fares and I would 
like to ask you if you could confirm that figure for me. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: I didn’t get the exact figure, you throw about the figure fairly loosely. Much of what 
appears to be an extravagance in terms of taxi services is . . . Don’t forget, if you didn’t take a taxi from 
Beauval to La Loche or Patuanak to take a patient to the hospital in Saskatoon or for medical attention in 
Saskatoon or in Meadow Lake, or in some of the other areas, then you would have to hire an aircraft or 
you would have to develop some other transportation system. We don’t have bus transportation systems 
going up to those points. There has never been and they are not accommodated the same way they 
would be in the south. So when you have the necessity to take a person from one of those northern 
points to a hospital you make the choice as to whether you take them by aircraft or whether you take 
them by some other means of transportation. We have used the taxis to do that. The figure that is given 
to me by officials is $179,000 for the total taxi allocation, as I understand it, in the last fiscal year. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Is that the taxi allocation for those people who are taken to hospital by taxi or does that 
include the entire taxi bill paid by DNS last year? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: $172,000 is for medical persons, that would be about $7,000 for other. 
 
Mr. McMillan: What other reasons do you have to use taxis in northern Saskatchewan other than your 
departmental employees getting around? Are there other circumstances under which the local residents 
are allowed to use taxis and submit their receipts to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Well, once again, it is a matter of transportation. It’s a means of 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2977 
 

transportation in the northern communities; we bring people to meetings; we bring persons to the job 
site. It is a process of communication as well as transportation. So, while it may appear to the members 
down here who live in a far different world, that figure is not considered to be high in terms of the 
responsibility and the area of jurisdiction which we have and the miles to cover that is related to the 
administration of the northern district. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I would like to ask the minister we are going to research some more of these figures 
because I understand your total travel bill was well over $3 million. Do you know what your average 
expenditure per civil servant was on travel and sustenance last year and I assume it will be the same or 
worse this year? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Roughly speaking, $1,955 per person. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Again, I did some research on this previously with respect to each different branch of 
your department and the payments made and it works out to, to the best of my knowledge, according to 
the people that you had listed in your estimates that worked for you, about $7,000 an employee. Can you 
tell me under what circumstances your civil servants use aircraft in northern Saskatchewan? I mean, 
obviously, in connection with their work but are they restricted in any manner or is it simply a question 
of phoning up La Ronge Aviation or Athabasca or phoning up your department and your aircraft and 
saying, I would like to go to Southend Reindeer tomorrow and getting in the airplane and going? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: No, there is a transportation policy within the department that suggests that employees 
do not have a free hand to go out and to charter or to take an airplane out of the department or otherwise 
at their will. They must conform to the policy which tries to co-ordinate aircraft travel and on a 
scheduled basis as well as on some co-ordinated basis as to going to any out-of-the-way community, a 
community that is not within the line of a schedule. They attempt to co-ordinate health workers, resource 
workers, social workers and so on in transportation that way. So there is a policy within the department. 
 
Mr. McMillan: The minister told me that they spent roughly $2,000 per employee on travel, sustenance 
and vehicle expenses. At 800 employees I assume that works out to about $160,000? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: What we’ve got is a different mix on the number of employees. You can take the . . . 
The number that we are having some difficulty in communicating with is the advance account 
employees who, obviously, have a travel cost involved as well. They are not the list of persons which I 
gave you. For example, a person who rides a caterpillar tractor, under the advance account system on a 
construction site, is not in the 874, but operates under the economic development advance account 
system, which constructs the roads and builds the houses and the schools and so on. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Is he included in your figures with respect to employees? Is he included in the 875 
employees? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: No, he was not. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, how many of those people do you have? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: The report says the Labour Service Employment reaches as high 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2978 
 

as 2,500 during the year. That is the Administration Branch, under what the Annual Report says. These 
are labour service people which really are construction workers. They would be, if we were not in the 
situation in which we are in in northern Saskatchewan and we didn’t have to have a project management 
branch or a project management facility, then these persons would be employed, naturally, by 
contractors. They would be employed by other persons who normally in the South would hire those 
persons. But because we are in the business of construction of roads, and construction of schools and 
public facilities and sewer and water projects, we have that labour component and some of that labour 
component, of course, has sustenance costs. 
 
Mr. McMillan: All right, I won’t pursue that. I think my figures may have been wrong too. I believe if 
you are $2,000 employee it is maybe $1.6 million. I am not sure about that; I will have to go over that 
again. I see health services, for example, spends $110,000, or spent last year $110,000 on travel 
sustenance and vehicle expenses, etc. 
 
I had another area I was going to pursue with you. I guess the Social Services Branch is a good enough 
place to start as well. 
 
You say that only 16 per cent of the people in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan are receiving 
social service payments directly, because there are different forms of social services. If probably one got 
down to it, you are in a position that you pay 80 per cent of the people in DNS who are probably 
receiving government money from one source or another. And under definition of one sort, that would 
be a social service you are providing with government money. You say that 16 per cent of the 
population is receiving social services. Can you tell me what the average payment is? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Yes, the figures which I gave you were the dependency rate in the Northern 
Administration District, which I said was about 16 per cent and that we had come down from 30 per cent 
to 16 per cent. I have indicated, as well, in that same period of time that the Department of Indian 
Affairs is running at a dependency rate of about 46 per cent in the same area. 
 
With respect to the approximate Saskatchewan Assistance Plan expenditures per capita, I am talking 
about expenditures per capita, averaging them across the piece both in the North and in the South, it is 
about $1,000 per capita in northern Saskatchewan. In southern Saskatchewan, including the Family 
Income Plan, the FIP plan, it is about $1,000 per capita. Now you will see that what is happening here is 
that even though we may have a higher percentage of persons on the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, that 
the costs per individual person is likely to be lower in the South. The reason why in the city of Regina, if 
a person is on public assistance here, likely the rent is to be around $250 - $300 a month. In the North 
that is not so, in many cases. So it is difficult to use an exact comparison. You have to be careful about 
the comparisons that we use. I think it is an interesting figure to consider that the per capita expenditures 
in the North runs at about $1,000 per capita, while they run at about the same thing in the South when 
you include the Family Income Plan. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I would like to know how many people on the average - you say 15 per cent were 
receiving direct payments. How many individuals, did you serve with respect to social services in the 
year under review, or at least last year? 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2979 
 

Mr. Bowerman: I want to take the opportunity, if I may, to introduce the staff, which the member didn’t 
really give me time to do when we started out. He was very anxious to get going on the department and I 
can understand why, it is a very interesting department - a department that is doing an exceptionally 
good job. I am sure that he will be pleased to meet the Deputy Minister, Mr. L’Heureux, who sits with 
me; Jack Morris is behind Mr. L’Heureux; he is Director of Administrative Services; Jim Stobbs who is 
the Director of Project Management, who is behind myself; and the Assistant Deputy Minister, Ross 
Moxley in charge of the Resources and Secondary Education, sitting behind Mr. Morris; and Mr. 
Worster, Assistant Deputy Minister of Social Services and Health. Behind them Mr. Shikeer (?) from 
Executive Planning and Mr. Sardar. 
 
Now, the answer to your question with respect to recipients, total recipients, 2,531. That’s 16 per cent as 
we indicated. It is 754 cases. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, your expenditures here for direct payment with the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 
and your total for Social Services Branch comes close to, comes very close to $6 million and you had 
2,700 recipients did you say? I’m sorry. Well, Estimates, that’s what we are doing. Item 7, Social 
Services Branch, $3,000,080 total cost there; Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, $2.8 million. Now your 
total Social Services dollars spent in the DNS is about $6 million. If 15 per cent of the total population 
received direct payment, that would be 3,750 people. Now there weren’t that many. If that was the case 
then the average payment for the year would be about $15,000 to $16,000. Now that is including 
administration costs, supplying social services, etc. I would like you to repeat for me how many people 
were on social who received payments over the year? You just gave me the figure. I am sorry I wasn’t 
paying enough attention. Would you redo that? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: The number of recipients was 2,531, 1977-78. The number of cases was 754 or 16 per 
cent is the dependency rate which I have already given you. Total expenditures in respect to that is close 
to the figure which you have in this year’s estimates, but last year would be something less than that by 
a few hundred thousand dollars I think - very close to $3 million my officials say. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Your other expenses under item 7 are $1.565 million. What do the other expenses 
entail? Was that assistance in one form or another directly to people? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: That’s other program costs such as corrections, family services, child care and so on - 
come under that other expenses thing. 
 
Mr. G.N. Wipf (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): Mr. Minister, you say that you have 25,000 to 30,000 in 
the North; 16 per cent of that 25,000 or 30,000 have received some help from the Department of Social 
Services. Is that what you say? Or where did you get that 16 per cent - of what? They are not marked on 
these . . . 
 
Mr. Bowerman: No, that’s the eligibility rate, not related to the population. This has no relationship to 
the population. Does it? O.K., I am sorry. My officials say that it is related to the total population rate. 
 
Mr. Wipf: Mr. Minister, you talked about the transportation regulations that you have in the DNS for 
the employees. I wonder if you would table those regulations or explain those regulations for policy or 
whatever you have? 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2980 
 

Mr. Bowerman: I understand that there is not a written policy, but the sort of unwritten policy that 
governs the, is done through the air traffic co-ordinator, who must approve all flights. He doesn’t 
approve an individual flight unless, for example, there was an emergency, unless there was a priority of 
some kind that would let a plane go out to Patuanak, let’s say, without some co-ordination being 
arranged at another day when there would be two or three other passengers go along. While it is a policy 
I understand there is no written policy. It is administered through a person who is called the air traffic 
co-ordinator. 
 
Mr. Wipf: Mr. Minister, I am still hung up a bit on the 16 per cent. You say that you had 754 cases dealt 
with the Department of Social Services and you have 30,000 people and 16 per cent of that is around 
4,400. 
 
Mr. Romanow: What kind of . . . 
 
Mr. Wipf: I don’t know, he hasn’t explained it. I want you to explain that. The Attorney General is 
confused in what you are talking about and he wants to know, also, what kind of cases you are talking 
about here. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: What I think you are confusing is, we give you the total population, the total 
population of 25,000 or 30,000, but that includes Treaty Indian people who operate on their own. In 
other words, their own social service system. As I said, 46 per cent was the dependency rate in the 
Department of Indian Affairs for Treaty Indian people. 
 
Mr. Wipf: O.K. then. Would you subtract the Treaty Indian people in your northern administration 
district and how many people does DNS actually take care of then? What is the number of non-Treaty 
people? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Well, again, you can’t clarify quite as precisely as you would like to in that respect. 
While we don’t deliver the social services on Indian reservations, we do deliver other kinds of programs 
to Treaty Indian people. 
 
If you want the relationship - the relationship in the population, I have said in an offhanded way, is 
about one-third, a third and a third. In other words about 10,000 are Treaty Indian people; about 10,000 
non-status or non-registered Indian people and about 10,000 non-Indian people. Now that is a fairly 
rough calculation. That is the best we can do. It is in that neighbourhood. 
 
Mr. Wipf: O.K. Mr. Minister. A little earlier you talked to the member about the taxi fares, the price of 
taxis. Did I get it right that $172,000 was for ambulance? I think you said $7,000 was for something. 
There is $172,000 for ambulance services. What is DNS doing at this time to actually help the 
ambulance services in the North? I know in La Ronge they were talking about having to remove one 
ambulance from the town site of La Ronge because there wasn’t enough work. Are you helping the 
ambulance services instead of the taxi service, are you going into strictly ambulance service in some of 
these smaller places? I believe that some of these people that you are hauling deserve to be hauled 
maybe in a better accommodation than a taxi. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: I certainly appreciate that if there was another transportation system. You will know 
that we have subsidized Saskatchewan Transportation to do regular runs up the east side and that we 
have been considering, at least, a bus system up the west side as well. But we would prefer now that the 
province has gone into an 



 
May 17, 1978 

 

2981 
 

ambulance program, a provincial ambulance program, we are attempting to blend that into the North as 
much as we can. We are not really at this point deciding to do anything other than to meet the issue as 
we find it and perhaps we can modify or implement or adopt the provincial ambulance program. 
 
Mr. Wipf: Mr. Minister, under the grants to municipal governments throughout Saskatchewan, I realize 
that the ambulance service is one of them, in the North there is a different type of municipal grant going 
to the northern people or into your district and are you waiting for the southern municipalities to accept 
that or get their program going before you start your own in the northern administration district? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: We have been basically waiting for that ambulance program to develop in the South 
and to adopt it into the northern program as best we can. We are carrying on with a situation which has 
been traditional or used in the past. We are using it to a greater extent but we believe that is justified and 
we believe that the justification of that shows up in the hospital administrations, the decrease in the 
number of hospital administrations because of a better health facility. 
 
Mr. Wipf: Mr. Minister, in talking about the grants to the municipal governments, throughout the 
province we have a different type of arrangement for grants for the policing of the areas. In the North the 
police costs do not come under the per capita grants and when I asked that question with the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, he told me I could get my explanation from you. Would you explain that? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: There is no other policing other than the RCMP which is a matter for the Attorney 
General to deal with and he hires all the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and they do all of the policing 
in the North. So there is no provision in the estimates to consider police costs. 
 
Mr. McMillan: I would like to ask the minister a few general questions about his fish-aging program in 
northern Saskatchewan. It has always been a complete sense of intrigue to me why you would establish 
a program to train people how to tell the age of fish. Would the minister try to attempt to justify to me 
why this program is under way in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: I must say that the age and sex life of a fish is very interesting to a biologist, if not to 
other people. One of the reasons for having a fish ageing program is to establish a productivity, a lake 
productivity, to establish lake limits for both commercial and angling purposes. This is part of the 
biological process of studying lake production. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, exactly how many people do you need in the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan to do this sort of work? I would like to know how many people have been involved in the 
program? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Well, I might suggest to you that one of the very beneficial little side programs from 
this is at Stanley Mission, where there is a local fish-aging co-op. In other words, the women of the 
community have learned how to read the age of fish from the scale samples which they take and they are 
not only doing it for Saskatchewan but in fact scale samples are being sent in from other jurisdictions in 
Canada and out of Canada for this particular precise process to be undertaken by this group of ladies in 
the Stanley community. 



 
May 17, 1978 
 

2982 
 

Mr. McMillan: How many people are permanently employed in northern Saskatchewan doing 
fish-aging, counting rings on fish scales as a result of the development of your program? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: I don’t know that we have anyone specifically employed to do that job; I don’t think 
we have. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Well, how much did you spend on developing the program? Because your point to me 
was that the program was developed to provide employment and to do training and yet you can’t even 
tell me of one person who is employed doing it. 
 
Mr. Bowerman: The local co-op, as I told you, in Stanley Mission, is the one for which we provided a 
$15,000 grant and I think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . six persons in Stanley Mission are involved in 
that co-op. 
 
Mr. McMillan: Do you people, aside from - you say you provide a $15,000 grant to the co-op to operate 
- do you provide any funding of any other sort? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: No. 
 
Mr. Wipf: Mr. Minister, in the last little while there has been a lot of controversy over the Northern 
Municipal Council. I am wondering if your officials have come to the commitment or conclusion, I 
suppose, does the Northern Municipal Council, in your opinion, have enough money to carry out its 
commitments for consultation with Specialada (?), the resources and the fisheries and the northern 
contractors and other organizations that they consult with, has this been taken into consideration in your 
estimates? Do you figure there is enough money there for them to do this? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Yes, in my opinion they do have enough money. 
 
Mr. Wipf: How many workers will the amount of money that you have given the Northern Municipal 
Council for the following year. How many do you figure they will be employing? What does your 
budget have for them to employ? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: Well, I couldn’t answer for the Northern Municipal Council. The Northern Municipal 
Council budget will be about $270,000 and for any municipality in Saskatchewan a $250,000 budget is a 
pretty sizeable budget. 
 
Mr. Wipf: Mr. Minister, you talked a little earlier about the sewer and water project that you are doing 
in the North. I am just wondering, for the 1978-79 budget, how many sewer and water projects are you 
going to do and what are your capital expenditures you have for that? 
 
Mr. Bowerman: I am sorry. I wasn’t clearly listening to the member’s question. I was seeing that we 
are getting close to 5 o’clock and I am sure that members of this Assembly will know that the staff that I 
have here today have been in town for a couple of days, staying at a hotel waiting for these Estimates to 
get through. If we don’t conclude this evening, they are here for another day or two days in hotels and I 
am wondering, Mr. Chairman, if the members of the House wouldn’t consider stopping the clock for 15 
minutes or 20 minutes or what it might take? 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 o’clock p.m. 


