



















































Hansard: January 03, 1978


1245 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

January 3, 1978 
 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Mr. M.J. Koskie (Quill Lakes) moved, seconded by Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley) That the 

First Report of the Select Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections by now concurred in. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Regulations Controlling Lotteries 
 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister in 

charge of Consumer Affairs. Shortly before we broke for the Christmas recess I directed some questions 

to the Attorney General concerning the regulations controlling lotteries in the province of Saskatchewan. 

The Attorney General indicated to me at that time that possibly changes could be made and obviously 

you have received, as I have, several letters and complaints from organizations in Saskatchewan which 

say it is making it very difficult for the service clubs, Legions and so on to operate. Have you given any 

consideration in the light of this opposition to some changes in the regulations? 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — I think the hon. member knows that the principle 

reason for the regulations as they are written is to guarantee that those who are engaging in lotteries and 

who are taking a chance by buying tickets will be given an adequate return, that the prize money will be 

of a substantial amount, and since the Criminal Code of Canada insists that the spells out very carefully 

what the Criminal Code . . . very carefully sets out as a charitable purpose . . . the regulations were 

written to conform with the Criminal Code and to guarantee, one, that people would get an adequate 

return, that there would be a substantial portion of the lottery undertaken for charitable purposes. We did 

a great deal of monitoring and, of course, as the Attorney General said earlier we are prepared to listen 

to representations prior to the time the regulations were written. We did carefully scrutinize many 

returns from many lotteries and we think the regulations, as they are constituted, are fair and reasonable 

but, of course, as I say, we will listen to representations. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. If the minister then is prepared to listen to 

representation (and I am sure that he has already received some), the question I want to present to you, 

Mr. Minister, at this particular time is this: would you not think it advisable and imperative for your 

department to notify the provincial head offices of such organizations as the Lions Club, the Kinsmen 

Club, the Legion and so on, and to spell out to them in laymen’s language what the new regulations are 

so that they will not be embarrassed throughout the year 1978 that is before us by conducting illegal 

lotteries and certainly that would be embarrassing to them. Would you not consider then, your 

department, contacting the head offices of the many organizations and making it clear to them what now 

constitutes a legal lottery in Saskatchewan? 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1246 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I think the Criminal Code has been written for a long, long time, in answer to the hon. 

member and these organizations are probably well aware of how the terminology is spelled out in the 

Criminal Code, which is fairly accurate and fairly easy to comprehend. In addition, I would like to point 

out that we have advised all the municipal organizations in the province and they have full details in this 

respect. In addition we are preparing a handbook which we will make available for anyone that wants it, 

including these organizations. It is written in laymen’s terms and it is easy to comprehend and we will 

make it available to them and it is just about ready to come off the press. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I believe I will take a new question. 

 

Gain Resulting from Increase in Oil Price 
 

Mr. E.C. Malone (Leader of the Liberal Opposition): — A question to the Minister of Finance or the 

Minister of Mineral Resources. As the House is aware, the price of oil increased by a dollar per barrel 

effective January 1. The advice we have received, Mr. Speaker, is that the province of Alberta stands to 

gain approximately $170 million as a result of this increase in price. 

 

My first question, to either minister, has any calculation been made as to how much Saskatchewan will 

benefit because of the increase? 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the average general increase will be 

$1 per barrel. I think the member is fully aware that that applies to certain grades of oil in different ways 

so that it is not in fact $1 across the board but I think for average or general figures the price of $1 per 

barrel will apply to about 60 million barrels of production in the province of Saskatchewan, so should 

generate approximately $60 million to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Has the government decided yet as to what 

portion or proportion of this increase that they will allow to remain with the oil industry for the purposes 

of exploration and production in the months ahead? 

 

Mr. Messer: — We have a policy that has been in effect for something approaching a year now in 

relation to price increases and I and the government gave assurance to the industry that for future price 

increases that 60/40 split would stay in effect and that will be the division of the increased profits to the 

province and to those who are involved in the oil industry. 

 

Mr. Malone: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view then of the tremendous cost for energy and 

related products that is being paid by the people of Saskatchewan, has the government given any 

consideration whatsoever to cushioning the taxpayers and the users of this particular product in 

Saskatchewan against this latest increase, in view particularly of the dramatic increases in SPC rates, the 

dramatic increases in the cost of fuel and so on? Does the government have any programs at this time 

that it can announce to cushion the taxpayer against these increases that have been coming? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member should first, I think, be fully aware that when we talk 

about a $60 million increase in revenues to the province and that is not all accruing to the government of 

Saskatchewan, that the consumers of 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1247 

 

Saskatchewan oil do not pay that total bill. About two-thirds of that production is shipped out of the 

province of Saskatchewan and thereby most of the revenue that occurs to the province and the related 

industry comes from consumers outside of the province of Saskatchewan. In relation to his question a to 

whether or not the province has given consideration or is undertaking to give consideration to try and 

cushion the increases to the consumers of energy in the province of Saskatchewan, I think that we have 

already in a number of areas undertaken to do that even though he relates to what he terms dramatic 

increases for natural gas and electricity in the province of Saskatchewan. Those increases are certainly 

less than what other consumers of natural gas and electricity have been confronted with in other parts of 

Canada and in other parts of North America. We announced in the Throne Speech the establishment of 

an energy conservation secretariat which will be involved in undertaking to educate consumers as to 

how they may be able to get better returns for dollars spent on energy. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — I would like to ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, if there is any ongoing 

confrontation. I shouldn’t say confrontation although this is probably what it means — but is there any 

ongoing consultations with the federal government in attempting to come up with a bigger share of that 

export dollar on our Saskatchewan oil? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Well, as the member is fully aware there are some differences of opinion in relation to 

the federal and provincial attitude in relation to the sums of money that will accrue to the province. Yes, 

those discussions are ongoing. 

 

Drug Dispensing Fees — Senior Citizens 
 

Mr. H.W. Lane (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of health. The 

Senior Citizens’ Council for Saskatchewan has gone on record as objecting to the increase recently 

announced by your department for drug dispensing fees. I have a copy of the news release dated 

December 28th, 1977, making that announcement. The government you are associated with has 

advanced or has committed itself to advancing $2.6 million to a private cable television firm. Would you 

be prepared to advance an equal amount to help defray the cost to senior citizens of the increase for 

drugs as a result of the news release of December 28th, 1977? 

 

Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): — Maybe I misunderstood, Mr. Speaker, but I can’t 

recall the government of Saskatchewan advancing $2.6 million to a cable TV firm. I understood it was a 

guarantee of a loan. But be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, that’s not relevant to the question. The question 

is with regard to the prescription fee that is charged for prescription drugs. I would like to point out to 

the member that the consumers of Saskatchewan by the Prescription Drug Plan are saving in excess of 

$4 million a year and, therefore, it is a considerable saving to all consumers including senior citizens. 

The announcement made recently, last week, indicated that there was going to be an increase of 20 cents 

per prescription. That may not necessarily be passed down by all pharmacies. In fact some are indicating 

and will indicate that they will not be increasing it by 20 cents. It is a choice that they have and, 

therefore, the consumer under that kind of a scheme has an opportunity to do some shopping around. 

 

Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Do I take it from the answer that you have given that you 

are not prepared to make any special accommodations with respect to this particular increase insofar as 

senior citizens are concerned? 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1248 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — There is not a proposal, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s question, for a 

special accommodation. We have for senior citizens many other programs that we provide, including the 

income subsidy that we provide the senior citizens in need and I think that those kinds of programs are a 

much better way to make sure that senior citizens have an adequate income than doing it on the basis of 

bits and pieces through various kinds of programs that we have. I might also add that many of the 

programs and benefits that accrue from our health programs are to the benefit of senior citizens already. 

 

Increase in Deterrent Fees 
 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I too, would like to direct a question 

to the Minister of Health in relation to the increase in deterrent fees from $2 to $2.20 and the 

Pharmacare plan, Mr. Speaker. The question I would like to ask and direct to the Minister of Health is: is 

he aware that last year there were some 3,600,000 prescriptions written in Saskatchewan which would 

come to approximately $8,200,000 of deterrent fees? By increasing by 20 cents the cost to the patient, 

brings an added increase of $730,000 approximately, to the cost to senior citizens and those sick and the 

old and halt, all that need this particular care. Can the minister indicate why the government of 

Saskatchewan has not agreed to pick up a portion of the 20 cents of the increased cost of the 

administration of the Pharmacare plan? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the commitment of the government when we committed the 

program to the time that we developed it was to provide drugs to Saskatchewan citizens at reduced cost. 

This commitment has been fulfilled and I believe fulfilled very adequately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now it is rather interesting, Mr. Speaker, to hear members from the Liberal 

caucus get up and ask questions of that kind about a program which last year some of their members, 

recorded in Hansard, branded as being a frill program. Surely, if it’s a frill program then the thrust of the 

questions is a little bit misdirected. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I think that the minister is aware that the cost of this 

particular program to a family of our in the province of Saskatchewan is $75. Could the minister tell me, 

did he give any indication to the industry that the government of Saskatchewan would be paying an 

increased portion of those deterrent fees, or any portion, in any negotiations with the pharmaceutical 

association? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am not aware of such a commitment of that kind. Probably the member is 

referring to a newspaper article which I read as well as he did, last week. I was as mystified by the 

newspaper article as I am sure some other people are. I might add that the government, even with that 

charge that now the consumer has to pay, does indeed pick up some portion of the dispensing fee and so 

the government is making some of the cost pick-up that is involved with the cost of prescribing or of 

dispensing the drug. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I am going to ask the minister a question. With 

the tremendous increase in cost and inflation, with an increase of something in the neighbourhood of 10 

per cent in the dispensing fee above, once again, the anti-inflation guidelines in the Dominion of 

Canada, a cost of $730,000 to the sick 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1249 

 

and the old and the halt, would the minister indicate whether or not the government of Saskatchewan 

will consider the absolute removal of the deterrent fees in the drug program for senior citizens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The last time, Mr. Speaker, we had deterrent fees in Saskatchewan was when that 

member opposite was sitting on this side of the House. We do not have a deterrent fee. The development 

of the Prescription Drug Plan was such as I indicated earlier, that it was intended to reduce the cost of 

drugs to the consumer. It has done that and there is no doubt about it. 

 

Now the member asks if the government is considering the total removal of the prescription fees — my 

answer to the member is: — no, we are not at the present time considering that. I find that the consumers 

of Saskatchewan, including senior citizens are quite satisfied that our Prescription Drug Plan is an 

adequate plan, it’s working very well and it provides the lowest cost drugs to consumers anywhere in 

Canada. 

 

Canadian Beef Exports 
 

Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. 

Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that United States farmers are today picketing Canadian border 

crossings with complaints and objections surrounding the importation of Canadian beef, they have left 

the impression that Canadian beef exports are costing the American farmers $8 a hundred on their 

livestock. Will the government immediately consider sending Department of Agriculture officials to 

each of the Saskatchewan border crossings to supply accurate information to the picketing US farmers 

and protect the Saskatchewan cattle exports? 

 

Hon. E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the people who are handling 

livestock, who are shipping livestock across the borders are quite aware of the balance of trade and the 

problems that are related to the crossing of cattle over the border, and they will be using all of the 

arguments available to them through our department and any other facilities they have, to make the right 

arguments. 

 

I would be prepared at any time to have our people available to them for any additional information they 

might want but I am sure that most of them have the information at hand. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister of Agriculture is not prepared to 

accept those responsibilities on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, then I wonder, Mr. Minister, 

would you consider requesting the federal government officials of the Department of Agriculture to have 

their officials at all border crossings and protect the Canadian cattlemen and all of their interests as it 

pertains to the export of Canadian beef to the United States? 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian officials are aware of what is happening and 

that they are taking the proper mechanism to deal with it. I would think that nobody is stopping those 

cattle from going across the border. There are pickets there attempting to convince the truckers that they 

should not cross. I am not aware at this point in time that any trucks have been stopped and until such an 

emergency arises I think we should not interfere. 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1250 

 

CPN Monthly Rent to Sask Tel 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, to either the Attorney General or the 

minister in charge of Telephones, will CPN be paying the same monthly rent to Sask Tel, namely $3.90, 

the rate that is not yet announced but will shortly be announced for conventional cable operators? 

 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it the rate that the 

CPN would pay to Sask Tel in the event that CPN becomes operational has not yet been finalized. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the minister would agree with me that 

since Sask Tel will have to create traps or filters, and secondly, supply converters, and since even buying 

those items in bulk will mean that Sask Tel will face a price of approximately $100 per subscriber, that 

to amortize the cost of that $100 would be about $2.50 per month, and that a reasonable rate for CPN if 

$3.90 is the reasonable rate for cable, that the reasonable rate for CPN would be $6.40 per month. 

 

Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, the terms for the monthly rental and any arrangements 

between Sask Tel and CPN with respect to traps and converters is still being negotiated. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree with me that not only 

will CPN drive up the price of programming for all of the conventional stations in Saskatchewan with a 

cost to Saskatchewan people but that also if you charge a rate less than $6.40 it will mean that a Crown 

corporation is heavily subsidizing CPN in addition to the heavy subsidizations involved in the grants and 

loan guarantees to date which total almost $1 million and $2.6 million which you have now guaranteed? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the question of rates as it applies to both CPN and the 

conventional operators, it is assumed that a rate will be struck that will enable Sask Tel to recover its 

capital cost just as it recovers its capital cost for most of the hardware facilities that it provides as part of 

the total communication system. 

 

Regional Assistance Program — RCMP 
 

Mr. G.N. Wipf (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, prior to the Christmas break it was 

indicated that the RCMP were investigating the RAP Program which is run by the DNS. Could the 

Attorney General tell us if this investigation has been completed and if so will the report be tabled in this 

House? If it has not been completed, when do you expect it to be completed or do you have any idea? 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that it was indicated before 

Christmas that the RAP Program was under investigation by the RCMP as far as DNS is concerned. I 

believe the question related to investigations surrounding an individual company or individual, I am not 

sure which of the RAP aspect of it was or may be incidental to the investigation. Secondly, the second 

aspect of the question is, will a copy of the RCMP report be tabled and the answer to that is 

emphatically and clearly, no. Police reports which are carried out as part of investigations for the 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1251 

 

possible laying of criminal or quasi criminal charges, have always been, always, not only in 

Saskatchewan but everywhere in our system of government, confidential and we intend to maintain that 

policy. 

 

Windfall Profits from Increase in Oil 
 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. A substantial percentage 

or portion of the windfall profits or moneys that will be accruing to your department as a result of the 

increase of $1 per barrel of oil effective January 1st will be paid by the agricultural sector of this 

province. Could the Minister of Agriculture assure the House and the agricultural sector that they are 

concerned about the fact that their net incomes will be dropping drastically in 1978 as they did in 1977 

and look into our suggestion of re-introduction of the Farm Fuel Cost Reduction Program to enable that 

industry to continue to operate? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the policy of the government will be 

announced in this respect in due course. 

 

Request for Assistance by CCIL 
 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. I wonder if the Premier could 

tell this Assembly if anything has happened during the last week or ten days regarding the request for 

assistance by Canadian Cooperative Implements Limited and, if so, what has happened as far as 

commitments by the Saskatchewan government? 

 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge nothing has transpired in the last ten 

days or so and I have consulted with the Minister of Co-ops who has been dealing with this on a 

day-to-day basis on behalf of the government and he advises me that there has been no change in the 

situation in the last ten days. 

 

Contract for Cable TV 
 

Mr. MacDonald: — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications. Could the minister tell me and the members of the House who no contract (at least 

there wasn’t until just prior to the New Year), why no contract has been signed between Cable Regina 

and the Saskatchewan Telecommunications and if this contract has still not been signed in the last few 

days, why has it not and when will the minister indicate will there be a possible signing? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the agreement was signed some weeks ago between Sask Tel and the 

North Battleford Cable Co-op. That agreement was subject to final approval by the CRTC and the 

CRTC finally did agree to that agreement. Once that was cleared away that agreement provided a basis 

for obtaining an agreement between Sask Tel and the three other operators and to the best of my 

knowledge that has not been obtained but the discussions are proceeding. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Would the minister indicate to the members of the 

House if it is the generally accepted policy of the government to delay the signing of this agreement in 

order to promote the interest of CPN ahead of Cable Regina? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Mr. Speaker, the conclusion of an agreement between Sask Tel and 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1252 

 

Regina Cable and the conventional cable operators in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw has nothing to do with 

the guarantee by the government to CPN to set up a competitive network. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Final supplementary. Would the minister not agree that the delay in the signing of 

the agreement with Cable Regina and Sask Telecommunications is seriously hampering the ability of 

Cable Regina to sell to the consumers of Regina their product and at the same time enhancing the 

opportunity of CPN to sell their product? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the three conventional cable operators, aside from 

North Battleford, that have been awarded licenses by the CRTC are in the process of working out an 

agreement along the lines of the North Battleford agreement and that is a process that does take some 

time and I am not aware of any great horrendous problems that are arising as part of that process. 

 

Amendments to the School Act 
 

Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, 

after several months Bill 42 is finally to come down in this session. It is a very large bill and you have 

indicated both within this House and to the media that perhaps the government itself would be looking at 

some major amendments to The School Act. Because of the size of the bill and the mammoth amount of 

discussion that is to take place, would the minister not think it advisable for the government to withdraw 

the bill, to make the amendments that the government is going to make and then reissue it or ring it into 

the House at another session? 

 

Hon. D.L. Faris (Minister of Education): — No. 

 

Signing of Cable Contracts 
 

Mr. Merchant: — A question to the minister in charge of Sask Telecommunications. Is it correct that 

the contracts in Regina and Saskatoon will be signed today or tomorrow and is the rate a $3.90 rate? 

 

Mr. Byers: — I can’t say, Mr. Speaker, whether the agreements will be signed today, tomorrow or any 

specific time or hour. Secondly, I cannot advise you as to what the specific rate will be. I don’t have that 

information right here. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Is the minister saying that you will not give us that rate, or that you don’t have the 

rate? 

 

Mr. Byers: — I don’t have the rate at my fingertips. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I wonder if the minister would ask the Attorney General, who I believe has the 

contract and is aware of the rate, and inform the House whether the rate is in fact $3.90 per subscriber, 

per month? 

 

Mr. Byers: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you could rise in the House in the opposition and ask the question for 

any rate. If the member wants to know what the rate is he can put a question on the order paper. He is 

quite aware of that procedure. We would be glad to provide him with the information. 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1253 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 56 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 56 showing: 

 

The revenue received by SGIO for the fiscal years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 from the sale of 

package policy insurance additional to licence plate insurance from the purchases between the ages of: 

(a) 18 and 30: — (b) 30 to 45; (c) 45 to 55; (d) 55 and older. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I have had these matters on the order paper for some time and the only reason I 

didn’t move them earlier was because it was in the radio time and so on and I anticipated the 

government being unhappy about some of the remarks that I would make. I say to the Attorney General, 

it would be better to save this rancour until after Christmas and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole series of questions are designed to get at something which I believe to be true 

and that is I believe that SGIO punishes older users of their services. It is my belief from talking with 

other insurance companies and line companies that the profitability, particularly in dealing with the 

types of insurance that are questioned in this series of returns, that the profitability goes up a great deal 

with the people beyond middle age — 55 and older. That the current insurance provisions that this 

government has take from the old and reward the young who have the tendency to have more accidents 

(and serious accidents) and in a way sort of tax the elderly for being cautious, tax the elderly for being 

careful, tax the elderly for driving well, not having fires, being careful with their possession, not having 

items stolen from them. This whole series, Mr. Speaker, from 56 through to Return No. 65, all address 

themselves at that question. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am told by government officials that they may not be able to give me these figures. 

I find that very hard to believe. The breakdown by age . . . I am told by government officials that no 

records are kept by SGIO of your clientele in terms of age. I find that very hard to believe because line 

companies keep these kinds of records. I find it surprising that such a large insurance company would 

not keep records by age and not have some idea of who their clients were and where their customers 

were coming from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, knowing then the intent of the information that I seek, I trust that I won’t hear from the 

minister that he is prepared to give me certain kinds of information but not give me information about 

the age of their customers, and knowing as well, Mr. Speaker, that I will have an opportunity to speak to 

the other returns without any further comments, I move Return No. 56, showing, seconded by Mr. 

Wiebe, my seatmate from Morse. 

 

Hon. E.C. Whelan (Minister in charge of SGIO): — Mr. Speaker, I listened with a great deal of 

interest to the hon. member for Wascana. It struck me as being contradictory when I heard him talk 

about how senior citizens were being discriminated against. I recall vividly when the members from his 

group protested very strongly when we allocated a few cents per gallon from the price of gasoline to a 

fund that would help 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1254 

 

alleviate the situation. The request for this consideration financially came originally from the senior 

citizens. It was based on the fact that senior citizens drive fewer miles and, therefore, the people who 

drive miles have accidents and those who drive miles buy gasoline and the allocation of 3 cents per 

gallon for gasoline would enable us to keep the rates at a reasonable level, particularly to help the senior 

citizens who drive perhaps 1,000 to 1,500 miles per year. It absolutely amazes me that the opposition 

members would protest against the 3 cents per gallon levy and at the same time go to bat for the senior 

citizens. I just want to tell him that we take into consideration the mileage but we do not discriminate 

against citizens or for citizens based on their age. The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office 

records do not classify insurance premiums and claims according to the age of the policy holder. 

Moreover it is virtually impossible to obtain the information requested by age group category as we do 

not capture the age of the insured on the policy. In the case of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

we do have the age of the registered owner and the vehicle registration certificate and the age of the 

driver on the driver certificate. Nevertheless premiums and claims are not classified according to age, to 

do so now would be virtually impossible and the cost would be inordinately high. Furthermore, in the 

motion for return there is a reference to revenue received from the sale of insurance and we think that 

this may best be described as premiums earned. And amounts paid out on insurance policies may more 

appropriately be defined as claims incurred to obtain the best match between revenues and costs. Also 

unless the expenses of writing insurance and settling claims are taken into account, those who look at the 

record will have an incomplete picture of the profitability of a particular line of insurance. 

 

Finally the licence year is a more natural trade for auto insurance than is the fiscal year. In view of the 

foregoing I propose to move an amendment to the motion, seconded by Mr. Faris, the hon. member for 

Arm River, which would read as follows: 

 

That Motion Number 56 be amended to read that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and replaced 

by the following: 

 

The Premiums earned by SGIO for the licence years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 from the sale of 

package policy, automobile insurance additional to insurance under The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment as the minister well knows is absolutely useless, it 

doesn’t give any information that anyone could care less about. That information is fairly readily 

available. I won’t even bother to read the return when I no doubt have it mailed to me a year and a half 

from now someplace else. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where . . . 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Otto’s house. The information, Mr. Speaker, is as far as I can tell available. When 

package policies are taken out, when automobile insurance is taken out, your age is filled into the form. 

Indeed, there was a time when there was a surcharge based on age. All of that information, I suggest, is 

available, and even if that information is not available in the specific and easy way that I hoped it was 

available when I drafted this Motion for Return, I am satisfied that SGIO could give us figures on the 

profitability of the various age groups. I am also satisfied, Mr. Speaker, that those figures would 

demonstrate that there is a transfer of money from the old to the young, that there is a greater 

profitability insurance in dealing with old people than young people. Other insurance companies that 

that into account, other insurance 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1255 

 

companies, Mr. Speaker, such as Allstate, for instance, have special rates and special premiums. I am 

aware and we’ll come to the return, I am aware of a provision by which there is a modestly reduced rate 

available for a home-pak kind of policy that older people can get. As people reach middle age and go 

beyond it, their ability to adjust to increased costs ends, they don’t have the flexibility basically to go out 

and earn more. A government insurance office with the power of being able to impose whatever rate 

they seek, a government insurance office with the advantage of compelling everyone to deal with them, 

should be able to pass some of those savings, some of the high profitability that they enjoy from older 

people back to those older people. All of these motions address themselves to the fact that SGIO should 

be charging a different rate for older people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am moving some distance from the amendment. Let me just say one thing further. We 

have in Saskatchewan now 54 per cent of people over 65 drawing the Guaranteed Income Supplement. 

That means that 54 per cent of Saskatchewan people over the age of 65 are living, if they are single, on 

something in the $260 to $310 a month rate. They are faced with these kinds of costs and government 

should be doing what it can to ease that cost factor instead of using a compulsory rate and a uniform 

rate, which is better politically, the uniform rate is better for you politically, instead of using that 

uniform rate for the good politics that’s in it to really tax the old and pass it to the young. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 57 
 

Mr. Merchant moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 57 showing: 

 

For the fiscal years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77, the amounts paid out by SGIO on policies of ‘package 

policy insurance additional to licence plate insurance’ from the purchasers between the ages of: (a) 18 

and 30; (b) 30 to 45; (c) 45 to 55; (d) 55 and older. 

 

He said: This is the second matter dealing with the package policy insurance and I suggest to hon. 

members that if you have your forms, if you recall ever applying for a package policy you will find that 

on the form you were asked what your age was. That information has gone to SGIO, SGIO knows the 

age of people holding package policies. Now if the minister were, for instance, saying to this House, 

‘Look, the expense of giving you all of that information is too great but we can give you a representative 

sample.’ If the minister were even able to say to this House but he can’t because he knows it to be true 

that there is a higher profitability of older people. If the minister were able to say, look, I saw these 

motions coming and I knew what you were after (indeed, I think I have talked to him about it) I knew 

what you were after, I’ve asked the people in SGIO and they say, no. For some curious reason line 

companies may make more money out of older people but we don’t. Maybe we have succeeded as a 

Crown corporation in being inefficient in some way and we are not doing as well with older people as 

we should. If the minister were able to say that, but he’s not. If the minister were getting up 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1256 

 

and saying, we can’t give you all of that information because it’s too costly to give it to you, but we’ll 

give you some representative information, we’ll go and do a sample of 500 or 1,000 policies and come 

up with some representative information. If he were introducing that kind of an amendment, then 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, people might understand the amendment and might say, well, there is some 

justification for whatever reason, though SGIO requests to know the age of people on a package policy, 

they haven’t put it into their computer or they haven’t broken down the figures. If the minister were 

saying that it might be a little more understandable, but instead what the minister, if he follows the form 

that he followed in the last return, instead what he will do is that he will just get up and say, well, we’re 

not going to give you any usable information at all; we are not going to give you information that 

anybody could care less about. 

 

Now, when he does that, Mr. Speaker, (I won’t speak to the amendment at this time) but when he does 

that, I say to members of the House, you have to see it for what it is. SGIO is making an added profit 

from older people and they don’t want the taxpayers to know that they don’t want older people to know 

that. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s an improper and atrocious way for a government insurance 

office to function. It is all the more shocking coming from a party that mouths some support for older 

people, mouths support for those who are to some extent deprived, and are caught perhaps by inflation 

and other forces over which they have no control. 

 

We face, Mr. Speaker, an ever-growing number of older people in Saskatchewan and this country. By 

1991 there will be approximately 20 times as many people over 75 in Canada as there were at the turn of 

the century. We face a problem, Mr. Speaker, with more and more people retiring, and when they retire 

they retire to fixed incomes. They are not able to adjust to rising costs. The costs at SGIO which are 

acceptable costs, good costs — I believe that SGIO has worked well and served Saskatchewan people 

well, and frankly, I believe that it is a well run corporation. The costs at SGIO are good costs, it’s a good 

corporation, but it shouldn’t be transferring money from the old to the young because of the good 

politics. And, Mr. Speaker, with those words I move Return No. 57. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with a great deal of interest to the hon. member for 

Wascana when he talks about Allstate Insurance and their rates. I venture to guess that the Allstate rates, 

even if they did consider the age of the purchaser of the premium, would still be higher than anything 

SGIO would charge, particularly when there is a subsidy and 3 cents per gallon gasoline on the mileage, 

and the older cars have a much lower rate than anything Allstate charges. The senior citizens of 

Saskatchewan are getting an excellent deal in the province of Saskatchewan from SGIO. 

 

If you look at the overall picture, a dollar’s worth of insurance fed into a company like Allstate costs 38 

cents to administer while in the province of Saskatchewan, a dollar’s worth of insurance fed into the 

SGIO system takes about 18 cents to administer, so not only are the senior citizens, not only are the 

young people, not only are middle-aged people or the farm people or anybody else, being exploited to 

the tune of about 20 cents, but when the hon. member advocates Allstate insurance, that’s precisely what 

he is doing. He is going to bat for a company that takes 38 cents out of every insurance dollar in order to 

administer its program. Sure, under certain circumstances anyone 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1257 

 

can quote separately on special rates for one category or another among the so-called free enterprise 

insurance, but the overall picture is the 38 cents out of every dollar that is paid to them goes to 

administration — 20 cents more than is necessary, so all the people who buy insurance from them, 

regardless of their age are being exploited, and there isn’t a doubt in the world that the record will show 

that every Liberal government in Canada, federal and provincial, is opposed to public insurance 

corporations. They haven’t, in any province where they have been the government, introduced this kind 

of a program. As a matter of fact, the federal government has put in the way every possible roadblock, 

legal and otherwise, to prevent the extension and the development of Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance. 

 

It is all right to come here on behalf of one group, but it has never been the policy of the Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office to discriminate for or against any particular group. We have given them 

all an excellent rate, the lowest rate that there is in Canada on a per vehicle rate. If you take all of the 

vehicles in Saskatchewan and divide them into the total cost for insurance you will find that the average 

cost of the vehicles is just over $100. You can take any other area, even where there is public insurance, 

in this country and the cost per vehicle would be $30 to $40 higher. If we are advocating extra 

expenditure, extra time, extra effort in order to discriminate or to locate where the accidents are, I think 

that is an added expense. The money that is being spent in SGIO is not being spent on this kind of 

careful research to ascertain who is at fault, but rather to work on a safety program. 

 

This year the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office will spend over $500,000 on a safety program 

that takes in not only senior citizens but young people as well. 

 

I just want to move a similar amendment, seconded by the hon. member for Arm River for Motion No. 

57 that: 

 

All the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and replaced by the following: 

 

For the licence years 1974 and 1975, 19975 and 1976, 1976 and 1977, the amount of claims and 

expenses incurred in respect to the package policy insurance, additional to insurance under the AAIA. 

 

Return No. 58 
 

Mr. Merchant moved that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 58 showing: 

 

The revenue received by SGIO for the fiscal years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 from the sale of licence 

plate insurance from purchasers between the ages of: (a) 18 and 30; (b) 30 to 45; (c) 45 to 55; (d) 55 

and older. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, let there not be any doubt in anybody’s mind (and I don’t think there is) what the 

minister is doing is he might well vote down the motion; nobody having drafted these questions could 

care less if he ever sees those replies. You ask for some information about oranges and they don’t even 

tell you about bananas; they mention that a monkey does the Chiquita brand commercials, it is about that 

far afield. Nobody could care less about the returns that the minister seems prepared to give to me. I am 

not looking for the profitability of the various areas of SGIO’s operations. They may make some good 

reading to somebody, but I am not in the insurance business and I am not that interested in it. 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1258 

 

What really does the minister do? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Well he comes in with that motion that his executive assistant drew thinking ‘gosh it 

will look better if we give them a bunch of gobbledegook instead of just voting down the request for 

information. That will look better, a little bit of gobbledegook next March’ instead of saying no, we are 

not going to give you any information at all. We wouldn’t want the press to report that they just said no, 

we won’t give them any information at all, so he moves these amendments to give information that 

nobody could care less about. Then, Mr. Speaker, he goes down every alley and follows up every red 

herring that he can think of, talks about SGIO and says that SGIO is defensible and SGIO gives better 

rates than Allstate, and maybe it does and maybe it doesn’t and I don’t care whether it does . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, the minister has not spoken on this item which is before the Assembly and in 

order to be in order the member must relate his remarks to the item that is before him at this time. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have such a good feeling for the member’s thinking that I sort 

of anticipated some of his remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion requests, as you can see, certain information regarding licence plate insurance. 

In asking for the information contained in this motion I want it to be clear that I am not in any way 

suggesting that SGIO doesn’t give good rates as a general rule. I am not in any way suggesting that 

SGIO, for instance, doesn’t give better rates than Allstate. Perhaps Allstate gives better rates, perhaps 

SGIO does. I don’t know. I think that SGIO gives pretty good rates all across the board. What I also 

believe is that SGIO subsidizes those pretty good rates for the young by extra profits from the old. In 

similar motions that have come before this House, I have yet to hear the minister deny that fact and the 

minister won’t be able to deny that fact when he speaks to Return No. 58 because that’s true. SGIO 

subsidizes younger rates at the expense of older people. 

 

Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s improper and that it would be appropriate for the figures to see the 

light of day so that people can decide whether it is fair or not and people could also be able to judge for 

themselves the level of profitability. That’s the reason that I now move Return No. 58 showing, 

seconded by the member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan). 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The seconder is not in his seat. Does the member have some other seconder? 

 

Mr. Merchant: — The member for Saskatoon Eastview (Mr. Penner). 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, in listening to the hon. member for Wascana, I have come to the 

conclusion that what he wants to do is raise the rates for younger drivers. That’s really what the motive 

is. Perhaps he should say that next time he speaks because it looks like that is the whole motive. I repeat 

again, the senior citizens in Saskatchewan have the lowest rates any senior citizens group has anywhere 

in Canada. The best proof of this would be to consult perhaps on the Alberta border where a senior 

citizen owns land on both sides of the border and has an opportunity to buy insurance in Saskatchewan 

and in every instance the insurance is purchased in Saskatchewan. I 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1259 

 

know that the hon. member would like us to put together a list of those in every category. I suppose not 

only in regard to their age but their ethnic background, their religion and goodness knows what all and 

then we would have a discriminatory set-up where we could quote rates for every particular group 

according to the performance. We could have a rate for people with black hair and a rate for people with 

white hair and a rate for Serbian people and Catholic people and every other group. We maintain we 

should try to charge across the board the best possible rate for the people of the province. Treat 

everybody on a proper basis and that’s what SGIO does. This has resulted, as I said earlier, in a low 

administrative rate per dollar and the lowest insurance rates in Canada and, therefore, I move, Return 

No. 58 be amended and that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and replaced by the following: 

 

The premiums earned by SGIO for the licence years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 from the sale of 

insurance under The Automobile Insurance Act. 

 

Seconded by the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Faris). 

 

Mr. S.J. Cameron (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment or two about this. I find 

in respect of this particular question and the one that follows, the attitude of the minister to be totally 

indefensible. It seems to me what he is doing in the process, and some members ought to pay attention 

to this, is overlooking some pretty fundamental questions here. One of those is that he is responding in 

this legislature about a public corporation. He doesn’t have the kind of luxury that a private corporation 

may have with respect to the disclosure of information. SGIO is a public corporation. SGIO is owned by 

the people of this province. These questions are legitimate ones to determine, for example, the question I 

am very interested in, to determine what portion of the revenue of SGIO is raised by people 65 and older 

as opposed to what portion of the expense of SGIO is incurred by people 65 and older. I know, for 

example, that those people are in a special category for two reasons, one is, that they drive fewer miles 

than most people as a general rule and I think that their driving habits are demonstrably safer than 

people in other categories. That’s one. Secondly is, is that we should be particularly concerned about the 

position of those 65 and older, particularly in these days of high inflation. What the member is asking 

from government insurance is, can you tell us, for example, how many — this is the kind of information 

— what is the revenue derived from people in this age category, 55 and over, from which I would hope 

we could get that from 65 and over, what number of accidents are attributable to that group of people, 

what is the expense and consequence to the insurance fund, because some of us rather suspect that 

people in the older category are being asked to subsidize those in the younger age category. 

 

Now that in itself, it seems to me, is sufficient justification for the answers that the member asks. What 

adds to the justification for it is as I said earlier, that this is a public corporation. The people of the 

province have a right to this kind of information, why do you not give it? What kind of arrogance leads 

you to simply say, no, I’m not going to give you this information. That’s the equivalent of what you’ve 

done. I say that we have a right to know, the member represents 10,000 people. I represent 10,000 more, 

that’s 20,000 that the request is coming from. What right do you have to withhold this information from 

us as the minister responsible to this Assembly on behalf of this corporation? 

 

You say that you are satisfied of the older age brackets in this province have the lowest premiums in the 

country and as the member for Wascana says, “that may or may not be so.” I don’t know, but of one 

thing I am certain they have under SGIO the licence plate policy as it now exists some of the crummiest 

insurance that exists in North 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1260 

 

America. They may have the lowest premium but they’ve got trash, by and large, for insurance under 

licence plate insurance. As you know they have a $35,000 public liability and a $200 deductible. The 

insurance that they are getting, particularly older people, who stand to get their savings and everything 

they’ve got wiped out through a car accident, doesn’t begin to satisfy a judgement even of a modest 

variety and you know that those limits are far too low. The protection they are getting is poor protection. 

I many ways they are not only being asked, as I rather suspect too, to subsidize those in other age groups 

and are being treated cavalierly and heartlessly by you but secondly is that you are defrauding them into 

thinking that they have adequate coverage when, in fact, they don’t. I think your attitude about 

disclosing this information is shoddy, it is to be condemned, there is no reason for it and I think the only 

reason for it is you are afraid it is going to embarrass you because you like to posture, take the posture 

that you are so considerate to the senior citizens of this province. Well, here is a point clearly in 

evidence against you on that count, that you are not, in fact, very appreciative of the particular burdens 

of senior citizens in this province on some fronts and here is one. 

 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to pass a few comments to the 

member for Wascana, the motions that he has on for return, somewhat similar, all of them. 

 

In listening to the debate on the motions, Mr. Speaker, I find it a little bit difficult for me to understand 

the position taken by the minister. Mr. Minister, you say that no records are kept related to the age and 

yet I find very strangely that SGIO kept a record as to the type of car and the kinds of cars that were 

involved in accidents so that the insurance premiums on the hatchbacks and the sporty cars received a 

higher premium. Now it is a little bit hard to believe that you would keep statistics on the types of a car 

involved in accidents and yet you say you don’t keep track or there is no record kept on the age of the 

driver involved in the accident. 

 

Mr. Minister, I don’t think too many people in Saskatchewan are going to believe, (a) that you keep 

track of the make of the car that is involved in the accident and the year of the car. Therefore, you place 

a higher premium on say a Mustang, than you do on a comparable Chevrolet. A Mustang in itself 

doesn’t cause the accident. What you are doing, in effect, is exactly what the member for Wascana and 

the member for Regina South have already mentioned, you are placing a higher premium on a certain 

type of car because it was involved in more accidents, when you don’t have the courage to come out and 

say, ‘Look, here are the statistics.’ What you are telling us in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, is this, that 

you very carefully have kept track of the number of Mustangs in an accident, the number of two-doors, 

the sporty cars but you haven’t kept track of the age of the people involved in the accidents. Mr. 

Minister, I just can’t believe that and I am quite sure the people of Saskatchewan don’t believe that 

either. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — The most obvious fact of all, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister was aware in his initial 

comments on the first motion. He said, “We don’t keep that information.” He hasn’t said it since 

because they do keep that information and we all know that licence plate insurance contains the age. Mr. 

Speaker, I suspect that the very information that we are requesting is in the computer right now and I 

suspect that all the minister has to do is tell his officials to press the button and give us the information 

that we want. He is not prepared to give us the information because he well knows that that information 

would be embarrassing to the government. 

 

The minister said that am I, in moving these motions, looking for some kind of a higher rate on the 

young as opposed to the old. In saying that he admits, Mr. Speaker, that they 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1261 

 

know that they are charging a higher rate upon the old than the old deserve to pay. They know that well. 

They also know, Mr. Speaker, that the reason they are able to do that is that as people get older their 

driving habits improve and it is a kind of an unfair additional charge that they don’t have to impose but 

the passage of time itself imposes it as people improve their driving habits. This very information, unlike 

some of the other, some of the other information may not have been available but as the member for 

Rosetown has said and as I think we all know because we all have applied for licence plate insurance, 

this information asked in this return and the next is readily and simply available but SGIO and the 

government are afraid to give us that information. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to beg the indulgence of the 

House to introduce a group in the gallery. I am pleased to introduce to Mr. Speaker and to the members 

of the House, 15 air cadets from the Foam lake Air Cadet Squadron. They are accompanied here today 

by their Commanding Officer, Mr. Clarence Breaunt and the Adjutant Lieutenant, Audrey Breaunt, 

Training Officer, Mr. Allen Nordahl, senior cadets, Warrant Officers, McCowan and Reynolds. 

 

The Foam Lake Air Cadet Squadron left home about 7 o’clock this morning. They have arranged a full 

day of visiting a number of highlights in the capital city, among them being the RCMP Depot, the 

Museum of Natural History, the Sask Tel building, HMCS Queen. I am very pleased today to be able to 

introduce and welcome this group to the members of the legislature. I hope that this visit to the 

legislature will increase their interest in the parliamentary process. I invite all members to join with me 

in welcoming them here on this occasion and hope that they return again and that they do have a safe 

trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate continues on Return No. 58. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just briefly rise to say a few 

words with respect to this debate. I want to make two points, one in response to the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose, who unfortunately is not in his chair at the present time and one to the main substance 

of the motion made by the hon. member for Wascana. 

 

The member for Rosetown-Elrose argues that because SGIO has information respecting the year, the 

model, the make and the style and costs of a car, that somehow of necessity and of naturalness, if I can 

call it that way, it would also flow that SGIO would have the information pertaining to the age of 

claimants on insurance policies. That, of course, is absolutely wrong. It is perfectly proper, for an 

insurance company, to keep information respecting the cars which were involved in a car accident. 

When you come to your rating, namely the amounts of insurance fees that you are going to be paying, a 

lot has to do with the make and the model and the year and the wheel base of a vehicle. Quite clearly, 

one example, for example, in the last four or five years we have seen the advent of the so-called 

bumpers which at three miles per hour prevent any kind of damage being done to a car. 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1262 

 

At first blush one might think that this is a terrific saving of cost of insurance. In reality, I am advised, 

that these bumpers have, to a large extent, been a contributing factor to increased damages for cost 

repair in an accident, because of the nature of their construction and the certain features that don’t work 

if you are in a car accident over three miles per hour, in a car accident of five or six or 10 or 15 miles per 

hour which is what all of us are. The result is that when SGIO looks at the kinds of cars that you are 

looking at, Stingrays and makes and special qualifications of them, you are looking at that from a point 

of view of determining the amount of the insurance that is going to be paid because, quite obviously, if it 

is going to be a more expensive car to repair that is therefore a greater risk that falls on the insurance 

company and as a greater risk on the insurance company you may very well be asked to pay a greater 

insurance fee. 

 

That, I think, is perfectly logical and understandable. We have been doing that now for a little while and 

that is part of a rating principle that any insurance company would involve itself with. 

 

Now the second part that I want to turn my remarks to deal with is the substance of the question that the 

hon. member for Wascana raises and that is, the essence of this question is, to provide information to the 

House based on the age of the claimant. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan), chairman 

in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, from my short experience of SGIO and 

that is, that SGIO records do not classify insurance premiums and the claims — that is what this 

information wants, the claims — according to the age of the policy holder. They simply don’t capture 

the age of the insured on the policy. 

 

In the case of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act SGIO does have the age of the registered owner 

on the vehicle registration certificate and on the driver certificate. That’s one thing, for the driver’s 

licence, but for the premium and for the claims on the insurance, the other thing, they are not classified 

according to age. I guess it could be done, but based on this long-standing practice of SGIO it would be 

virtually impossible. I think the cost would be inordinately high to go sifting through the drivers’ 

licences and try to correlate somehow to the actual claims on the insurance policy. 

 

I want to remind the members that it is the member for Wascana himself who has for consideration 

before the legislature of this House, this legislature, proposed amendments to the Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights and The Fair Employment Practices Act and The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission Act, 

all of which would seek to add an additional head, as a head upon which you cannot discriminate the 

question of age. He says that it shall be, if these amendments are adopted, no longer the law to be able to 

discriminate on the basis of age. 

 

What these questions are really dealing with, I submit, is the very kind of discrimination by age, or at 

least selectivity of information based on age, from which presumably certain consequences would flow, 

that the very member himself in the amendment seeks to avoid, the private member’s amendment before 

the House. I have a great deal of sympathy with some of the general directions and thrusts of the 

proposed amendments by the hon. member, but if you obviously know on the basis of age, the amounts 

paid by claimants, then the natural consequence is to discriminate on the basis of age, one way or the 

other. Either discriminate in favour of the young or discriminate in favour of the old, depending on your 

particular argument. I think it really begs the questions, for the member for Wascana and the members 

of the opposition, to 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1263 

 

simply say, well we don’t really argue that it should be more for the young people or more for the old 

people. We just want the information. It begs the question, if by their very requests they seek to bar age 

as a factor in the consideration of corporations and businesses and individuals in their normal course of 

conduct in the province of Saskatchewan, something with which I have a great deal of sympathy. 

 

So the point that I am making, Mr. Speaker, is that it ought not to be a factor of age. We are here talking 

about if that person is 18, 19 or 99 years of age. We are talking about an insurance program based on 

driving records, we are talking about insurance program based on the make and model of the car. We are 

not talking about discrimination based on age. I suppose to put the argument to a ridiculous extreme, 

you could be talking about insurance if you can talk about age, insurance based on colour or insurance 

based on educational background, or insurance based on other aspects of potential, what I would say, 

potentially discriminatory aspects. 

 

So I do say, Mr. Speaker, to the members of the House that I do not find it unusual. In fact, I find it to be 

usual in the insurance industry. I find it the proper thing to do, to find out information with respect to 

make, models in cars and not to classify payments out, which is what this question wants, payments out 

based on information of age. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t rise after the member for Foam Lake only because I thought it 

might delay the process of the House, but I too wanted to welcome the group from Foam Lake because I 

am probably the only serving member of the Reserve in the legislature. I am a member of the sea 

component however. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since you were kind enough to allow the hon. Attorney General a fair amount of latitude, 

namely letting him refer to other matters that are on the order paper and make some discussion of them, 

let me for a second respond to that. 

 

The hon. Attorney General implies . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . on a point of order, I certainly would have drawn the Attorney General sharply to a 

halt on the matter. I can’t permit the member to indulge in a debate which is already concluded. 

 

Return No. 59 
 

Mr. Merchant moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 59) showing: 

 

For the fiscal years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77, the amounts paid out by SGIO on policies of ‘licence 

plat insurance’ from purchasers between the ages of: (a) 18 and 30; (b) 30 to 45; (c) 45 to 55; (d) 55 

and older. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I will shortly be moving Return No. 59 which seeks further information which I 

believe would demonstrate that SGIO is transferring money from the old to the young. 

 

Two things have been suggested in the debate, two things have been drawn in one way or another to our 

attention. First, hon. members opposite may, in dealing with Return No. 59, suggest that there is some 

possibility that this would mean that there be a greater insurance premium from younger people because 

if older people are more 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1264 

 

profitable and their rates go down, clearly the money has to come from some source. Mr. Speaker, if that 

kind of an argument is presented to you by the minister or members opposite, I think that I, at least, 

would be prepared to accept that possibility. If I had those figures it might well be that I in fairness 

again, would say, yes, the fair thing to do is the people who are costing the money should be paying the 

premium. And clearly, all that we say here says we’re not prepared to see the old going on subsidizing 

the young. 

 

Another place on the order paper, Mr. Speaker, I have moved a number of amendments dealing with 

retirement age. In that area again, I believe there’s a prejudice being exercised against older people; 

that’s the same problem towards which Return No. 59 addresses itself — a prejudice towards older 

people. And with those comments, Mr. Speaker, knowing that this information is readily available, I 

move Return No. 59. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I first want to say that each year since SGIO has been in existence all 

members have had an opportunity before the Crown Corporations Committee to raise any point or move 

any resolution. This is in sharp contrast to the situation that exists with federal Crown corporations — 

Polymer Rubber Company or Eldorado and the millions of dollars where questions remain unanswered: 

— where the Crown Corporations Committee never meets and is never given an opportunity to tell the 

public the facts about great sums of money that are left open to question. In sharp contrast the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office gives members an ample opportunity to raise questions 

about the way we put policies together, the age of those who are premium holders and so forth. This has 

been a constant practice since the day SGIO was organized and that situation still exists. 

 

I want to re-emphasize in answer to this motion what the hon. Attorney General said, that although we 

may have the age according to the motor registration or to the driver’s licence, we do not keep track of 

the age according to the premium or to the claims. This has never been done, it’s a practice that has 

never been kept in the SGIO offices and therefore it would only be with the greatest difficulty and a 

tremendous expense to provide this sort of information. I know of one record that is kept, and it’s 

obvious to everyone and that is when people are found at fault in accidents, a surcharge is levied, and 

this is levied not according to age but according to the blame in that particular accident. 

 

I would be really interested when someone who belongs to a party castigates SGIO for not keeping 

records. I would be really pleased if some of those people from that particular political group could 

quote as a precedent, a publicly owned government insurance company that they initiated somewhere in 

this country and that could give us these sorts of records. If there they are available we would probably 

consider the motion, but we have not made it a practice of keeping track of people who are in accidents 

according to their age. Therefore, I moved, seconded by the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Faris): 

 

That Return No. 59 be amended as follows: that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and replaced 

by the following: for the licence years 1974 and 1975, 1975 and 1976, 1976 and 1977, the amount of 

claims and expenses incurred by SGIO on insurance provided under the AAIA. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 64 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1265 

 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return 

(No. 64) showing: 

 

The revenue received by SGIO for the fiscal years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 from the sale of 

‘home-pak insurance’ from purchasers between the ages of: (a) 18 and 30; (b) 30 to 45; (c) 45 to 55; 

(d) 55 and older. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Faris), Return 

No. 64 be amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and replaced by the following: 

 

The premiums earned by SGIO for the fiscal years 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77 from the sale of 

dwelling insurance. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, they definitely have this information and they definitely have this 

information by age because they have a special premium and a special policy that is available to older 

people. So that in this area particularly they have done some research. They have done some work, they 

have the information and again, I gather, Mr. Speaker, they are not prepared to give us the information. 

The result is that that amendment will be moved and passed and they might as well, Mr. Speaker, have 

ignored the matter completely. I want to stress that . . . the information that they are giving us is 

absolutely useless. I couldn’t care less what their premiums were from home dwelling insurance. If I had 

wanted that I would have phoned John Green and asked him. He can probably remember. The 

information that they are giving is absolutely different from the information requested. It is not getting 

to the area of which the request is made and as we have moved from one return to the next the 

information has been more and more readily available. In this area they have actually done studies in 

order to make it possible for them to impose a special rate and I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that even 

that special rate leaves them with a more profitable level of insurance than insurance on younger people 

because younger people by and large are faced with fires caused by children and things of that nature. 

So even in this area where they make big fellows of themselves with a slightly lower rate, even in that 

area, they are still not doing what would be fair to older people but are instead passing the rate on to the 

young. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 85 
 

Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 85 

showing: 

 

The rates charged for electricity and gas for farm use and city use in the form of a percentage average 

of the four rate categories as of August 15, 1977 as well as before August 15, 1977. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, before I read the motion into the records of the Assembly, I would like to make a 

few comments regarding the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It would be very difficult not to deviate 

into other provincial Crown corporations, but I do feel that this motion is really worthy of the 

government’s attention and that they would do a justice to the people of this province whom they are 

serving if they provided this information. In light of the drastic rate increases from 7.3 per cent to 20.5 

per cent in 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1266 

 

one year constituting 180.5 per cent net increase in profits, I feel that Sask Power surely has some 

answering to do on behalf of its rate structure, the rate increases that it has imposed upon the people of 

the province. 

 

Both opposition parties have been criticized for any criticisms they may make of provincial government 

Crown corporations and I feel that that is unjustified if in fact our criticisms are well founded and well 

meaning and I know that from this side of the House in the Conservative opposition, that our criticisms 

have been well founded. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — They never have. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — The minister responsible for Social Services says they never have, but he knows very 

right well they in fact are. That’s why he is in such trouble out there in his constituency. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at Crown corporations in this province, in particular SPC, we look 

at it imposing even further costs to the people of Saskatchewan with its advertising of family Crown 

corporations. When we brought this to the attention of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we were criticized 

for that. The government said, oh there’s those terrible Tories again, they are down on the Crown 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure this Assembly and in particular the government across that we are not 

opposed to Crown corporations as utility corporations that provide services where the private sector can 

not. We never have been opposed to them. As soon as I say that, Mr. Speaker, you will note that the 

government yipper yappers start, this bothers them an awful lot I know, bothers them as well with other 

pieces of legislation that they put before this House that we agree with them and we stand with them on 

certain pieces of legislation. They don’t like to see that, they don’t want our help. Most definitely the 

member for Wilkie says Bill 47, yes, Mr. Speaker, I think that our criticisms of Crown corporations have 

been well founded. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when you take a look at the rate that SPC has imposed 

on the people it leads one to believe that this is nothing more than an indirect tax on this province. Mr. 

Speaker, being as I am a representative of people in this province, I will naturally keep my remarks to 

this province. I am not representative in other parts of this country at this time, and therefore, I see no 

need to comment on other provinces. I hear the government opposite though, in many instances does 

that, they say, oh, look at this province and look at that province. The former Minister of health, in 

particular, used to do that and I’m sure given time once the new Minister of Health gets his feet on the 

ground with his new portfolio, he’ll be doing the same thing regarding the costs of health care to the 

people of Saskatchewan. They all say, oh, look at Tory Ontario with those terrible rates they’ve got 

down there. But, you know, if you just take a look at the estimates and in particular the former Minister 

of Health because I commend him for being very sharp with figures and he knows very right well that 

taking the estimates we worked out for the ’77 year divided by the population, you get a cost for every 

man, woman and child higher than that of Ontario for health care. And I don’t care how you play at 

those figures, those are the facts. Nevertheless, let’s take a look at the rate structure with regards to 

electricity and gas. In particular, with electricity they are broken down into four categories: cities, towns, 

villages and rural. Furthermore, the rates are charged on another breakdown of four categories per 

category that I previously mentioned. I have asked in my motion that the answer be put in the form of an 

average of percent increase. If you take those percentage increases for cities and average it out for towns 

and average that increase for villages and rural, you will find that in fact we are charging our rural 

residents a higher rate than we are our large city 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1267 

 

residents. Now then, for a government whose philosophy is one of equality, that is to charge everyone 

the same, everybody makes the same amount of money, nobody should have to spend any more money 

than the other person; that’s the socialist philosophy. Now then, I do not see how that philosophy and 

this rate structure is consistent. I am telling you, Mr. Speaker, rather this government through you, Mr. 

Speaker, that prior to the rate increases of August 15, the city rates were as high as 43.3 per cent lower 

than farm and village. Now with the new rate structure that great difference decreased a small amount to 

36.1 per cent. I do not feel that those rates are justified. Furthermore, I might again just deviate from 

these rates of Sask Power and look at Sask Tel. It is doing something much similar in as much as it 

having a great input into cable television, for instance. It is investing a great number of dollars. But that 

service will not be available to rural Saskatchewan for quite some time, and in fact, for those people that 

live in the city and have that service made available to them, they maybe don’t want it. And I would like 

to know again, why does this government in a situation like that want to make non users of cable 

television pay for it through Sask Tel? Pay for those that use that service. The rate differences which I 

have pointed out in the electrical end of Sask Power are much similar to that of the gas rates. The 

percentages are there and I’m not going to go into them in any detail, only to say that they are, thank 

goodness, lower differences than those in electrical, that in gas before the increase, they were 21.8 per 

cent lower in the city than they were on the farms, the rural parts of our province, and after the increase 

it went down to 8.9 per cent, but still a lower rate for gas users in the city than in the rural parts of our 

province. And to compound the problem, and I say compound the problem because in checking the 

average monthly consumption of electricity in this province, we find that our farmers who are providing 

the backbone of the economy of this province use twice as much electricity as do our city dwellers. 

Again, I want to point out inconsistency that you on the one hand with your rate structure of being the 

same on the runoff, suggest that electricity and gas would be cheaper for those that use more of it. Then 

you turn around on the other hand and charge them more for it, and that again is very clearly 

inconsistent. You are encouraging consumption on the one hand and discouraging it, by higher costs to 

the consumer, on the other. And I think you should make up your mind which way you want to go and 

if, in fact, you have to look at your rate structure and review it and come up with a more consistent rate 

structure that would be more in keeping with your philosophy then at least it would be proper. But the 

way you have it now, it surely doesn’t make any sense to me. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, with those few 

brief remarks to outline some of my concerns, I feel that if you as a government would take a look at 

your rate structure, do some work with it, correct me if I’m wrong, but if I am right, I feel that that 

should be justified to the people of this province and in particular to those that it’s costing more, and 

that’s our rural people in Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Bailey) Return No. 85 shown. 

 

Hon. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will be asking to adjourn debate on this motion in just a moment. 

Before I do I would like to make just one or two points in passing in rebuttal to the remarks made by the 

member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Moosomin made two points. One point, frankly, confuses me because I 

have a great deal of difficulty following his argument. I find this about the Conservative Party very 

often, Mr. Speaker. When they attack Crown corporations they attack the Crown corporations on the 

basis of the fact that we are not business-like. I remember the speeches of the member for Qu’Appelle 

(Mr. Lane) talking about how we are politicizing the Crown corporations. His favourite speech is to 

identify Mr. Don Cody and identify a few others and how we are running this in an unbusiness-like way 

and all of these connections. He seems to be critical of us in this regard. 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1268 

 

When the rates are set, which is the subject of the motion, when the rates are set on a business-like 

fashion, then we get the reverse of the Conservative argument. Then we are being criticized for being 

too business-like. Then we should be looking at whether or not the farms are subsidizing the cities. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have that information, but I do believe that it can be found out very easily and I 

think that the minister in charge of the Power Corporation would like to say a few words on this, and I 

think also the minister in charge of Power Corporation would like to say a few words in comparison to 

the rates charged to farm and city in this province as it relates to the province of Alberta, for example. 

 

Now the hon. member says he doesn’t want to talk about Alberta and he doesn’t want to talk about 

Ontario. He doesn’t want to talk about any of these other provinces. How else can you judge whether we 

are doing a good job or a bad job, how else can you judge whether or not we are charging too high a fee 

for the farms and for the cities unless you compare to what the power rates are in other provinces in 

other parts of the country? I am telling the hon. member for Moosomin that that’s the kind of 

comparison you are going to get because if ever the day should come that the people of Saskatchewan 

should be unfortunate enough to have a Conservative government in power that’s the kind of power 

rates they’d get if they were in power. There is no way that this is going to happen, there is no way that 

it is going to happen. We know that in the province of Saskatchewan they are not going to allow the 

power rates like Alberta or Alberta power rates for the farm or Alberta power for the city operation, 

absolutely no way. I tell the hon. member for Moosomin that he can make all the speeches that he wants 

about the unbusiness-like approach or the business-like approach depending on what horse he is riding 

on this particular day respecting Power corporations or Crown corporations. The one thing that is not 

going to happen is the people of Saskatchewan are not going to go for a Conservative philosophy of 

power rates which is making the farmers pay right through the nose in other provinces where the 

Conservatives are operating. Not a chance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — There could be more of a chance when the minister in charge of the Power 

Corporation gives you the specific details. 

 

I also find very interesting, Mr. Speaker, the position that the Conservatives and the Liberals are taking 

with respect to CPN and I am sorry to see this position because this is a part of the argument which is 

attached to these rates. The member for Moosomin says you know CPN, they are using Sask Tel to 

subsidize CPN. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’re out of order! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No I’m not out of order. You weren’t here. He talked about CPN. You have be here 

to listen. He is the one who raised it as an aspect of rating costs and I am going to rebut this. You should 

listen to these speeches and I am saying, Mr. Speaker, and I am saying this, that I am interested in seeing 

the Liberals and the Conservatives take this position because I am going to have a great deal of fun 

going to rural Saskatchewan and telling the farmers and the people of rural Saskatchewan that the one 

mechanism of getting closed circuit television to them in the next relatively recent time — 18 months to 

36 months — is being opposed by the Conservative and the Liberal parties because they don’t think 

that’s the role for a Crown corporation. They don’t think that a Crown corporation should be subsidizing 

farmers and the farm 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1269 

 

communities for the provision of services. They don’t believe it in CPN and they don’t believe it in the 

Power Corporation and that’s the position that you have taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take some time to dig out exactly the details of the farm and city expenses in 

Saskatchewan over the years and how they compare to Alberta and I am also going to take a little time 

to consider in detail this business of CPN and Sask Tel because I am inviting the members to put 

motions on the order paper and we are going to carry this argument to the farmers and the rural people 

of the province of Saskatchewan and who stands for the provision of services for rural Saskatchewan 

and who doesn’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 91 
 

Mr. Birkbeck moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 91 showing: 

 

The total amount of grants under all government grant programs including the homeowner grant paid 

out by the Province of Saskatchewan in: (a) 1970; (b) 1971; (c) 1972; (d) 1973; (e) 1974; (f) 1975; (g) 

1976; (h) 1977 to date; (i) including a record of grants paid as per hamlet, village, town and city in the 

years 1974, 1975, 1976 to date of return. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago I might have been hesitant to rise after getting such a blast 

out of the Attorney General, but I can tell you that whenever I can get up and introduce a motion to this 

Assembly seeking information (that’s all that was being asked of this government) and get that kind of a 

rise out of the Attorney General, in his usual way where he starts out calmly and quietly and he gets 

himself into such a jumble and mix-up about CPN and I never even mentioned CPN, so really I don’t 

know why he even got into that. Clearly he is losing track with what reality is and again, Mr. Speaker, 

you might note that he is getting a little riled up again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the risk of causing the Attorney General any more internal turmoil, I will proceed to 

say a few words about Item 10. 

 

This motion is again seeking information that may or many not, depending upon the efficiency of the 

government, require some work on the part of their civil servants to go back a few years and look at the 

different grants that have been provided for the different towns and villages, cities and different projects. 

Certainly we have no criticism of the grants as they pertain to those interests in Saskatchewan that 

cannot provide or raise the necessary funds which they must have. But I only have to look back, Mr. 

Speaker, about 15 or 20 years ago to when a community wanted a new skating rink or curling rink and I 

was able to see those people rally and get together with these, raise their own money and provide those 

facilities and I think the people could still do it with the exception of one fact and that fact is this, that 

this government has destroyed the people’s initiative, their incentive to do anything on their own. And 

you can laugh all 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1270 

 

you like but I’m going to tell you that if you provide all the people want and that they don’t have to do 

anything for it you can be sure they’re not going to. Furthermore, you have taxed the people to such a 

level that that’s maybe one of the reasons that they haven’t got the funds to build those facilities for 

themselves. If you want an example you can take the homeowner’s grant. Now if you can afford to give 

that money back then you can afford not to take it in the first place and if you must take it then take it at 

the municipal level or the town office level, now that’s local government, now that’s what you could do. 

If you’re all for local government and local concern, local people running their own businesses then 

what would be wrong with that? But you don’t do that because there is something about it when you 

give a homeowner grant and the people receive this cheque: — it has got province of Saskatchewan 

written across the top and they say oh isn’t that wonderful, they’ve received something from the 

government and the fact is all they’ve received is their own money. You took it from them, you took 

their money from them through taxation you said very little about it and then you give it back to them in 

a big flare. Now then what we have is a great number of grants, a great host of grants for all kinds of 

programs and the government isn’t going to be bale to get off. I don’t care who stands up on that side of 

the House I know what you’ll do, you’ll stand up and say, oh, the Tories are against grants for the 

people of Saskatchewan, there you are. But you know and I know that that’s not so, that I laid out 

clearly what our position would be and our position would be very simply to provide grants. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Be careful. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — I don’t have to be careful and I don’t have to think as hard as you, you have to 

provide grants where people cannot provide for themselves and I know if the minister responsible for 

Municipal Affairs stands to say a few words on this he is going to know that what I’m saying is not far 

off the truth — that he is for local government whether he sits on that side of the House or where he sits 

he is concerned about local government. Regardless of all the heckling of all the backbenchers around 

him he knows that basically what I am striving for is to get control back into the hands of the people. 

You have taken that control away in any numbers of ways on the motion prior to this when I was talking 

about that motion and now I’m talking about grants. I’m talking about total government involvement 

into the lives of the people of Saskatchewan. Sure, in many forms it’s good and we support it but when 

you look at a television ad and it shows this quiet Saskatchewan town and the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company bus pulling in down that quiet main street and it shows him meeting the Sask 

Tel truck and they wave to each other and likely around the corner are the Sask Power boys ripping up a 

pole and then there is a little SGIO sign, it’s a little house that’s doing the business, you know 

government at every turn. Have any of you ever stopped for a moment to take a look at the amount of 

government that you’ve got involved in your own lives, you people sitting over there from the moment 

you get up in the morning until the moment you go to bed at night, you would realize. 

 

Mr. R. Nelson (Yorkton): — Let’s cut out hospitalization. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Now then, the member for Yorkton suggests cutting out hospitalization and let’s 

make that clear, let’s make sure that that’s on the record that the member for Yorkton wants to cut out 

hospitalization. Mr. Speaker, the government clearly knows the information that I’m seeking. All I want 

to know is the forms of grants, the numbers of grants, how many dollars is involved so that maybe 

somebody, somebody involved in this government can start to get a hold of this situation, get track of 

the number of grants that are going up. Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move this motion. 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1271 

 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Last Mountain-Touchwood): — I have in mind moving a very simple 

amendment to the motion put forth by the hon. member for Moosomin and let it go at that. However, 

because I think we can answer the question, where the information is available, however, I don’t think I 

can let it go at that in light of the comments put forward by the member for Moosomin. They had 

considerable comparison to some comments made by the member for Nipawin, the Leader of the 

Conservative Party, earlier on sometime before, I think it was at their convention and I want to consider 

his remarks, the member for Moosomin, along with the remarks of the member for Nipawin and see if 

there is the comparison that I think there is and that I can perhaps direct some remarks to both the 

member for Moosomin and to the member for Nipawin and in fact all of the members of the 

Conservative caucus and in order to give myself some time to prepare such remarks I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 92 
 

Mr. Birkbeck (Moosomin) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 92 showing: 

 

The names and addresses of all persons, corporations and co-ops who have grazing leases from the 

Government: (a) The locations of the land leased; (b) The terms of the lease. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the information I seek in this motion is very straightforward; I don’t think it 

requires any debate whatsoever or discussion. 

 

Hon. E. Kaeding (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure whether the member for 

Moosomin when he put this question on the order paper really realized what he was asking. If you look 

at the Lands branch in my department you have a land mass of 5,420,000 acres to deal with, all of which 

is dealt with by the Lands branch. There are almost 8,000 leases covering these lands and of those, 7,500 

are held by individuals. There are 57 of which are under PFRA and 134 under grazing associations, and 

17 under leases to municipalities. Now the dates of these leases expire anywhere from 1978 to 1998. 

They were entered in at various times and various stages and the terms would vary depending on when 

the leases were issued. So the compilation of that kind or that mass of material which he is requesting 

seems to me to be totally unrealistic. My department tells me that it would take at least a man’s year of 

labour to assemble this kind of information and I am sure the member for Moosomin if he got that pile 

of information which would be an $18,000 question at least, I think it is irresponsible to ask for that kind 

of detail. I am sure that if the member opposite is out on a witch hunt and he wants to find out who has 

got what kind of a lease and what rate he is being charged, I am sure that he can get that information by 

putting a question on the order paper which would specify what he wants to know. I don’t think in any 

case that he should feel that there is anything incorrect happening in the department of the Lands branch 

with regard to allocation of leases. They are certainly open to appeal at any time. So I would suggest that 

the member for Moosomin reconsider the request that he is making here and that he would be more 

specific in requesting information in the future. I would suggest that if he has a problem, if he has 

something specific that he wants to know that he make it specific so we can give him an answer without 

putting the 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1272 

 

whole department to work for a whole year. I would therefore suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the members of 

the House that we defeat this motion and ask the member to bring in a more specific motion. 

 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Speaker, could I just ask the member one question if he would permit it. I 

wonder then, Mr. Minister, in light of your comment, would you then consider proposing an amendment 

to my motion and provide me with that information which is economically feasible in your terms and 

which is accessible. I am sure that that would help a lot. I would prefer to get part of something than all 

of nothing. 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — I think that the member should set down somewhere this specific information he 

wants and we would be prepared to reply to it providing he would realize that the kind of job that he is 

asking us to do here is unrealistic. If he wants to know the number of acres broken down into the 

different specifications he should state that and make that request and we will be prepared to supply that 

information. 

 

Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, to assist the minister and the member on this side, who 

are suggesting that there is some ground in between so that he could get some information, I would beg 

permission to adjourn debate. 

 

Permission to adjourn debate denied. 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, when one looks at this question and at 

many others, there seems to be a general scenario in the questions that the Progressive Conservatives are 

placing on the order paper this year. I have noticed that they have asked questions about who is on social 

assistance, they want the names of individuals who are on social assistance, how many of those are 

Indian and how many are Metis, how many of other racial origin. Take a look at the question in the case 

of the public service, they are asking the names of students, where they were employed, their addresses, 

their salaries month by month and day by day, they are asking the number of employees who were given 

leave of absence for education purposes, their names, their addresses, where do they live. Now, I wonder 

why they are raising all these questions. Are they really on a witch hunt campaign that they want all the 

names of all these people in the province of Saskatchewan. Now, if it were not for that, Mr. Speaker, and 

they asked the questions about the gross total numbers, we are prepared to supply total numbers of 

people who are getting grazing leases, but when it comes down to individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one other thing to remember, if you look at the arguments that the Conservatives have 

presented during the budget speech of last year and during the Throne Speech this year they’ve had an 

attack on that there are too many public servants. Mr. Speaker, if we are going to answer all these 

questions, then we will have to hire hundreds of more public servants in order to be able to provide the 

answers. They can’t have it both ways. They can’t, on the one hand, say that we have too many public 

servants and then be demanding information from the government that takes months and years to answer 

it. 

 

Now the other important thing, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives also argue about the handing down of 

reports, the annual reports that are provided by the Crown corporations and by the various departmental 

agencies and by the departments. Interestingly enough that while these reports are being provided 

obviously the Conservatives have not bothered even to look at them because much of the information 

that they are asking, without providing the detailed names, is provided in the annual 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1273 

 

reports. Now why is it, haven’t they learned the rules in here, haven’t they bothered to take a look at 

what is provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the case of the previous question, the grants that are provided to the various 

communities, if they ever bothered to open the Public Accounts, that information is recorded there. Now 

why do they insist on repeatedly asking for this information so that our civil servants are put to more 

work, unnecessary work, to duplicate all of that. Now surely, Mr. Speaker, as an opposition they should 

be responsible but really what is happening in here, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at their questions 

and the information they are seeking, that this is total irresponsibility they’re asking the public to waste 

millions of dollars unnecessarily to provide this kind of information when it’s already in many cases 

reprinted and printed in the annual reports except for the detailed names. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 

totally unfair to be subjecting citizens of this province in providing lists of names and addresses so that 

the PCs can use it for their political purposes of sending out their political propaganda to these people. I 

think that’s the only reason they’re asking for the names and addresses. If it wasn’t for that what’s the 

purpose in them making these kinds of demands. Mr. Speaker, I shall be making a few other remarks 

after I’ve had a chance to further consider some of the other questions and tabulate more of their 

questions so that we can deal with them in further detail. Mr. Speaker, for that I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 13 — Ballot with Braille Markings 
 

Mr. G.N. Wipf (Prince Albert-Duck Lake) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan, Mr. R.A. 

Larter: 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to adopt a suitable ballot with Braille 

markings to ensure that those with visual handicaps enjoy the right to secret ballot. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I expect that there will not be too many MLAs in the Assembly who will 

disapprove of this resolution and I, therefore, expect that all the debates will be in favour of the province 

of Saskatchewan designing a ballot in a manner that will allow people with visual handicaps a right to 

the secret ballot. This, I believe, would be a first in North America from what I can get. Mr. Speaker, 

after speaking with people who are blind and people who are elderly and with poor eyesight and many 

who are in a younger age group and have to rely on glasses in order to read, I’ve been told that if a ballot 

was designed with some distinct markings that can be identified by touch and if this was available that 

these people would actually have they’d feel they’d have the right to the secret ballot. There are 

instances where those with poor eyesight have left their glasses at home. They’ve told me and they feel 

that they may have spoiled their ballot by not marking an X on the right place. Those voters who are 

classed as blind do not have a secret ballot as they have someone help them mark it and with the 

properly designed ballot these people, approximately 1,300 in Saskatchewan, would enjoy this privilege. 

And that old man talking across the way there, he’s going to be in that shape some day with those bad 

eyes of his and maybe a little marking on the ballot would help him. Mr. Speaker, in my resolution I’ve 

asked for a ballot with Braille markings but first let me assure you that the word in this does not mean 

Braille lettering, but more generally 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1274 

 

speaking the idea of an embossed line or a raised line that divides the candidates names on the ballot 

would be more suitable. Each name would then be in its separate location s defined by the raised line 

and could be identified by touch. Each ballot could be the same for every voter. In fact, it would have to 

be the same for every voter in case you have a poll where only one blind voter or visually handicapped 

person, so all ballots would have to be the same. I also realize that there is probably an inventory of 

blank ballots on stock at this time and that they may have to be used up first. I don’t know how they 

print ballots years ahead and get the names on them, but they may have to be used up first. However, I 

feel that this resolution will be taken seriously by every member of this Assembly and that we can be the 

first province in Canada to ensure as close as possible the concept of the secret ballot for all voters. Mr. 

Speaker, my request is a fairly simple one and with all our modern printing technology we have today, I 

feel that each member will endorse this, so I move this resolution seconded by the member for Estevan, 

Bob Larter. 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to support this and would like to feel that 

every member in the House would support this. I know this government is very conscious of the new 

buildings in doing things for the handicapped and making things easier for the handicapped. I would like 

to think that this is just one more thing that in this having the right of a secret ballot I would like to think 

that we are moving more towards helping the handicapped in almost every field and I’m thinking, of 

course, even in our own Legislative Buildings here when renovations take place that we are doing more 

to make them more at home in their working environment. I know that the government has done a fairly 

good job over the past few years in hiring handicapped people and I commend them for it but I do think 

we can go on further and push it a little bit further. But I would urge every member to support this right 

to a secret ballot by the blind in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just point out to the member 

that everyone I’m sure is aware, there is a mail-in provision now, a special ballot provision now which 

does exist for handicapped people. I think it has worked fairly well, one of the disadvantages to it is that 

it’s not totally secret in the sense that you require somebody else to do the marking for you, but 

nevertheless, there have been to my knowledge no recorded or reported instances of abuse of the mail-in 

provision that I know of requiring, therefore, a change in the law but we would need to have or to see 

. . . well, the member for Rosthern shakes his head. I would be pleased if he would give me something in 

writing which indicates that the present mail-in provisions have worked for the handicapped or have 

been abused by somebody, necessitating a wholesale change. I am not speaking against this motion 

because I realize the intention with which it is made and the purpose of it which, certainly, I think 

everybody in this House would agree, is a very laudable purpose. 

 

I should like to have some time to consider if this has been done elsewhere and if so, where, and whether 

it is possible to do it from a printing point of view, what cost implications there may be attached to it and 

also to consider some aspects respecting the present mail-in vote that exists, the handicapped vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 16 — Federal Liberal Government Ignores Needs of Veterans 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1275 

 

Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan) moved, seconded by Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the federal Liberal government for ignoring the needs of some 190,000 

veterans in turning down monies agreed to on an all party agreement of two years ago, and that this 

Assembly further urges that this agreement, although not accepted by Cabinet, be now passed in order 

to restore dignity to a group that has given so much to our country. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I should like to speak on a subject that is very personally important to me and I 

believe should be important to every member of this Assembly. It is the subject of veterans’ disability 

pensions. 

 

The Minister of Veterans’ Affairs, the Hon. Mr. MacDonald, just announced prior to observance of 

Remembrance Day in 1977, or reported on October 28th in the Regina Leader Post that the Government 

of Canada would not be able to live up to its promise to increase the disability veterans’ pension because 

of the economy of the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few days ago different veterans organizations across Canada met in committee with the 

government and it was agreed that the rate of pension for a 100 per cent disability pensioner would be 

equal to the pay of the lowest category in the federal civil service, which at that time was a caretaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this promise was not kept and the disability pensioner received some $500 less than the 

lowest paid civil servant. 

 

I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. MacDonald wants to advise the disabled that they could not keep 

the government promise because he, himself, I believe, is a double amputee. Mr. Speaker, he lost the 

battle when he took it to the federal Cabinet. 

 

I would like to see this Assembly as going on record that we strongly oppose the action of the federal 

government in respect to the disability veterans’ pension. In my opinion the federal government has not 

only broken faith with those who died in defence of this nation, but also they have broken faith with the 

living who are handicapped, because they volunteered to defend the freedoms we enjoy today. I would 

request that all members of the legislature support this motion. 

 

Mr. R.R. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to say just a few words on 

this particular motion. I am a little concerned that the member who presented this resolution, being a 

veteran, would present a motion that would be out as far as his figures are in the resolution. 

 

He said that there are 190,000 veterans being turned down, while the actual figure of veterans in the total 

of Canada that received pensions is 138,973. He is out some 50,000 people in number. He condemns the 

federal Liberal government for ignoring these veterans and I should like to say at this time, Mr. Speaker, 

that Canada gives the highest veteran benefits of any country in the entire world. 

 

I have several other things that I would like to say on this. I would like to consider the remarks of the 

member and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 17 — Delaying of Marijuana Legislation 
 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan: 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1276 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to delay any legislation that would legalize the 

sale of marijuana until broader research has been conducted. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased at this particular time to discuss before this Assembly the 

resolution which appears. I know that the question of the legalization of marijuana is certainly not a new 

one and it is one which has been tossed around from time to time. I suppose that which has put me in 

interest in taking a look at the problem of the legalization of marijuana prompted me, this summer, to do 

some research on my own and write to various centres who are currently researching marijuana, as well 

as the other pharmacologists in Canada who are presently working and studying this topic of marijuana 

and its effect. So the question, Mr. Speaker, is by no means a new one. It is a question that has been 

around for a long time and the only people that you hear passing comments on the legalization of 

marijuana are those who are the least informed about the effects of the drug itself. I am referring to 

politicians of all political stripes, who from time to time, give lip service to the legalization of marijuana. 

Certainly theologians have. A very prominent church leader, not too long ago, gave tentative support to 

the legalization of marijuana. There are many lawyers in Canada who advocate the legalization of 

marijuana, sociologists and so on. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, to present to this Assembly, today, that there are far too many unknowns, far too 

many unknowns in this question of the legalization of marijuana to actually go out and legislate its use 

as some would have us do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I only need to draw the attention of this House back to something that took place in this 

decade. Three provinces, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba and Ontario eventually lowered the drinking age to 18 

years of age. The question is very obvious, why? Why did we move in this direction? The question is 

there for everyone and the answer is obvious. They thought it was a vote getting piece of legislation. I 

want to ask the question, put forth the idea, what has happened to each one of these provinces since? 

 

They have all had to fight their way back through legislation in bringing the age back to 19 and far too 

many people regret that move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all political parties in Canada, in looking this question over, have at one time or another 

given lip service to the legalization of marijuana. Certainly the federal Liberals have, the federal 

Conservatives have and many NDP members as well. You would think that more thought would be 

given by these people first. You would think the example of trying to sell more booze to young people 

would have prompted them to exercise more care. Some of Canada’s leading church officials recently 

got on record and in September of last year, Mr. Speaker, police and medical officers were warning a 

meeting of the International Narcotics Enforcement Officers Association, that marijuana was a highly 

dangerous drug. And we in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, who represent the citizens of Saskatchewan, 

should listen very carefully to the warning of these people. We should be listening, not to the layman but 

rather to the people who are currently engaged in mammoth research on marijuana and its effect on the 

human body. And I want to quote. The drug abuse consultant to the government of Prince Edward Island 

told Canadians at this conference and I quote, “That marijuana is a menace to society.” Mr. Speaker, that 

does not come from somebody who would just casually be drawing attention to marijuana but somebody 

who, in effect, had done many years of research. I suppose that one could say that there’s an excellent 

reason that laymen, law enforcement officers, religious groups and government leaders as well as 

scientists are so divided. The fact is, that up to this point in time, not one 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1277 

 

scientist, not one research has even intimated in any way, that this drug would be safe to legalize. Only 

laymen and politicians have come up with that idea. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite hundreds of published studies such as the Le Dain Commission Report, refers to 

846 scientific documents on marijuana. And this Le Dain Commission I believe was published in 1972, 

and to this date there has yet been no solid answer to the question, “Is marijuana harmful?” 

 

However, I want to refer you to Harold Cullen, the leading researcher at the University of Toronto in the 

field of pharmacology. He happens to be among the many scholars in the drug field who urge and 

continually urge caution in the legalization of marijuana. Cullen states this, that the real questions we 

should be asking are, “How much marijuana does it take to produce how much harm?” Another question 

he puts forth is this, “And how many people are likely to use enough to produce that harm?” In studying 

the works of this eminent scientist, I find that most, if not all, of his conclusions would lead anyone even 

without a scientific mind to want to stay away form the legalization of this drug. 

 

The only thing that it has going are those who question largely the use of the drugs on the basis of 

individual rights. Every single person, Mr. Speaker, that I wrote to and every single research fact that I 

can find involved in the drug research tends to urge caution on a number of issues particularly health 

grounds. The director of biological studies both for the University of Toronto and the Addiction 

Research Foundation of Ontario say this and I quote: 

 

We still have years of data gathering ahead of us before anyone can say with certainty what problems 

the widespread use of marijuana will create. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the history of pharmacology is full of cases of the so-called “safe drugs” whose hazards 

became apparent only after the substance was used on a wide scale for many years. And I would draw 

the attention of the Assembly to the fact that it was only about 25 years ago, that the first scientific 

studies linking tobacco to lung cancer, emphysema, bronchitis and heart disease, started. Let us look at 

the drug heroin. This drug was first introduced as a non-addictive substitute for morphine. Demerol,. A 

synthetic narcotic came on the market about 30 years ago and was acclaimed for its non-addictive 

qualities. And today, Mr. Speaker, thousands of people are hooked on it. The many barbiturates and 

tranquillizers initially were presented to us as being totally harmless and yet now, it is known that they 

can lead to addiction and of course, we all know the serious side effects. Mr. Speaker, what I am saying, 

in drawing these to the attention of this House, is the lesson is here for Canadians to be learned. And 

certainly the lesson from history is to be learned at this time. Our knowledge about the long-term effects 

of marijuana is still meagre at the least. The head of research at the University of Toronto said this: 

 

The number of people using marijuana is relatively small. Most of them are young and healthy. Many 

have not been using it for a long period of time. 

 

And yet many laymen will make the claim that alcohol is a more serious problem than pot. They say that 

marijuana is a substitute for alcohol and thus they will smoke pot and not consume alcohol. But 

researchers tell us, from all over Canada and the United States, that that prospect is most unlikely. The 

prospect of substituting the use of marijuana instead of consuming alcohol, researchers say that that 

prospect is most unlikely. Researchers agree that the widespread use of marijuana would add to the 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1278 

 

health and economic problems caused by alcohol. Now this opinion is based on research conducted in 

metro Toronto by Dr. Reginald Smart and Diane Pheiffer of the Addiction Research Foundation. And in 

reading their report, Mr. Speaker, they indicated that marijuana users are more likely to be alcohol 

drinkers than non-users. They’re also more likely to consume mood altering drugs as well as alcohol. 

Mr. Speaker, the other evening there was a one full hour program, and I forget which network it came 

on. It was devoted to, they called in ‘The Genie in the Bottle’ the drinking problems and the conditions 

around the world, comparing Canadian drinking habits and so on. But at the present time it is estimated 

that 13 million Canadians over the age of 15 are drinkers. I’d like to repeat that statistic. That 13 million 

Canadians over the age of 15 are drinkers and about 7 million are tobacco users. It was interesting to see 

the program the other night in which they stated that 10 years ago, one out of every three adults in 

Canada was a non-drinker. At the present time it’s one out of ten, so we see that the widespread effect of 

alcohol has gone over many, many people. If marijuana say, was available from the Saskatchewan 

Marijuana Control Board or the Alberta Marijuana Control Board, it seems likely that in time the 

number of people who both drink alcohol and smoke marijuana regularly would be numbered in the 

thousands, and eventually in Canada it would soon reach the millions. An undisputed research finding is 

that a driver stoned on marijuana is a very dangerous driver. It has also been proven in the research labs 

in Toronto that a person whose blood test in alcohol would only measure .02, but having consumed what 

they call a jolt of marijuana, would be a far more dangerous driver on the highway than a person whose 

blood contents was .08. His perception of time and space as well as his co-ordination is impaired. And 

you can well imagine that if the driver drinks and smokes marijuana at the same time, as the researchers 

proved, that the research findings are indeed alarming. Research says that a person high on marijuana 

and then drinks alcohol, that portion of the alcohol that he consumed becomes seven times as potent as it 

would have been had he not smoked the marijuana at the same time, seven times as potent! Controlled 

studies of motorists in city traffic, intoxicated on marijuana alone, revealed that they completely missed 

traffic lights, flashing stop lights, drove recklessly, did very poorly in the handling of vehicles and were 

vaguely aware of pedestrians and parked cars and, Mr. Speaker, this was a controlled study. We can well 

imagine what would happen if it had not been a controlled study. Now if the Liberals want to make fun 

of this particular resolution I’m glad that they are because if they want to support the legalization of 

marijuana I’m quite sure that they’ll have the opportunity when I am finished speaking. But I would ask 

them, Mr. Speaker, until I’m finished that they would save their comments for their own approach to the 

topic if they don’t want to support the resolution that’s their privilege but when I’m providing the rest of 

it I would ask them to behave in the same manner as they would want other people to behave when they 

are speaking. Convicting marijuana drunk drivers would be difficult if not impossible. At the present 

time there is no screening device for marijuana users as there is for alcohol, but most researchers agree 

that it would take years to have the full effect on the measurement of the drug not only in Canada but in 

the United States as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every research that is going on in the continent has agreed that much more time is needed 

for research. Every research in the continent says that it is indeed a very, very serious problem, there are 

far too many unanswered questions. Some of the questions I think that we need to ask ourselves at this 

time are these. Does marijuana cause pre-cancerous changes in the lung cells? Does it cause emotional 

disturbances and mental illness — some researchers are already pointing to that fact — does it cause 

emotional disturbances? What about the effect on the heart? What about the effect of smoking marijuana 

and the pregnant mother? Does it kill ambition or make a person apathetic? The most important question 

facing all of us is this, what have we got to gain 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1279 

 

by the legalization of marijuana? The conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like the House to listen carefully 

to the words of Olaf Benin, director of the United nations Narcotic Laboratory and I quote, “In my 

opinion it seems that as progressively more scientific facts are being discovered about marijuana the 

more one becomes aware of the potential dangers.” Mr. Speaker, I think that the work and the little bit of 

information that I could gather would point out that legislatures have a very, very serious commitment to 

make and that is not to make the mistake that they made with alcohol but rather to look upon this and as 

this motion says, Mr. Speaker, it is a federal matter but I think the federal government would be well 

advised to know how this Assembly stood on a very, very important question. Mr. Speaker, I move this 

resolution. 

 

Hon. R. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this 

motion before I propose an amendment to it. I want to first of all say that the motion in my judgement is 

defective in some areas. First of all the motion seems to indicate or at least imply that the Government of 

Canada had some legislation about that would legalize the sale of marijuana, that may or may not be the 

case but I don’t know of that being the case, in fact in my federal provincial dealings with the federal 

government, I know of no such intention by them to introduce legislation which would legalize the sale. 

I realize that there is a question of documentation done by Le Dain and others in this whole area but I 

don’t know of any intent by the federal authorities to legalize the so-called sale of marijuana. There has 

been from time to time at the federal level discussion about decriminalizing the use of marijuana but still 

allowing and attaching to it penalties, namely of putting it in the category of perhaps provincial style 

kinds of offences, liquor act offences or vehicle act offences, that kind of a situation rather than putting 

it in the level of the Food and Drug and Narcotics Control Act. Either way it would not be a suggestion 

or an implication that there should be quote, “a legalization” of marijuana. 

 

The other thing that I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that the position of myself as Attorney General 

for the province has been one of opposition to the legalization of the sale of marijuana. I’ve been asked 

this question, I was asked in question periods a year or so ago and I indicated that I was opposed to its 

legalization and I still maintain that position, Mr. Speaker, the argument is raised that here we’re dealing 

with a drug which is no more harmful than alcohol. The argument is on occasion raised that in fact it has 

less of an impact than alcohol. That may or may not be the case, I don’t know, but to me it doesn’t meet 

the main substance of the argument. The main substance of the argument as far as I’m concerned is that 

marijuana is a mood altering substance, it is a mood altering substance as alcohol is or any other kind of 

a drug or chemical might be. Whether it has more harmful or less harmful effects really begs the 

question, the question being mainly should we as legislators provide for or in some way legitimize or 

legalize mood altering substances and the distribution in our society and I for one feel that alcohol as a 

mood altering substance has proven to be a very costly medical and social problem as far as society is 

concerned. 

 

I believe that marijuana has proven to be a very costly, social and perhaps even medical problem, 

certainly a social problem as far as our society is concerned. The point is it is a mood altering substance. 

I think some fundamental questions have to be asked about whether or not the provision of mood 

altering substances even if they are medically less harmful and perhaps not having any harm whatsoever, 

where the provision and the distribution of them is the kind of direction in which our society should be 

heading and from my point of view it’s a direction that we should not be heading and to argue that is 

less harmful than alcohol or less harmful than some other substance or that we’re making criminals out 

of young people begs the fundamental question in my view. The 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1280 

 

fundamental question is the promotion or at least the distribution of what I consider to be the potentially 

dangerous aspect of a mood altering substance. Now, Mr. Speaker, I realize that there may be some 

people who hold the individual views which are contrary to those outlying. But I tell you that those are 

my views, personally, and as Attorney General. And I also find that as a consequence the words of the 

motion that are before the House are inadequate, inadequate to express my concern in this matter. The 

words of the member for Rosetown-Elrose are as follows. “That this Assembly urges the Government of 

Canada (to do what?), to delay any legislation that would legalize the sale of marijuana (until when?) 

until broader research has been conducted,” Mr. Speaker. And I believe that that question implies not an 

opposition because it would have stated an opposition, it implies a delay because that’s the request that it 

wants, a delay until there is an opportunity to presumably analyze in a broader aspect the research that 

has been conducted. My point of view is, what if you did conduct broader research and if it did show 

that it was not harmful to one’s health? As I’ve said in my earlier remarks the fundamental question still 

has to be answered. And that is whether or not a mood altering substance, notwithstanding the research, 

is the kind of a substance which we should allow for sale or allow for distribution in our society. I, for 

one, do not believe that that’s the case. I believe that the motion is, therefore, defective, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would like to move, seconded by my colleague, the Minister of health, the hon. MLA for 

Humboldt, Mr. Tchorzewski, that this motion needs an amendments. I would, therefore, move that we 

amend Resolution No. 17 by deleting the word “delay” in the first sentence thereof and substituting, 

therefor: 

 

The words ‘oppose the introduction of’ and further by deleting all the words after the word 

‘marijuana’ in the second line thereof. 

 

Mr. Bailey: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly concur with the Attorney General that perhaps as he has looked 

at the written motion he has taken a different viewpoint than I had intended in the motion. I don’t think 

that I made any indication in my remarks in this particular resolution that I was in any way inferring, I 

suppose, if they want to read it that way, that in time that the drug should be legalized and if this 

Assembly will take a look at the resolution and I certainly agree with the amendment of the Attorney 

General and I will certainly be supporting it. I think it’s incumbent upon every member of this Assembly 

to look seriously upon this resolution and the amendment that has been offered by the Attorney General 

and I certainly will be supporting it. 

 

Hon. E. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just say a few words on this 

because I have had a considerable amount of interest in the question of drug abuse and marijuana for a 

large number of years. From the days when I was a teacher back from 1965 and on and even before that. 

I cannot disagree with the general idea that’s incorporated in the resolution, in fact, I would heartily 

support it. I believe that our society has been steered over several years, quite a large number of years by 

pressures and I think even by promoters of new drugs towards using all kinds of crutches to meet the 

pressures of society and to avoid responsibilities just to list two examples. I want to also say in my few 

remarks in this debate, Mr. Speaker, that nowhere in Canada, I believe sincerely has there been a more 

positive and concrete effort made to meet the problems of drug abuse and alcohol abuse than in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And the member for Rosetown, he smiles and grimaces, but he knows that 

that is true. In Saskatchewan I know it too, we don’t allow the advertisement of alcohol, in other 

provinces they do. In Conservative Ontario they do. Member should try to persuade his colleagues over 

there that that’s not a good idea. In Conservative Alberta they do. The member should talk to his 

colleagues in Conservative Alberta and 



 

January 3, 1978 

 

1281 

 

persuade them that they should not. And they still in Alberta, as far I know, Mr. Speaker, have the age of 

18 as the age in which alcohol can be consumed in bars and beverage rooms. That was changed in 

Saskatchewan. So you have to wonder where the member for Rosetown really stands. We have had 

other efforts developed in Saskatchewan that have done a great deal in this area. One example is, and the 

member for Saskatoon will be quite interested, I’m sure, the alcohol treatment centres like they call the 

Rehab centres in Saskatoon which is doing an excellent job. And alcohol education programs in schools 

and throughout the public by the Alcohol Commission. But I want to say after saying that that all of 

those things when you talk about our young people are not going to be particularly effective if the adult 

community does not set up the appropriate example. Now my personal position on this, Mr. Speaker, is I 

oppose the introduction of legalization of marijuana, I always have and I do now. I was rather mystified 

listening to the member for Rosetown about his dancing around and attempting to ride both sides of the 

fence at the same time in his resolution, and he laughs again. Except that if he had really not wanted to 

ride on the both sides of the fence at the same time he would not have talked about ‘delay the 

introduction of’. The delay the introduction of, which really means that he could go out to those people 

who oppose the legalization of marijuana and say to them, oh, we oppose it and go to those people who 

agree with the legalization of marijuana and say well, we don’t really oppose it we just want to delay it 

while somebody studies it for awhile. And it’s that kind of position that, I think, we cannot take in this 

House, and I certainly cannot. And, therefore, I’m very much in agreement with the amendment 

presented by the Attorney General. I think, Mr. Speaker, I have more that I want to say on this after 

giving some more consideration to the remarks from the member for Rosetown and, therefore, I at this 

time I would like to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 o’clock p.m. 


