



















































Hansard: May 15, 1978


2779 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

May 15, 1978 

 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Reported Political Involvement - Occupational Health 
 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would address my 

question to the Premier. In Saturday’s paper a reported address by Dr. Clive Dennis, the former director 

of the occupational health branch of the provincial Department of Labour indicated that it was time for 

the Department of Labour to back away from political involvement, as it refers and relates to the 

department of occupational health. 
 

I would ask you, Mr. Premier, whether or not you, in your capacity as head of the government, have 

started or commenced an investigation into what kind of political involvement Dr. Dennis was referring 

to and whether or not the department of occupational is in fact involved in the political arena in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 
 

HON. A.E. MR. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, Dr. Dennis’s comments are not new. I 

believe that he has made similar comments in the past. So far as I am aware, Dr. Dennis has not apprised 

us of the nature of the involvement which he labels as political. Accordingly, it is not possible for us to 

investigate what he has in mind. So far as we are aware, the occupational health branch of the 

Department of Labour is not involved in any activities which can fairly or reasonably be called political 

involvement. 
 

If someone comes forward with some instances which could be the subject of appropriate investigation, 

we will certainly consider it but so far that has not happened. 
 

MR. COLLVER:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is it true that the kind of political 

involvement of the department through the occupational health branch of the Department of Labour by 

sending out questionnaires to various employees and employers across the province of Saskatchewan to 

find out which of the employees are the most popular employees in the particular business firm or 

organization, and which information is reported back to the Government of Saskatchewan, that a contact 

is made by the Department of Labour official with the occupational health branch and that information is 

in turn passed along to the political party in power in Saskatchewan? 
 

SEDCO Loan - Fairview Developments Ltd. 
 

MR. S.J. CAMERON (Regina South):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SEDCO. 

As I understand the situation, SEDCO loaned Fairview Developments Limited money on the strength of 

a mortgage with respect to the Golden Acres Motel and took as additional security certain personal 

guarantees. Can the minister tell me, in granting the mortgage, Fairview Development Limited waived 

the provisions of The Limitation of Civil Rights Act? 
 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce):— Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite get the 

question. If you don’t mind, can you just rephrase that again for me please? 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2780 
 

MR. CAMERON:— Under the provisions of The Limitations of the Civil Rights Act the taking of a 

final order on foreclosure extinguishes the debt. In the case of grants of money to corporations and 

grants by mortgages backed by them, they have the option to waive that section of The Limitations of 

the Civil Rights Act. If in fact in this situation they did not waive it, it would mean that the guarantors 

are now worthless because the debt would be extinguished. So my question to you is, whether in 

granting the mortgage to SEDCO Fairview Developments waived The Limitations of the Civil Rights 

Act. 

 

MR. VICKAR:— Mr. Speaker, I think that would be a question I may have to check with my lawyer. 

May I take notice of that motion? 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Yes, it taking notice of it, would you also confirm, if you find in fact that The 

Limitations of the Civil Rights Act provisions were not waived that the guarantors are now in effect off 

the hook but no further action can be taken because it was a final order for foreclosure? 

 

MR. VICKAR:— Mr. Speaker, I will come forth with the answer for that question as well. 

 

SWIG Program versus YES Program 
 

MR. R.H. BAILEY (Rosetown-Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 

minister in charge of Culture and Youth. You announced earlier a program of students working in 

government, the SWIG program, which I understand is a new program for this year. Mr. Minister, 

recognizing that we will probably have a record number of high school and university students 

unemployed this summer, can you tell this House why you did not go back to the original position of the 

YES program in which local governments could also make use of employing students under the YES 

program? 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Government Services):— Mr. Speaker, I perhaps might 

advise the minister that it would have been useful for him, had he been in the House during the 

discussion of my department’s estimates because we spent about an hour on this very subject. I will try 

to summarize the conversation by saying that the original program - it was not called the YES program 

then, I think it was called STEP. The one that the Liberals introduced was a program that was abused by 

a goodly number of people and was brought into disrepute with the Saskatchewan public. If we could 

think of a way of introducing such a program that would not be abused by so many people as could 

bring the whole program into disrepute we would introduce it. In fact we are working on it. But the 

whole program which was introduced by the Liberals was the subject of a great deal of abuse. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I am not too sure that the minister 

understands my question. I do not particularly care for the inference that you have made against the 

private sector. What I am referring to is, that you have through the SWIG program employed students in 

government. Why have you denied local governments from also employing students as we did some 

three years ago? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— Well, I may not have understood the member’s question properly. Local 

governments now can hire people under the YES program. They can hire them for recreation purposes. 

That is in fact the program we have now, hired by local governments or charitable institutions for 

recreational purposes. That is the program we have now. I guess I did not understand the member’s 

question and I still do not 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2781 
 

because that is what our present program allows. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— Are we to assume, Mr. Minister, that local governments such as hospital boards, town 

councils, municipalities, school unit boards and so on, were abusing in the past the YES program, and 

due to the fact that there will be an emergency would you not consider it now, within the next six weeks, 

an appropriate measure for your government to take to re-establish its policy or to take a look at the 

policy we had in the past, not only to the recreational facilities but also to some work programs which 

local governments can provide. It seems to me, Mr. Minister (and I would like your comment on this), if 

it is all right for the government to employ university students in government, why is it that local 

governments can’t employ students? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— Well, of course they can. That is the very point of it all. I did not suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that hospitals and local governments would abuse the program and I don’t really think the 

member for Rosetown thought I did. What I was suggesting was, the program which was in effect some 

time ago, was abused by the private sector and that is a matter of record - I think a matter admitted by 

everyone including those who worked on the program initially. Local governments and hospitals now 

can employ students; that is the whole point of the YES program, yes, for recreational purposes. 

 

MR. A.N. MCMILLAN (Kindersley):— Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it not a fact that if you 

were to take the $1 million that you will be spending on the SWIG program to create 360 jobs and 

instead, apply that to the extension of the YES program to include private business without spending any 

additional money, you could create an additional 1,000 jobs to 2,000 jobs in Saskatchewan for young 

people? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— Mr. Speaker, the rules that the private sector run by and the rules the public 

sector run by are somewhat different and I suggest to the hon. member for Kindersley that if a 

significant number of people abuse a publicly funded program, that brings the whole program into 

disrepute and that is precisely the experience with the former program. 

 

Buildall Construction 
 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— A question to either the minister in charge of SGIO 

or the hon. Attorney General. I ask those ministers whether lawyers on behalf of any of the defendants in 

the Buildall case have filed appearances and indicated whether they are going to enter defences? I ask 

the minister whether he is aware that though there are fairly strict rules, namely that companies or 

individuals have 15 days in which to file an appearance and six days after that to file a defence, 

notwithstanding those strict rules, frequently cases are badly delayed. I ask the minister whether he 

intends to instruct his lawyers to ensure that the 21 day period is in fact complied with as it is intended 

to be complied with, under the law? 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs):— In answer to the hon. member’s question, I 

believe the first question was, did I know of any of the lawyers acting for us being served. To my 

knowledge that has not happened and I will take into consideration the comments made during the latter 

part of the question. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— I ask the minister (and it may be that this is the kind of question that you would 

want to consult with the lawyers about), but will you give your commitment to the House over a matter 

of such importance, to ensure that the law is rigorously applied and that if appearances are not filed 

within the 15 day period, which will expire 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2782 
 

this week, I believe and if the statements of defence are not filed within the six days that follow 

thereafter, your lawyer will be instructed to note for default and to take default judgment if things aren’t 

handled as expeditiously as possible. 

 

MR. WHELAN:— Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. member’s question we’ve obtained a 

lawyer to act for us who is thoroughly knowledgeable, who has an excellent reputation and we think that 

he will do exactly what he considers best. We have our complete trust in him. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. With respect that doesn’t really answer the 

question. Because I say to the minister, that he may want to consult with the Attorney General, but 

you’ll find that lawyers have a little club going and they give each other vast amounts of time so that one 

lawyer doesn’t embarrass another. The rules of court are very clear and provide specific lengths of time. 

I ask the minister whether you will not instruct your lawyer to deal with the rules of court in the way that 

they are intended to be dealt with and in the way they are laid down by the justices of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench which set those rigorous time limits? 

 

MR. WHELAN:— Keeping in mind, Mr. Speaker, the intricate difficulties and the type of case it is, I 

can assure the hon. member that we will work as fast and instruct our lawyer to work as fast as he can. 

 

Farm Recording Service 
 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister 

of Agriculture. I would like to direct a question with regard to a new policy through your Department of 

Agriculture to be handled by the regional extension services branch regarding the farm recording 

service. Now, Mr. Minister, I see by the policy that your government, your department, stated 

unequivocably that they are not in any way responsible for the accuracy of any recording or any reports 

provided to a client under this program. Now, at the same time, I see by the report that we have that farm 

clients must agree to, for instance, ‘Give the regions Farm Management Specialists Act access to 

accounting records the year-end proof of services rendered.’ Now, Mr. Minister, do you not believe that 

such a program, if it’s going to work, is going to require responsibility both on behalf of the recorder 

handled by your department and the client? 

 

HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture):— No, Mr. Speaker, I think not. We are setting up this 

program in an attempt to get more farmers involved in keeping accurate records on the farm. We are 

attempting to try to get people who could, either as part time or full time work, undertake to do record 

keeping for farmers. At the same time we can’t guarantee the kinds of people who will undertake this 

kind of work. They are going to be given instruction in general methods of farm accounting but at the 

same time it would be very unwise for us to attempt to guarantee that the work they do is accurate work. 

The client would have to have some confidence in the recorder that the work was being done properly or 

else he would have to question that recorder. We couldn’t, any more than any other accountant that you 

might hire, guarantee that the work that he turns out is accurate. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I just find that there are two things bothering me 

about it. It seems to me that the whole policy and the service that you are supposedly going to provide 

for the farmers is more of an information gathering service for your benefit than it is for their benefit. I 

can understand, Mr. Minister, why 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2783 
 

your department would want to renege on its responsibilities in being responsible to this policy, being as 

it seems so ironic that you should be advising or questioning . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order! What is the question? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK:— Very simply, Mr. Speaker, the question is, Mr. Minister, would you not agree that 

it seems rather hypocritical that your government would be taking on yourselves to advise farmers how 

to manage their books and their accounting when this government can’t and has run three deficit 

Budgets in a row? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Speaker, what are we attempting to do is provide a capacity at the rural level 

for farmers to set up a bookkeeping service, which will be satisfactory to them. We are not proposing 

that these people have to be qualified accountants to do that kind of work. We are suggesting that this 

kind of work can be handled by anyone who has a fair bit of training in book work. We are hoping that 

after a few years time, after the farmers have had some experience with these fellows, that they will be 

able to do their own bookkeeping and hoping that that will be the outcome of that program. We think 

that would be a very desirable outlook. 

 

We certainly do not require that the information, which these recorders pick up, should be turned into 

the department. There is no requirement for that at all. 

 

Saskatchewan Checkoff Board 
 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon):— A question to the Minister of Agriculture. In view of the fact 

that the Saskatchewan Checkoff Board, which is an appointed body, has seen fit to fund the beef 

information centres, both provincially and nationally which activities fall well within the guidelines of 

what the checkoff was set off for, will the minister reconsider his decision that he made to cut this 

funding that was given by this board, by 75 per cent? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Speaker, I have not given any direction that they be cut off of funding. I simply 

suggested that because we were looking at amendments to the act, that we wanted to provide an 

opportunity for a new board, if a new board was to be appointed, for a new board to be able to look at all 

of the expenditures under that act, or out of that fund, and so that they would have an opportunity to go 

through these and determine which one of those they thought should be funded. I never said, at any time, 

that that was one activity which would be knocked out. I certainly haven’t made that commitment. 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— A supplementary. I am sure the minister realizes that the beef information centre 

does a lot of work at the various fairs - Yorkton, Regina, Weyburn, Agribition, that this budget has to be 

set on the spring basis. Your decision in cutting back this by 75 per cent you have assured that none of 

the beef information work that has been done for the last four years will be done at any of the fairs in the 

province this summer. 

 

In view of this, will the minister reconsider his decision and let the new board make its mind up? 

 

MR. KAEDING:— Mr. Speaker, it was not brought to my attention that this was creating a problem. If 

it is creating a problem I should be hearing about it from the proper people 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2784 
 

and we will see what decision to make on it. 

 

Cable Regina 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— A question to the minister responsible for Sask Tel. I understand that 

there is a problem with the cable hookups in that those people with condominiums or row housing or 

multi-unit residential housing are not getting cable hooked up because of an internal dispute between 

Sask Tel, and in one case at least, Cable Regina wherein the cable companies want to hook up the units 

internally, Sask Tel is insisting on hooking up each individual unit themselves contrary to CRTC policy. 

Now would you kindly advise when you are going to resolve this dispute that is leaving all people with 

condominiums or multi-unit residential places without cable and without access to cable? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Environment):— Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the question. 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— . . . Further take notice, Mr. Minister, that this dispute has been going on for 

some, I believe, two to three months. In that time areas of at least the city of Regina, that have had the 

cable hooked up, those residents of condominiums or multi-unit residential projects have been deprived 

of cable television whether it be your network or the conventional cable. This problem has existed for 

some three months without any resolution of the problem by particularly Sask Tel. 

 

MR. BYERS:— Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of that question. But just to advise the hon. member, 

there is not a common situation with respect to the wiring required for cable and CPN. There are some 

apartments and condominiums that were wired by the owners for one type of service. There are other 

cases where apartments or condominiums are not wired at all. The hon. member is making a very 

general and sweeping charge assuming that the situation is identical for all apartments and 

condominiums in the city of Regina which is simply not the case. Therefore, in order that we can 

provide an adequate answer for the wide range of possible situations in the general question that he has 

asked, we would like to take notice so that we can perhaps apprise him in a complete manner of some of 

the very complex technical problems that are involved. It has nothing to do with any jurisdictional 

problems that may be around. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order. Final supplementary from the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 

 

MR. C.P. MACDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— A few weeks ago the Attorney General gave 

every assurance to the House that anybody taking Cable Regina wouldn’t need a filter to filter out CPN. 

All my friends have Cable Regina and are enjoying the benefits of CPN. Could the minister tell me 

whether or not if you have Cable Regina you need a filter to filter out CPN . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! I’ll take the next question. 

 

Lanigan Potash Mine 
 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of 

Sask Potash Corporation. The minister announced enthusiastically today that he was shutting down the 

Lanigan mine for so-called refurbishment. I ask the 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2785 
 

minister why, when the changes that are designed to improve the mine in the 1980’s, you would choose 

to shut down now when there is such a massive demand for the product and stop producing and stop 

serving your customer at a time when it is very difficult to get the product? 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary):— Mr. Speaker, we will continue to produce and serve our 

customers from our other mines. As the member may not know, the potash industry traditionally shuts 

down in July for refurbishment. This is simply starting a little earlier on June 1, and using employees 

there to bring the mine back to the condition that it should be in. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— A supplementary, is it not the case that the mine is ordinarily shut down for two 

weeks and will now be shut down for about eight weeks? 

 

MR. COWLEY:— Well, Mr. Speaker, the mines are traditionally shut down in the province from three 

to four weeks. The period with respect to Lanigan will be longer. 

 

Advertising Expenditure - ‘Warm-up Saskatchewan’ 
 

MR. BAILEY:— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, when you announced the program which is now being 

called ‘Warm-up Saskatchewan’, there was a fear that a great deal of advertising would be done to 

promote that particular program. Could the minister tell me what funds are available under that 

particular insulation program for government advertising of the program? 

 

MR. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— I can’t be specific in the exact dollars that are 

going to be expended but there was careful consideration given to the level of advertising that we felt 

would be required in order to convey to the populace of Saskatchewan, the benefit of the program. I can 

take notice of the specific amount and certainly convey that figure to the member, perhaps later today or 

tomorrow. 

 

MR. BAILEY:— A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister, in doing so, also 

reassure the House against the fear that the opposition has that a big portion of the money that is being 

spent would be in advertising, so I ask you this question, do you feel that it is necessary to carry 

half-page advertisements in the weeklies advertising a program when money will be going into 

advertising and less into the insulation? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Mr. Speaker, I do believe that a certain level of advertising is required. Otherwise I 

think the program would certainly be deficient in carrying out its intention because people simply won’t 

be aware of the program. I, as minister responsible, Mr. Speaker, have talked to people who have not yet 

heard about the program, so that certainly undertakes to convey to this Legislative Assembly that there 

are people in Saskatchewan who do not know of the program. I think that the advertising is in fact, 

required. 

 

I can assure the member, Mr. Speaker, that the level of advertising vis a vis the moneys expended in the 

program will be very, very modest by comparison. 

 

Filing of Orders for Returns to Opposition 
 

MR. MACDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the House Leader. I wonder if 

the minister could tell me whether or not it is the intention of the government 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2786 
 

to file with the members of the opposition, some 20 papers, orders for return? I would like to point out 

that during the 1976-77 session, according to my figures, the government neglected to file 11 returns. 

During the 1977-78 session, they neglected to file 24 returns and during the current session, they are 

now 20 behind, for according to my figures, a total of 55. 

 

I was always under the impression, and would the minister not agree that it is your responsibility to file 

these orders for return? It seems that anything that is embarrassing, the NDP government has a talent for 

burying and not filing those returns. Can the minister give us this assurance, that by the end of the week 

you will file those returns? 

 

MR. COWLEY:— Mr. Speaker, I have been filing returns as they come to me from the departments. I 

will certainly undertake this afternoon to check where they all are and undertake to provide as many as 

possible to the opposition. I have filed, as far as I am aware, every return that has come into my office 

that has been compiled. Some of them involve all of the departments, all of the Crown agencies and they 

take a great deal of time to compile and put together and to check out. But certainly I will try to have 

them all filed as frankly, from my point of view as being the administrator of filing these things as well 

as frankly, from a purely political point of view, I would like to have them all filed by the end of this 

session. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MACDONALD:— Final supplementary. Would the minister when he is doing that check, go back 

to 1976 and 1977 and see if my statistics are right. I know it takes a long time but three years, don’t you 

think, is a little over-indulgent? 

 

MR. COWLEY:— I think, Mr. Speaker, if there are any here from the 1976-77 session, they would 

undoubtedly have been passed late in the 1976-77 session, which would be about one year ago, not three 

years. 

 

Coronach Shut Down 
 

MR. ANDERSON:— Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SPC. In view of the fact that 

there is a shutdown at Coronach because the construction workers can’t drive up the 2.5 miles of gravel 

road, is the minister making any effort to approach his colleague, the minister in charge of municipal 

roads, to see if something could be done so the project won’t be stopped completely? 

 

MR. MESSER:— I can assure, Mr. Speaker, the member that everything is being done to see that the 

Coronach project is not in any way delayed. 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— Supplementary. In view of the fact that they have information pickets out that the 

other unions are honouring, I find it quite facetious for the minister to say that there is no hold back or 

hold up on the job. Is the minister going to make some effort to either compensate for driving down the 

road or try to get the road fixed so that there isn’t a complete hold up? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I said that everything was being done. I did not say that there was 

not any interruption or potential interruption in regard to the activity carried on at Coronach. It is a very 

recent problem, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think that as of Monday afternoon, we should have all of those 

problems resolved. They may not last 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2787 
 

for very long and I am hopeful that there will not be a serious interruption with the activity at the 

Coronach power project. 

 

MR. ANDERSON:— A final supplementary. Would the minister give me his opinion. With a strike of 

this sort, which cannot be really the fault of SPC, would it be considered a legal strike, in view of the 

fact that you yourself are not in charge of the roads? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Well, Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time that we have had strikes in certain sectors 

of the industry which bring about some interference to other sectors of the industry and I am sure that 

we are going to be able to work out this problem, if it is a significant one, as we have in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Coal Mine Stripping 
 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan):— Mr. Speaker. Question to the minister in charge of SPC. Mr. 

Minister, the private sector that is mining the coal in the Boundary dam area is performing stripping 

operations, delivering the coal, selling the coal to SPC under $3 a ton. It is my understanding that this is 

costing SPC better than $3 a ton just to uncover the coal. Would you make a comment on that? 

 

MR. MESSER:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I can take the query that the member makes under advisement. I 

might want to say though that SPC is just undertaking to establish a mining operation. I do not, 

therefore, think that it would be unreasonable to see, for a number of years until they acquire the 

necessary facilities, the training, the expertise, that is required, that the cost might be somewhat higher. 

I, in no way concede to the figures that the member conveys to this House. 

 

Statement re Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 
 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, I would like to inform the legislature that the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, today, exercised its right of first refusal to obtain the 

Inexco share of the Key Lake join venture and that the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 

has, in turn, resold this interest to Eldorado Nuclear Limited, a federal Crown corporation. 

 

Eldorado Nuclear Limited has purchased the entire Inexco interest from Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation and assumes all liabilities in connection therewith. Under the agreement with 

Eldorado Nuclear, Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation retains the right to repurchase from 

Eldorado at a later date up to one-half of the Inexco interest, or a further one-sixth in the total joint 

venture. 

 

The founding members of the Key Lake joint venture were SMDC, Inexco and Uraniers Exploration and 

Mining Limited of Saskatoon. Each of the three parties held a one-third interest under the joint venture 

arrangement. Each of the three parties has a right of first refusal when any other member desires to 

dispose of its interest in the joint venture. 

 

In late March of this year Inexco and Denison Mines Limited of Toronto announced an agreement 

whereby Denison would purchase the Inexco interest for a $158.5 million US. The Inexco interest 

includes in addition to the interest in Key Lake joint venture, certain other undeveloped mining 

properties in northern Saskatchewan and Alberta. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2788 
 

This action on the part of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) in no way, Mr. 

Speaker, prejudges the outcome of the Bayda Inquiry, but rather allows the government and our Crown 

corporation, SMDC, to keep our options open at no cost or no risk to SMDC during the period in which 

we shall be considering the recommendations of the Bayda inquiry. 

 

We chose to exercise our right of first refusal at this, before the report of the Bayda inquiry, because the 

time period in which we had to exercise our right, as set out in the joint venture agreement, was rapidly 

coming to a close. 

 

SMDC and Eldorado Nuclear have for some time, Mr. Speaker, been jointly seeking to arrange a 

purchase of the Inexco interest conditional upon a decision to proceed with uranium development in 

Saskatchewan being made. The fact that the report of the Bayda inquiry will not be received and 

considered prior to the expiration of the first refusal period, dictates this course of action where by the 

entire Inexco interest is purchased by SMDC and resold to Eldorado Nuclear. 

 

The arrangement with Eldorado has been entered into in and recognition of the fact that since the joint 

venture is two-thirds foreign owned, federal law will require some or all of the interest of the foreign 

partners to be transferred to Canadian owners if the project goes into production. According to federal 

law, Eldorado Nuclear is an eligible Canadian owner. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Before the minister takes his seat I wonder if he would answer a question on this 

rather important statement, because he has not provided us with a copy of this statement in any way, 

shape or form, to examine it and he has gone through a number of various transactions that are going to 

occur. Would he permit a question before I respond to his statement? Would that be possible. 

 

MR. MESSER:— I will circulate copies, but I don’t believe it is within the rules of the House to answer 

a question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, I think it, therefore is - Mr. Speaker, I was still on my feet when you 

called order. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order! We’re talking about two orders of business. The member was asking if he 

may ask the minister a question. I said no. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, I was responding to the ministerial statement. I will do so now. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The member for Wascana gets the first opportunity to respond to the ministerial 

statement. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— . . . been asleep. 

 

MR. MERCHANT:— What do you mean asleep, I’ve been standing for the last minute. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. I can sleep standing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the minister is making what he might have thought was 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2789 
 

simply an announcement of some factual situation, even himself knew that he had to begin the defence 

against what he could anticipate would come regarding the Bayda inquiry. I say, Mr. Speaker, that for 

the minister to suggest to this House that 158.5 million American dollars, almost $175 million Canadian 

is being committed by Eldorado Nuclear, that that is being done without some guarantees from the 

minister about what he thinks will happen with Bayda and without some guarantees from the minister 

that they will, in fact, ignore Bayda if the Bayda inquiry comes against them. He really says to members 

of this House that you think we are unbelievably gullible and that you can suck in the people of the 

public. Mr. Speaker, the minister told this House not long ago that the time to exercise the option did not 

begin to run until Bayda brought in its decision and now the minister says that this is so urgent that they 

have to proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that it makes good sense to proceed in this manner, to allow Eldorado to move 

in but we assume from what the minister said today and from what the minister said in an off moment, I 

gather, at a press club meeting some time ago, that it is the intention of the government to ignore Bayda. 

I say to this House that the minister is making a mockery of the Bayda inquiry and the mockery of the 

way the government is dealing with the whole uranium matter. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to see that the member for Regina Wascana has 

such a depth of knowledge that without the document in front of him he could discern the juxtaposition 

of one-third interest here, there and everywhere, that the minister was talking about today in his press 

statement. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, is that it is not possible for anyone to make comments on something 

as complicated as this matter prior to the = to make a judgment on such a thing as complicated as this 

one. It indicates again why the Government of Saskatchewan is involving itself in these private sector 

business involvements and is merely going against totally the basic principles of good economic sense. 

The fact is that we, as legislators, in trying to come to grips with this kind of thing just quite simply 

can’t do so and the member for Regina Wascana quite clearly showed that in some detail today. The fact 

is, Mr. Speaker, that all of these complicated business transactions between the federal government and 

the provincial government, juggling of interest one with the other and ignoring the Bayda inquiry, is 

quite simply, Mr. Speaker, without any sort of economic foundation. At such time as we feel we’ve 

examined the minister’s statement and we have examined what is being proposed - all of the so-called 

laughter across the way won’t change anything - at such point in time as we examine this in some detail 

and depth, at that time we will make some response. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Introduction of New Page 
 

MR. SPEAKER:— Before the orders of the day, I beg to inform the Assembly that Helen Turanich, 

who has just left the room, will be a page during the present session. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. A.N. MCMILLAN (Kindersley):— Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, you had your 

verbal running shoes on today and slipped quite unnoticed passed me on introductions. I would like to, 

with leave of the House, introduce some students. 

 

From the Stewart Valley School on behalf of the member for Morse (Mr. Wiebe) these are 24 grade 

seven and eight students, accompanied by Mr. Larry Pool and Mrs. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2790 
 

Frances Moen. They are here to tour the building and to take in the proceedings this afternoon. I hope all 

members join with me on behalf of the member for Morse in welcoming them. I would like to say I will 

be meeting with this a little later to answer any questions that they might have about the proceedings that 

they have seen here. 

 

HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The fact that the member for Kindersley is a late starter should not be interpreted as 

the Speaker wanting to overlook important guests from Morse. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 - An Act to 

amend The Education and Health Tax Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, just a few brief remarks with respect to this particular bill in second reading. The 

bill actually amends The Education and Health Tax Act to provide legislative sanction to those portions 

of tax changes which occurred in the budget presented by my colleague, Mr. Smishek, the Minister of 

Finance on March 8, last. 

 

One of the specific changes provides for exemption from education and health tax for all individual sales 

of 25 cents or less. While this change may not seem too significant because there are a few taxable items 

left to retail at that value, the change should reduce the workload of those businesses which sell small 

single items. This tax decrease is retroactive, of course, to March 8 last. This bill also provides a rebate 

of one half of the education and health tax paid by a person who purchases a mobile home for residential 

purposes. The mobile home tax rebate will provide assistance to families who want to purchase homes 

in that medium price range. This rebate program is also retroactive to midnight on budget day. 

 

The major tax change contemplated by this bill is the increase in the education and health tax on beer, 

wine and spirits from 5 per cent to 10 per cent. As in the case of the tax rate increase on tobacco recently 

passed by this House, this government makes no apology for increasing taxes on liquor. As I have 

mentioned before, liquor and tobacco cannot be considered to be necessities of life. Both of these items 

are injurious to health and thus contribute to escalating cost of providing medical care to our citizens. 

The misuse of alcohol is a major factor in highway accidents and is responsible for absenteeism which 

creates very large losses in all sectors of our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government does not pretend that tax increases on liquor and tobacco will lead to 

massive shifts away from the consumption of these products. But we do hope that some people will 

moderate their consumption as a result of increased cost. We make no apology for choosing these 

particular areas to increase the revenues of the province. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, section 5 of the bill is designed to bring Saskatchewan law into line with other 

taxing jurisdictions by requiring payment of taxes in dispute prior to judicial hearing with a full refund, 

including accumulated interest, if any appeal is upheld by the courts. This provision simply prevents the 

use of appeal procedures to inordinately delay the payment of taxes officially owed to the province. Mr. 

Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of this bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2791 
 

MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, (No, the Assembly 

is not ready for the question) the point on a number of issues made by the Minister of Revenue in his 

introduction of this rather, or seemingly side bill that is just cleaning up House business, there are 

several points in this that need to have further study and debate, one of which certainly is the removing 

of the right of appeal of an organization for taxes assessed by a government. (That is what the minister 

just responded.) We want a chance to have our legal advisors check into that particular provision and 

make sure, if the tax is inappropriately levied by the Government of Saskatchewan, that no business 

organization loses its right of appeal. I have a great deal more to say on this and I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Byers that Bill 

No. 54 - An Act to amend The Liquor Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. C.P. MACDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a very few 

minutes - unfortunately, the Leader of the Liberal Party is not feeling well and he has brought up several 

very important points in relation to The Liquor Act. Therefore, today I just want to make a few 

comments, then move an amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one great problem with this particular amendment to The Liquor Act, of course, is that 

it zeros in specifically on one group of people in the province of Saskatchewan - I refer to the 

conventional cable television operators. It is designed originally with one intent in mind, and that is, to 

make darn sure that the cable television operator does not have an opportunity to use liquor advertising 

in his thing. I don’t think any of us really object to the idea of not having liquor advertising on cable 

television, except that there is a great technical difficulty. Of course the cable television operators have 

tried to project this and put it forth before the government, have asked for some consideration and 

leniency in this regard and they have been ignored. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the cities of Weyburn and Estevan have had cable television for many, many 

years. This was not a problem in those two urban centres in Saskatchewan. I am not sure if the rise, all 

of a sudden, of the battle between conventional cable in Saskatchewan and CPN, the offspring or what 

we could call the illegitimate child of the NDP, has in fact generated this particular amendment to The 

Liquor Act. Mr. Speaker, therefore I really want to say that if the Government of Saskatchewan is really 

sincere about prohibiting liquor advertising, I think we should have a look at all liquor advertising. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to move this amendment: 

 

That all words after ‘Liquor Act’ be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

Be not now read a second time but that the subject matter be referred to the Select Standing 

Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers and 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2792 
 

that the committee consider methods by which all advertising of beer, wine and spirits by print, 

radio or TV be prohibited within the province of Saskatchewan and that such prohibition include 

advertising by agencies or departments of the Government of Saskatchewan as to the availability 

of beer, wine and spirits within the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for Kindersley (Mr. McMillan). 

 

I hope everybody will take a very serious look at this one. I am sure that all of us realize the technical 

difficulty with the conventional cable operators is a difficult one. I think they would be most happy to 

comply with the regulations of the government if it could be done in a reasonable way. I think also that 

there are other . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order. The member has moved a motion. 

 

MR. MACDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, I do not want to say any more about it. I think the amendment is 

self-explanatory . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order. The member has concluded his remarks by moving the motion. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I think we need to see what is going on here. I think, while we 

certainly do not object in any way to the hon. member suggesting that there be other ways to limit liquor 

advertising and that these might well be considered, I think the substance of what he is saying ought to 

be carefully kept in mind by all hon. members. 

 

The issue before the House is whether or not we should attempt to prohibit anyone making use of any 

electronical device or equipment within the province for relaying, publishing or distributing any 

advertisement or form of advertisement concerning liquor. In my view, the answer should be yes. In the 

view of the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald) it should be no, since he wishes to 

ask this House not to real this bill a second time but that some study be conducted. Certainly no one 

objects to a study being conducted but the issue is what happens in the meantime. Certainly we can 

conduct a study as to whether or not there are ways to further limit liquor advertising but the facts are 

fairly clear. With respect to conventional radio and conventional television there has not been liquor 

advertising and the issue is whether or not that rule, which has applied to conventional radio and 

conventional television for years, should apply to cable. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— It seems to me the answer is yes. It seems to the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley, and I take it his party, that the answer is no and that cable television should be 

somehow treated differently than conventional radio and conventional television; that somehow to make 

them adhere to the same rules, which have been adhered to by conventional radio and conventional 

television is unfair. To delete the advertisements which have been deleted in conventional television for 

years, unsuccessfully, to require this to be done on cable television is somehow unfair. 

 

I say that he is wrong. I say that the cable television operators should live by the same rules that the 

conventional television operators and the conventional radio operators have lived with for years. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2793 
 

I say that rule is reasonable and fair and that the suggestion that we ought not now to pass this, is a 

suggestion that we, once again, give to the cable operators a benefit, a preference, a preferred treatment, 

which is not enjoyed by anyone else in this province, at least, as far s the province of Saskatchewan can 

legislate. I think it ought not to be given. I know of no reason why this special preference should be 

given. 

 

Since that is my position I will be opposing the amendment. I will, most assuredly, be opposing the 

amendment because I believe this should be passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suspect that other people will want to study this amendment to see its full implications 

and, accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that Bill 

No. 46 - An Act to establish a Heritage Fund for Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about The Heritage Act which is before this House. I 

may say that it gives me pride to speak in this debate on behalf of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 

We have always used money from our non-renewable resources to help pay for current expenses such as 

health care, education, highways and revenue sharing. The money for this purpose has always been 

unpredictable, however. This new fund will provide a degree of stability so that from year to year we 

will be able to predict what amount of revenue from non-renewable resources will be available for 

current expenses. 

 

This bill will also greatly strengthen legislative control over revenue from non-renewable resources. It 

will require that the Legislative Assembly approve the budget for the expenditures and for the long-term 

investment. We have, from time to time, in the last year or two, heard members object, saying that the 

money from the Energy and Resource Development Fund was being spent and that the legislature didn’t 

have an opportunity to debate the expenditure. It will give some merit to that. In order to meet that 

objection we are legislating to provide that under the Heritage Fund there will be an opportunity for the 

legislature to determine the use of that money. 

 

Most important of all, Mr. Speaker, the Heritage Fund will make sure that future generations of 

Saskatchewan citizens, at a time when our non-renewable resources will have been depleted or at least 

partly depleted, will still be able to enjoy benefits from the revenue we have collected. 

 

This bill is an act of faith by which we keep faith with generations of Saskatchewan people who are yet 

unborn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a fortunate province. We have substantial reserves of oil and natural gas; 

we have some of the richest uranium in the world. Clearly, we do not know what yield this will give to 

us in economic terms, because we do not know the future development, the future pattern for 

development of uranium, but that the uranium is in the ground is now established. We have a supply of 

high grade potash, which will last for hundreds of years. We are fortunate also, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

in having a government which is committed to the people of this province, committed to 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2794 
 

the principle that the benefits accruing from these rich resources, belong in no small part to the people of 

this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— As we all know, Mr. Speaker, when the world price of oil started escalating 

rapidly in the autumn of 1973, mainly as a result of decisions by major oil companies and by oil 

exporting countries, certain decisions were required to be made. 

 

Canada is also an oil exporting country and it is only logical that we should obtain the same price for our 

oil in the export market that other countries obtain for their oil on the export market. It seems 

reasonable. I am sure we all agree with what I have said, but where we disagree is in the disposition of 

the extra money, this major increase which came about. We have seen a very large part of that money 

being taken off by federal export taxes. We have seen provinces attempt to get part of that windfall 

profit, not only the province of Saskatchewan, but also the province of Alberta and the province of 

British Columbia. But we know, Mr. Speaker, where the money would have gone had members opposite 

sat on the Treasury benches. Because they have made clear what they would have done each of them in 

debates previously in this House has said what they would have done had they been on the Treasury 

benches when the international price of oil went up. We passed Bill 42. The Liberal Party is very clear 

that we should not have passed Bill 42 and we should not have passed any similar legislation, but we 

should have allowed the regular royalties to apply. 

 

The Conservative Party is equally clear. They have said we should have enacted a royalty structure such 

as that which exists in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I happen to have a table . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Where is the table? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— I have a table which indicates what was received between January 1, 1974 and 

March 31, 1978 under a New Democratic government, from our oil revenue except those in bonus bids. 

The details of this are set out here. I have estimated what would have been received under the 

Progressive Conservative policy of applying Alberta royalties. I have estimated what the receipts would 

have been under the Liberal policy of applying regular royalties. The figures, Mr. Speaker, are this. 

Under the New Democratic Party up to March 31st, 1978 we received $779 million; estimated receipts 

under the Progressive Conservative policy $338 million; estimated receipts under the Liberal policy 

$233 million. A loss under the Progressive Conservative policy of $440 million and a loss under the 

Liberal policy of $545 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative estimate is based upon an application of the Alberta system 

to Saskatchewan as advocated by PC policy. If the Alberta system provided for drilling incentives 

similar to Saskatchewan a further $64 million would have been lost and, accordingly, when I state that 

they would have received under their Conservative policy $338 million, I may well be overstating it by 

the extent of $64 million. There is, I think, no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that their policy is one of give-away. 

It is that policy which would have meant that we would not be debating The Heritage Fund Act, there 

would have been no money for a heritage fund at all. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2795 
 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan citizens would not have control over 

their own destiny . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER:— . . . afraid to table it? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, may I table the table I just read from. Mr. Speaker, hon. 

members opposite are suggesting that they need copies of that. I will try to see that before we rise at 

5:00 o’clock all hon. members will have a copy of it. I believe that they should have had that 

information whether in that form or not before this, since it is a policy which they are most assuredly 

urging upon the people of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan people would not have had control over what 

the oil companies did with this extra money. Sometimes members opposite argue that this money should 

have flowed to the oil companies and then it would have been invested in development and in this way 

there would have been a great deal of economic activity. I say to them that they have no way of seeing 

that this money goes into the ground in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— They have no way of seeing that, if invested in developed at all, it is not 

development in Indonesia or not development in the North Sea or not development in the Arctic Islands. 

Desirable as that may be it does not create any economic activity in Saskatchewan. I say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we have provided as we have more than $64 million in drilling and incentive credits, 

it was provided on the basis of that money being spent in Saskatchewan and it has been spent in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— The fruits of that policy are now being clear to see. Recently in an oil sale we 

received in bonus bids more than $12 million, far and away the largest sum of money ever received in 

this province in bonus bids. Far and away the largest sum; nothing like it in the years from 1964 to 1971; 

nothing like it! The previous high was in 1976 - 1977 now when we got about $7 or $8 million; the 

previous high in that was in 1976 when we got about $5.6 million; and in the 25 years prior to 1976 

when we have been receiving bonus bids only once have we exceeded $4 million. I say in 25 years only 

once exceeding $4 million and that was in 1957 and now we have more than $12.5 million last week. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— All this, Mr. Speaker, amid the comments that somehow the oil industry is 

leaving this province. Well, they are leaving a lot of money in the course of their travels. 

 

I noted that the Kindersley Clarion is carrying stories indicating that drilling in the Kindersley area is 

likely to be more vigorous than for many, many years in this year of 1978. I compliment the Kindersley 

Clarion for giving a few of the facts. I recommend to the member for Kindersley that he relay some of 

those facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, if they had their way this money would not be flowing into a 

heritage fund; we wouldn’t even be talking about a heritage fund. It would have 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2796 
 

been flowing into the coffers of the multinational corporations. Or most of it would have been flowing 

across the border into the United States because, as they well know, more than 95 per cent of the oil 

industry of this province is owned outside this country; perhaps not of this province but of Canada is 

owned outside this country. I would say this, that the more money that flows out under policies 

advocated by members opposite the more difficulty we have with our balance of payments and the more 

the Canadian dollar is put under pressure and the more the Canadian economy suffers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our position, the position of the New Democratic Party is clear and consistent. We have 

always believed that the people of Saskatchewan should be the major beneficiaries of any increase in the 

world price of oil. We faced a great deal of opposition and much of it encouraged by members opposite. 

Our legislation has been challenged in the courts. The federal government has consistently opposed our 

attempts to exercise the right over our resources that were granted us in 1930. Despite these obstacles, 

Mr. Speaker, despite the determined opposition of the Liberal and Conservative parties and the Liberal 

government in Ottawa, we are determined to see that the people of Saskatchewan get a fair return for 

those resources. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, that is the story of our oil revenues. It is a story we have heard 

many times before but it well worthwhile repeating because it is a story unique in Canadian history. It is 

a story that has not happened where members of the Liberal Party have been in power and where 

members of the Conservative Party have been in power. The principle is the same in our treatment of all 

other non-renewable resources, though the specific circumstances differ in each case. Our objective is 

always to permit the private sector to earn a reasonable profit on its investment for risk taking. And 

before hon. members say that the oil industry hasn’t made a reasonable profit, I would like them to look 

at some of the statements of companies which have major holdings in Saskatchewan. I do not know 

what their profit in Saskatchewan is. I happened to pick up the operating statement of the annual report 

of Pan Canadian the other day and I looked at their record. I know that they have extensive holdings in 

Saskatchewan and I noted that they, in the last three or four years, have increased their profits per share 

and their profits as a company, by more than four times - more than 400 per cent. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Nonsense! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— The hon. member says this is nonsense. I have got a few tidy shares in Pan 

Canadian; I have been watching their progress and I tell you, it’s the truth and I’ll . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER:— I have a few shares . . . 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has some shares in the holding company 

that owns a majority in Pan Canadian. My holdings are very, very modest, very minor. All I know is that 

this company has increased its profits four times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member of the opposition is raising the issue of whether this is before tax or after 

tax and I am saying to this House that over the last five or six years, I can’t remember the precise period, 

the after-tax profit of Pan Canadian has gone up over four times. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2797 
 

Mr. Speaker, our revenue from oil totalled in 1973-74, the first year when the price started going up, 

about $45 million. Some of that was in the last three months when we began to pick up a little bit of the 

royalty surcharge. In 1978-79 the figure was not $45 million but approximately $350 million. That is an 

increase of 670 per cent and a large part of that, Mr. Speaker, is money which would not have come into 

the coffers of Saskatchewan, had either the Liberal Party or the Conservative Party been the government 

of the day. It means that we in this province can do things which we wouldn’t otherwise have been able 

to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t use all of that money for current revenue or current expenses. It would have 

been nice for us to be able to do it. We could have introduced this money into the Consolidated Fund 

and we never would have had a deficit of any kind. Our projected deficit this year would not be $44 

million but rather, our surplus would be $70 or $75 million. Alternative - we could have made even 

more generous tax cuts than we made. But, Mr. Speaker, neither alternative would have been truly 

responsible. 

 

It would have been politically expedient in the short run and what government doesn’t like to cut taxes? 

It is always tempting to come in with big tax cuts but if we are to be responsible, we have to face two 

facts about oil revenues. The first is that the money will not continue at the present rates forever. There 

is only a certain amount of conventional oil available to us. Certainly we will produce significant 

amounts of heavy oil but there is no suggestion that the profit margin in heavy oil is anything like the 

profit margin in conventional oil on percentage terms, and accordingly, the windfall profits will not be 

there to the same extent. If we grow to depend upon this windfall money from conventional oil and use 

it for current expenses and all of it for current expenses, we will find some years down the road when 

the oil money begins to diminish, that we will face major increases in taxes or major cut backs in 

government services. We think in fairness to the next generation, 10 or 15 years from now, we ought not 

to do that. 

 

This money is not just a lucky jackpot for this generation, it all has been there for tens of millions of 

years and it doesn’t all belong to us in the 1970s; some of it belongs to the people who are going to 

come here in the year 2030. We have an obligation to invest in such a way that future generations will 

enjoy some of that benefit. Mr. Speaker, the Energy and Resource Development Fund was created in 

1974 in order to do just that, to allow us to set aside a major part of the increased oil revenues for the 

benefit of those future generations. A large part of the money used was used to buy equity in the potash 

industry; we provided money for Saskoil. I am not sure all that technically came out of the Energy and 

Resource Development Fund but that money allowed us to invest in Saskoil, allowed us to provide 

drilling and incentive credits. It allowed us to invest in potash. It allowed us to invest in development of 

hard rock minerals in northern Saskatchewan. I think that future generations will be grateful to us for 

having taken that step. Money from the fund has allowed us to do all of those things. 

 

This fund we are discussing today, the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, extends the principle we applied to 

oil, through the Energy and Resource Development Fund to all non-renewable resource revenue. Money 

from potash, uranium, oil, sodium sulphate, other non-renewable resources will be funnelled into the 

Heritage Fund. The Heritage Fund will be repositorial of this non-renewable resource revenue; then we 

will pay it out, pay it out broadly speaking in four ways. 

 

A Heritage Fund dividend will be paid each year to the Consolidated Fund to help 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2798 
 

finance the ongoing programs of government - universities, schools, hospitals, highway programs, all 

the rest. We will not identify what service it is to pay for; it will be voted for the Consolidated Fund. The 

dividend will be restricted, i.e., the bill prohibits us from moving all of the money, all of any year’s 

earnings of the Heritage Fund over into the Consolidated Fund. In this way our operating expenses will 

not expand beyond a level which we hope any government will be able to maintain. So there will be 

money moving out for current expenses. 

 

Secondly, the moneys will be used to provide exploration incentive, grants and loans for the 

development, the use and the conservation of our energy resources and our other mineral resources. So 

the fund, therefore, will be able to spend money in order to encourage production and to encourage 

conservation so that we will have further funds either in the short run if it encourages production or in 

the longer run if it encourages conservation. 

 

Thirdly, the fund will be used to pay for capital expenditures which have a lasting economic and social 

value but which may not earn a return on their investment in a strict sense. A highway does not earn a 

return on its investment in a strict sense, in the sense that we can calculate it. But we know it earns 

money for us. There are similar economic and social benefits which we believe can be financed out of 

this fund. This year, as you will note in the estimates, we are providing about $15 million for that type of 

investment. 

 

Finally, the fund will be used for long term investments which will yield a financial return, investments 

such as the kind I talked about in the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation or potash or as 

the case may be. Loan investments will be made to Crown corporations and equity investments will be 

made in Crown corporations. Thus, we will have long term investments which will be equity and which 

will not bear a fixed rate of return and we will have loan money from the Heritage Fund which will bear 

a fixed rate of return. For example, we will, it is anticipated provide in this year, a loan to the Potash 

corporation to help finance its expansion. That would bear a fixed rate of return. There are other 

investments which as I say are in the nature of equity investments. 

 

In essence, these equity and loan investments will convert all revenue which we believe are with us for 

only 10, 15 or 20 years, in large amounts; convert them into an investment which will yield not for 10, 

15 or 20 years, but with luck, for 50 or 100 or 200 years. Investments in potash, for example, will yield 

returns for, we predict, at least 100 years. Other investments in mineral development will generate an 

ever increasing cash flow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth category - the investments made by the Heritage Fund in capital assets which 

will produce in the future, is a very key in essence of this Heritage Fund bill. Because of statutory limits 

and ordinary management prudence, the amount of money which will be drawn off from the heritage 

Fund for non-investment purposes, will have a limit. 

 

This will mean that year after year, and every year, the Heritage Fund will grow. And year after year, 

and every year, Saskatchewan people can look to that fund and say, yes, it will continue to earn for me 

and my children and my children’s children. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2799 
 

MR. BLAKENEY:— That, I think, is why we call it a Heritage Fund. In time the revenue from 

investments may exceed royalties and other taxes accruing to the fund. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, we can expect oil revenues, currently the largest single source of 

revenue from non-renewable resources, to decline in the decades to come, but the Heritage Fund will 

have invested some of this oil revenue and assets which will yield continuing returns. In this way we 

will have preserved for future generations a good portion of the income generating capacity of today’s 

oil. We can truthfully say that the economic benefits from our oil resources will continue in perpetuity, 

long after the resources themselves have been depleted. We will have preserved a heritage for our future 

generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Heritage Fund is at the heart of the policy of our government. It puts principle before 

short-term political considerations, but I say that without sacrificing the present, it makes a commitment 

to the future. More importantly, it secures for the people of Saskatchewan, now and in the future, the 

rewards from their resources. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this bill will meet with the support of all members on this side of the House. I 

suspect it will be opposed by members opposite, who still believe, notwithstanding what they say, that it 

is immoral for governments to collect resource revenues, those revenues belong to the resource 

companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lines are drawn. We disagree with them. We agree with the idea that we should take 

these resources into the public domain; we agree that they should be set aside for future generations. 

That is why we have set up the Heritage Fund. Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Oh, I hear we are going to start out in talking about policy and we are going to hear 

the magic words again from the members opposite, even before I start to speak. So we will look forward 

to their magic words of, what about Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba? Those are the three magic words used. 

Then there is Management Associates, Buildall and Switzerland. Those are the other three. So we will 

wait for those six magic words to be fired across, as quickly as possible, during the course of my speech. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, it would have surprised me more if the Premier had said he wasn’t going to 

support a fund which he is going to control the destinies of all the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan ad infinitum, forever. The fact is that the Heritage Fund in the province of Saskatchewan 

is no more really than a change in name. It is merely a change of name from a fund that nobody could 

get any information on before, that we chose to buy a potash mine but nobody could find out how much 

was in it or how much was going in it. The reporting on the fund was a minimum of 18 months behind 

to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. No one on this side of the House could find 

out anything about the greedious fund into which the so-called oil revenues went. 

 

Now the point is, with reference to the Heritage Fund, it is not preserving a heritage of natural resources 

for the people in the province of Saskatchewan. It is going to preserve our heritage of slavery, 

enslavement to the Premier of Saskatchewan. That’s what this government wants. But I say to the 

government opposite, I say to all the members over there who have supported for the last seven years the 

increase in power 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2800 
 

of the Treasury benches, the increase in power of the Saskatchewan Premier and I ask you to ask 

yourselves one question only, just one. Would you accept in that chair with that power, Dick Collver? 

Because that’s the question you have to ask yourself. Would you accept in that chair, with that power, Si 

Halyk? Cy MacDonald, I’m sorry, a slip of the tongue, Cy MacDonald. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:— Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— A little Freudian there. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Well, there is a lot of Freudian in all of us, Al. Some of the Freudian, in you, for 

example, and Freud had a great saying or a great expression when he was introducing psychology to the 

modern world and he said that people had a tendency to be schizophrenic. That was Freud’s introduction 

to the modern world psychology and boy, I can tell you this presentation that you have made today in 

presenting so-called Conservative policy and so-called Liberal policy - give me back that piece of paper 

whoever took it, it was sitting right here - so-called Liberal policy and so-called Conservative policy to 

this Assembly is schizophrenic, two-faced, on the first one. 

 

First of all, I’m going to make a few comments on this statement that the Premier promised to table six 

months ago and has been afraid to table ever since. The point is, he says that from the period January 

1st, 1974 to March 31st, 1978, the Government of Saskatchewan has collected $779,130,364 under its 

oil revenue policy, under its oil revenue policy. Under that revenue that was collected did the Premier 

talk about or mention the fact that they lost during that same period of time millions and millions of 

dollars in income taxes and in corporate income taxes that they would have collected in that same 

period? The answer is no; he didn’t bother mentioning it. He didn’t adjust his figures to allow for 

income taxes. Secondly, what about the interest that is presently before the Supreme Court? He didn’t 

deduct that off the $779 million that the Premier knows he is going to have to repay. He knows that. 

Then, did he deduct the legal fees for the court cases that he embroiled the people of Saskatchewan in 

with reference to his oil policy? The answer is no. Did he include in a deduction from his oil revenues 

the reduced income taxes that the government of the province of Saskatchewan has received on payrolls 

of oil industry that have pulled out of Saskatchewan and moved into other jurisdictions that are more 

rational and more reasonable in their approach. Furthermore, the Premier attempts in this so-called 

document that he has tabled to spell out with is PC policy. Now I am not going to bother to say what 

Liberal policy is because they, I’m sure, can speak for themselves. We, however, are going to speak to 

the Premier about what Progressive Conservative policy is, not what he would imagine it to be from this 

document - and I know that we are going to see NDP ads in the next election campaign. You can see it 

all now: Oil revenue received under NDP government, estimated under PC policy. Of course he has not 

bothered to say where he found this PC policy. He has not bothered to say it, oh no! Where did he find 

the PC policy, Mr. Premier? Is it in the policy brochure? No it is not. We have tabled, Mr. Speaker, on 

three occasions in this legislature, a booklet which is the Progressive Conservative policy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— You have not tabled it. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Oh yes we have! Oh yes we have. We have tabled it. We have tabled it. Was it 

three times or twice? . . . Twice, sorry. We have tabled, twice in this legislature, our policy booklet. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2801 
 

It is unfortunate that the Premier cannot read or refuses to read what the policy is. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, even with what the Premier says is the PC policy, which is as was announced at 

the time of the introduction of the oil legislation last fall, the oil-mineral income tax legislation which 

was collecting the NDP’s goofs on Bill No. 42 - when they introduced that act we said that if the 

Premier of Saskatchewan had introduced legislation instead of Bill No. 42, similar to . . . check Hansard. 

Mr. Premier, see if you can say ‘exactly like’. Similar to . . . 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Oh. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, he says oh. He says oh, but I suggest that the Premier who holds 

himself out to be Mr. Smooth, who holds himself out to be Mr. Clean, who every time something rotten 

happens in this House happens to find himself in Vancouver or Ottawa or Toronto or the Bahamas - 

whom does he leave the message up to, Mr. Speaker, but the member, his desk mate, poor old Attorney 

General desk mate, same old thing. For example, here is this Mr. Smooth, Mr. Nice Guy sort of father 

figure whose responsibility is the electoral office in Saskatchewan and here he is. He hands over the 

introduction of the amendments, for his own responsibility, to the Attorney General. Why? Why would 

he do that? He is responsible for the Chief Electoral Officer. He is responsible for elections in 

Saskatchewan but does he run them? Oh, he might possibly have some bad publicity then. Well he is 

going to get some bad publicity over this one because he is trying to hold himself out to the people of 

Saskatchewan as being truthful and he is not in reference to this document. 

 

We are pleased that he has finally tabled this document because, Mr. Speaker, we did not know the exact 

number . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Now that they are finished with their magic words I suppose we 

can go back to discussing the issue. 

 

We did not know, Mr. Speaker, that the oil collection revenues were $779 million. That, we had to wait 

for the Premier to tell us. But now that he has told us, I tell him that he can calculate that we have in fact 

sent our documents over to the province of Alberta. We have asked them to present to us what the 

revenue would have been in Saskatchewan under a similar kind of program but allowing for the lower 

Saskatchewan production from one to 15 barrels, a similar kind of program . . . Oh, says the Premier. 

That is exactly what we said last fall and I tell the Premier right now exactly what we would have 

collected, knowing now that it is $779 million, we have been informed by our experts that under our 

policy of adopting legislation similar to the province of Alberta, we would receive 91.3 per cent of 

whatever oil revenues were received in Saskatchewan; 91.3! Now, Mr. Speaker, that allows for an 

adjustment off of the $779 million of some $71.1 million. We admit that if the Government of 

Saskatchewan had introduced legislation back in 1974 instead of Bill 42, but legislation similar to that of 

the province of Alberta with the same kind of constitutional base, with the same kind of constitutional 

expertise that the Alberta government adopted in adopting that legislation; we admit that over the course 

of those years, the people of Saskatchewan under that tax would receive some $71 million less. That’s q 

guess, we agree with that - under the mineral tax alone. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest to the Premier what extra the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan would have had if the Premier and the government members opposite, instead of 

developing confiscatory legislation, had adopted the policy, a similar kind of policy to that of Alberta, to 

try and work out with the industry the best possible level of taxation given the increase in revenues. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2802 
 

Here is what they would have had. First of all the oil industry in Saskatchewan would have continued to 

search for oil. Instead of dropping down significantly in terms of looking for oil, it would have 

continued on or gone up because we are energy short. The Premier knows that and everyone else knows 

that. Increased activity in the oil sector, in the private sector, that is what he would have had. $71.1 

million less on the one side in revenues under the mineral tax but many, many millions more in payrolls, 

in workers, in organizations that continue to pay tax in Saskatchewan. 

 

What else could we have had without it? We might have had new development in the private sector. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, what happened with Bill 42 and the confiscatory policies of the NDP, what 

happened was that they turned off the climate of confidence that should have been in the private sector 

as a result of all those resources that Saskatchewan has. There is the Minister of Industry and Commerce 

up there and he knows that if he wants to be an investor in the private sector that there has got to be a 

confidence in that investor to want to invest. If the investor believes that a government is going to act in 

a confiscatory manner, in an autocratic manner, as did the Government of Saskatchewan, the NDP, 

under that Premier, then the private investment sector is going to dry up. It is not only going to dry up, 

Mr. Speaker, in the oil industry, it is going to dry up in every other potential industry of Saskatchewan, 

every other one in Saskatchewan. 

 

What else could we have had if we didn’t have this NDP policy of attempting to attack organizations 

and legitimate organizations and people in our community. 

 

MR. CAMERON:— You supported Bill 47. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Well, the member for Regina South suggests that we supported Bill 47. That was 

merely a correction bill of Bill 42. The point is that at that point in time the mistake had been made by 

the previous government. The trouble is that the mistakes made by the government that my friend to the 

right is attempting to join, in terms of oil policy for Canada and the export tax, he will know full well 

what they tried to do to our country and to our oil industry. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that what we could 

have had, as a result, was a calm situation as it related to investment in other industry; we could have 

had new investment in the oil industry, as did the province of Alberta. And we could have had today, 

Mr. Speaker, more than one rig which is what we have drilling for oil in Saskatchewan today, as 

compared to the hundreds in Alberta . . . Well, that may be so. I sat in here during the debate, as a matter 

of fact, with the Minister of Industry who admitted there was only one rig in Saskatchewan, the minister 

responsible for Sask Power. 

 

We have the same kind of situation, Mr. Speaker, with reference to this policy whereby the Government 

of Saskatchewan sits on capped wells on the western border of Saskatchewan, while it is paying two and 

three times as much s they could get out of those capped gas wells, to the Government of Alberta and 

the oil industry in Alberta, for gas to be used by Sask Power. That is the kind of nonsense that the 

Premier is attempting to foist on the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to read this document into the record. This is from the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

The money received under the NDP does not include more than $64 million collected and paid 

out as drilling credits. (This may or may not be true.) 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2803 
 

The PC estimate is based on an application of the Alberta system to Saskatchewan (and I quote) 

as advocated by PC policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier wanted to be known as a truthful fellow, if the Premier wants to be known as 

true along the province, I challenge him to state where that is in PC policy and I challenge him to find in 

Hansard, any place in Hansard, where I or any member of my party suggested that this is our policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier thinks he can get away with this. He thinks that the big lie is reasonable, that 

this big propaganda machine can go out and print this document - oh, he will have it in every newspaper 

- PC policy. Maybe the press will be fairer than that and maybe they will come to you and say, show us 

where that is PC policy. Please do! We are waiting, Mr. Speaker, for this to be accepted. I challenge 

either the Attorney General or the Premier, but most especially the Premier, who has brought this into 

the House, to indicate where this is PC policy. Whether it is in our statement of policy, whether it is in a 

statement that I made, I wait for it with eager enthusiasm. 

 

Now, let’s talk about the Heritage Fund and what it is for. The Heritage Fund is nothing more than a 

collection of revenues that are going to be decided on by the Premier as to what goes into this fund and 

what doesn’t. A collection of revenues that the Government of Saskatchewan is going to try to say, 

somehow in its report to the people, that the total amount received from Saskatchewan Crown 

corporations, the government’s nationalized industries, is going to somehow be profitable. 

 

The Heritage Fund will be nothing more than a juxtaposition of the books. The Heritage Fund, I predict, 

will be nothing more than an attempt by the NDP government to hide the truth from the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know that the Premier is going to say, or the Attorney General when he gets up on his feet, he is going 

to say, haven’t they got a Heritage Fund in Alberta? And isn’t the Heritage Fund in Alberta under the 

total domination and control of the Alberta cabinet as compared to this Heritage Fund which is going to 

have some input from the legislature? I say, Mr. Speaker, that those comments will be correct. 

 

The fact is that there is a Heritage Fund in Alberta and the fact is that the Alberta cabinet does directly 

control the Heritage Fund with receipts of over $1 billion a year. 

 

The member for Lloydminster (Mr. Kwasnica) says shame and I add my shame to that, absolutely! To 

control that kind of money that the Alberta government is doing from the cabinet down means that 

freedom of individuals and freedom of action in the province of Alberta must diminish over the next and 

coming years, must diminish. It is a no better idea in the province of Alberta than it is in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The only difference between the Government of Alberta and the Government of 

Saskatchewan in this area is this. The Government of Alberta, as Alberta, does not have a tradition over 

the last seven years of producing phoney-baloney information in its budget, proven last year, proven! 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Where? 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Well, the Minister of Finance says where. We all remember the press report. He 

will remember what was stated in the press and all his bribery accusations. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2804 
 

He did not get around it. He did not get around it and he had to finally admit that his budget speech was 

wrong. 

 

In every single department of government, in every single Crown corporation, we find what? First of all, 

juggling of year-ends, from this year-end to that year-end, taking 18 months so that touchy areas skip 

over the one-year period so that we cannot investigate them until next year and will be 18 months 

behind. We raised that in the legislature already. 

 

Suggestions, for example, Mr. Speaker, by many employees of the Crown corporations, which we have 

raised before in this Assembly on many, many occasions, and suggestions by the Provincial Auditor and 

his staff that the Government of Saskatchewan does not have a handle on expenditures of the 

government and does not have a handle on any of the organizations of government. Suggestions today, 

suggestions that there is political involvement of the Department of Labour through the occupational 

health department, political involvement. The Premier refused to answer that question. Political 

involvement! Refused to answer that - a department of government accused by its former director of 

political involvement and the Premier says he cannot even answer that question. 

 

It is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that no one in Saskatchewan is going to believe that. No one is going to 

believe that, Mr. Speaker. $71 million less in oil taxes yes; half a billion less in borrowings for potash 

mines, yes; another billion in borrowings for Sask Power and Sask Tel less, yes - few separate deficit 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. Would we have those? No, no. 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, that this government’s fiscal and financial mismanagement of the affairs of 

the people of Saskatchewan . . . and now we are going to get more of the magic words . . . and we did, 

from that wonderful member that no one’s ashamed of, the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes). 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the people of the province of Saskatchewan are sick to death of government 

control in their day to day lives. They are sick to death of the power of the Premier of Saskatchewan. It 

is too bad that the members opposite do not really believe in the people of the province or do not really 

believe that they should have a say or, Mr. Speaker, they would accept our suggestion with reference to 

the potash mines and with reference to Saskoil, and turn them into a company which every voter owns, 

directly and votes for the board of directors themselves, directly. That is what we have suggested, Mr. 

Speaker. We have suggested that these people, these individuals, every vote in the province, is entitled 

to a direct share in these organizations. 

 

What the Premier is suggesting with the Heritage Fund is to create more shares in the hands of the 

cabinet - direction in the hands of the cabinet. What we have suggested is to broaden the base and give 

them to the voters and let the voters vote directly for the directors, not you appoint them. Then we will 

see - that’s going to be the issue in the coming years; that’s going to be the issue in the next election. 

Are you prepared to put your money where your mouth is? The answer is no. Are your prepared to give 

up some of this difficultly acquired power? The answer is no. Are your prepared to go along with real 

distribution of power amongst the people? The answer is no. 

 

Oh, of course, sure. We’ll give away 30 per cent; we’ll give away 40 per cent - we want control, says the 

Premier. In every single act, in every single bill - we want control. No dispersion of power. Direct 

control by the Premier of Saskatchewan. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2805 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we refuse to accept this kind of direction and control by the Premier. 

 

I’ve got a great deal more to say on this and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General):— Mr. Speaker, before the hon. member takes his seat, 

will he permit a question? 

 

MR. COLLVER:— No. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow, that 

Bill No. 70 - An Act to amend The Election Act, 1971 be now read a second time. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— We believe that legislation along the lines of Alberta, after negotiations . . . 

(inaudible) . . . the vast majority . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order! 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Well, along the lines - I’m glad you quoted that. Quote another one. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Is the member for Nipawin through on Bill 70? 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Not a bit. I want to talk about The Election Act and the Attorney General was just 

electioneering. I thought you would permit that. He was trying to electioneer and I wanted to talk about 

The Election Act. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order! The member for Nipawin has an obligation to proceed with Bill No. 70. The 

Attorney General has no obligation here at this time. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— That’s right. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Now, the member for Nipawin should proceed or be out of order. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, I’m making a few comments about The Election Act in the province 

that are going to ensue as a result of the amendments that have been directed by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. I would just like to make one comment first of all. 

 

One section is now going to take the instructions off the great big sheets that are going to appear in the 

voting stations and throughout the polling stations in Saskatchewan and they are going to put them on a 

little ballot about that size and they are going to print the instructions on the ballot. Now, this is one of 

the suggestions in this Election Act. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the line-ups that are going to occur 

at the polling stations with every person trying to read these instructions written on the ballot in very 

fine print? Everybody is going to say, I’m not going to put my name on there until I read it and they are 

all going to walk from there to the voting station, from there to the voting booth and try to read these 

new instructions that are on the ballot, specifically designed by the Attorney General to confuse the 

issue. 

 

Now, I mentioned earlier and I notice that the Premier has now run out of here because 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2806 
 

he doesn’t want to talk about The Election Act. It is his responsibility. It’s his department. Normally, the 

person responsible for the Chief Electoral Office would introduce amendments to The Election Act. 

Why isn’t that happening here today? Why didn’t it happen here the other day? Why didn’t the Premier 

introduce the changes to The Election Act? Well the question quite simply answered is this. He didn’t 

want to tie himself with any of these changes or any of these suggested changes. Because even though 

his employee, his direct employee, the Chief Electoral Officer, is going to be responsible under the new 

act for the administration of this Election Act, the Premier wouldn’t want to introduce the act and the 

changes because then it might seem to the people of Saskatchewan that the Premier somehow is not 

there. Not reasonable, not super smooth, not Mr. Nice Guy. 

 

Let’s talk about some of these amendments that have been introduced in this new act. Supposedly, the 

Attorney General said in his discussions, we are now going to introduce an independent audit. 

Independent audit. This is designed to ensure that any of the problems hat might have happened out in 

Pelly don’t occur again. Did the Premier or the Attorney General approach the Institute of Chartered 

Accountants for the province of Saskatchewan and ask for their opinion as to whether or not an audit of 

the parties could be performed under the aegis of the act? The answer is no. Did the Attorney General 

have that suggestion before he introduced the bill? The answer is yes. Did he go to any accountant in 

Saskatchewan and ask any accountant in Saskatchewan whether or not any accountant could comply 

with this act and give a certificate to the party? The answer is no. He went to a group of lawyers. They 

designed a legal act that has nothing to do with accounting; that has nothing to do with presentation of 

figures. Yet come the next election time there is going to have to be independent accountants brought in 

according to this act. They are going to have to examine the expenditures of political parties. 

 

This act, Mr. Speaker, first of all, as an example, spells out in terms of expenses and I would like to 

suggest this to you throughout the act, expenses are referred to cash, cash. So if I go in, so if the 

Attorney General, cash expenses, if the Attorney General has gone out in the previous election or four 

elections that he has been in and has purchased 5,000 signs and he has these in an inventory, the 

Attorney General gets to use those signs at no cost required to be recorded under the act. If the person 

who is running against the Attorney General, who is new to the field, tries to get signs, anything that 

they spend in cash is required to be recorded under the act. Was the Attorney General alerted to this 

problem; was the Attorney General informed that it would be better to have an accrual statement which 

is the only kind of statement that any auditor can possible audit fully and give what they call a clear 

certificate to. The only kind of statement that is possible to give a clear, clean certificate to is an accrual 

statement. That means you determine how much inventory you have; that means you determine how 

much cash you have on hand; that means you determine what your accounts payable are, what your 

accounts receivable are, both at the beginning and at the end. And if you have that kind of a statement, 

Mr. Speaker, then the amount that is expended in between those two dates is a meaningful number. It is 

a meaningful number and applies correctly to what, in fact, was spent. 

 

Unfortunately the Attorney General refused to accept that. He wanted to introduce an act by his lawyers 

that was ‘cash money’, ‘cash money’. How did they get that information? Well, they got it from the 

federal Election Act which is identically at fault for the same reason. The federal Election Act that’s 

where they got that information. They were going to tighten up on expenditures and they were going to 

say, well, we will just copy, we won’t take any time and even though the Attorney General brings it to 

me 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2807 
 

for my comments, and even though we look at it and we comment and we say, look, if you bring it in for 

an accrual statement it will be able to be audited; it will really be clean; everybody will be cleaned by 

the act and it will be a meaningful statement presented. And the Attorney General said no, after 

consideration he is convinced that the system set out in the amendment is the most effective way to 

control the election expenses. No report from the accountants; no report from the auditors even though it 

was suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also suggest that there are a couple of other minor areas in the bill. The 

major areas that we are concerned about . . . the major one, is the fact that the Attorney General or the 

Government of Saskatchewan, I say the Premier, has decided not really to come to grips with election 

expenses in Saskatchewan. Let’s leave the biggest possible loopholes you can. I am going to spell out a 

loophole for the benefit of the Attorney General . . . Yes, it is covered off in the assets, he says. I don’t 

happen to agree with him and neither do our legal advisors. According to our legal advisors it is not 

covered off. 

 

Here is a nice little game that is played. The Liberal Party has a bunch of land, let’s say. I don’t know 

whether they have or haven’t. I have been told that they have. That is beside the point. I don’t know that. 

They have a bunch of ground, a bunch of dirt owned by the Liberal Party. Do they have to record the 

donations? Yes, they do, under this bill. But comes the next election and let’s say they have this land 

that was purchased in previous years, let’s say. Now we are going to sell it off or better yet we are going 

to mortgage it. We will borrow against it. Does that have to be recorded under this act? No, sir, it does 

not. Was the Attorney General alerted to that problem? Well, according to our advice . . . that is what I 

am told. But why, and I am also informed that this is true, why would this happen now? Why would the 

act be brought in for debate now, prior to . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— We always do . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Yes, you are the one who sets the order of business. Maybe you should introduce 

the bills right to start with before you introduce bills like this that are designed specifically to develop 

debate. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— No fun. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Yes, no fun, isn’t that right and waste the people of Saskatchewan’s money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only other item I would like to mention is this. I noticed that throughout the earlier 

debate we still heard the magic words from the members opposite. So when I presented the facts to the 

Attorney General about the new bill having the first name or the Christian name first and the surname 

last, I would like to read his reply. I just want to mention this reply so that they will know how they 

answer on the other side. Here it is: 

 

The way the amended bill is drafted, the surname will appear last on the ballot. 

 

Now we were concerned about that because two people named Pete, running for an election would have 

Pete and Pete in the same place on the ballot and it might be confusing and we felt that the last name or 

surname should be first and the Christian name last. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2808 
 

 

That is what he thought. And this is the rest of the answer: 

 

A quick survey shows that Alberta, Nova Scotia, Ontario and perhaps other provinces have the 

surname last on the ballot. The present Saskatchewan ballot has the surname last and I should 

also point out that the surname will appear in block capital letters. 

 

Now, when it serves their purpose, they say the words Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, terrible, awful places. 

When it serves their purpose to spell out why their way is better, Alberta, Nova Scotia and Ontario are 

very positive things. The other comments I would like to make - the banding together of committees, we 

don’t think that the section on the metro area is tight enough and it is going to cause some confusion in 

some rural areas. 

 

We do intend to move two or three minor amendments to this bill, Mr. Speaker. But the major ones are 

the major loopholes that occur in the bill as a result of the Attorney General’s insistence on a cash basis 

rather than an accrual basis and the way that the Government of Saskatchewan, primarily, can juggle the 

numbers to suit their convenience by the use of this cash statement. Therefore, this bill has not answered 

the real problems raised in the Pelly by-election. 

 

MR. MACDONALD:— Mr. Speaker, that is a hard act to follow. I couldn’t understand it myself, but I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to speak too long. I think it best that this bill be dealt with in 

Committee of the Whole. But there are two or three very important fundamental areas that should be 

mentioned in second reading. 

 

I’m going to start with what I think is by far the most important. If you propose an act and the act is 

incapable or the responsibility for abiding by the act is not possible by the people whom the onus is put 

on, then certainly that has got to be a bad piece of legislation. And what I’m referring to is number one, 

the 203AA where under the rules, the advertising of a registered political party is limited to $50,000 in 

the aggregate to a year. I want to say you might call that a particular section put in, it might have been 

directed to certain individuals or the kind of going on that certain individuals may have taken the liberty. 

 

Let me give you an example. Suppose the NDP Party nominates 10 candidates and those 10 candidates 

decide that they are going to put on an advertising program in Saskatchewan. They go ahead and go to 

their newspapers; they go to their local television station in Prince Albert; they go to their local radio 

station in Yorkton; they go to their local radio station in Swift Current. There is not any law in the 

Dominion of Canada that states they have to report that they are a registered political party. In other 

words, a candidate for the NDP in Prince Albert does not have to come and tell the NDP Party, 

provincial party that he is going to spend $3,000 on advertising. All of a sudden those 10 candidates 

spend an average of $3,000; that’s $30,000. But in the meantime, the provincial executive of the NDP 

Party has decided to balance out according to this act, the advertising for the year in a budget. So, in the 

Commonwealth, on the radio and on television and in the newspaper, they balance out $50,000 for the 

year. But all of a sudden, now according to this act, they have spent $80,000. And the NDP Party has 

absolutely no control over the candidate. In Yorkton, for example, my two colleagues here have been 

investing money in what they considered was an advertising program prior to the writ in the federal 

election because 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2809 
 

Mr. Benjamin, for example, on behalf of Mr. Cameron has a secretary; he has free phone calls; he has 

free mailouts; he has had that for four years. In order to get voter identification, in order to try to catch 

up with him, they have gone out and their supporters have raised money to spend. But I want to tell you 

something, the national party, the Liberal Party in Canada has no control of how much they spend. They 

don’t know any. They have no moral obligation to report it. The national Liberal Party of Canada has no 

moral obligation to find out. I’m just telling you, Mr. Minister, that is impossible to abide by. Once 

again we are going to have exactly the same situation as Pelly. We are going to have political parties in 

contravention of the act and they will not even have any knowledge of it. And I want to repeat, you say 

in here that in the aggregate a provincial party cannot spend more than $50,000 in a year on advertising. 

Go and ask my friend from Quill Lakes. He’s a liar. What legal responsibility for example does any 

NDP candidate have to report it to the provincial executive. Let’s take another example. Supposing 50 

candidates, and the Conservative Party now has over 50 candidates, decide to spend $1,000 a year and 

that is only maybe advertising their political meetings, a couple of ads in the newspaper relating to their 

annual meeting, maybe a small radio program, $1,000 worth of advertising in this day and age is literally 

nothing. It has nothing to do with the provincial executive, nothing to do with the provincial party and 

all of a sudden then, if the provincial party goes out and spends $4,000 or $5,000 on their own 

advertising program, the NDP Party is in contravention of this act, and once again the political party is 

in real serious trouble, as an example, Pelly. 

 

I would like to suggest to the minister that I hope he would have a legitimate explanation for the reason 

for 203(AA) and he can please try to explain to us how a provincial political party can control an 

independent candidate, they can tell him how they can control an independent constituency. For 

example, in my own constituency I have eight to ten independent associations. I have local Liberal 

organizations in Indian Head, in Wolseley, in Grenfell. I have absolutely no knowledge of whether or 

not they are going to advertise in the Grenfell Sun for a public meeting. I have no idea what they are 

going to do on an advertising program. I don’t control them and certainly neither does Ted Malone or 

the president of the Liberal Party. 

 

So once again I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, I expect the Attorney General will get on his feet and 

explain, because what he is doing now, is creating a situation and an atmosphere that could come up and 

end up exactly like Pelly. I think that is very bad. 

 

I want to say to the Leader of the Conservative Party who said, I heard that those Liberals had some 

land. You know, that’s the kind of innuendo that I particularly don’t like. 

 

MR. LANE (Sa-Su):— What innuendo? If you don’t have land you can deny it. 

 

MR. MACDONALD:— No. We do have some land. We happen to have a building on the land. We 

have a little piece of property in the city of Regina and I think the NDP has a little piece of property in 

the city of Regina for provincial headquarters, and if you don’t, that’s unfortunate. That’s unfortunate. 

But when you say they own some land, you suggest that it is in a real estate kind of a proposition and I 

suggest to the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland with his yap, yap, yap the way he always does when he 

starts talking about that, I am suggesting to him that it is none of the business of the Leader of the 

Conservative Party about the land. All you need to do is put into that act that any time for election 

expenses you must declare revenues for loans or mortgages or anything else, but you don’t have to come 

and pry into our business and that’s the second thing. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2810 
 

The second part of the act that I think is a little difficult. What are the assets, the cash, the bonds, the 

securities, the totality of the resources of a political party in Saskatchewan? For example, what is the 

NDP going to do with Service Printers? Are you going to have someone come in and evaluate the 

machinery and the equipment and the building and the assets? Are you going to turn around and in every 

local constituency going to send in a report on the assets? Why don’t you merely put in the law that, as 

far as revenues are concerned, they will include all revenues, statement of cash to being with, because I 

think when you start off with an act you have to have a statement of cash. But to turn around and try and 

do the land and the value and so forth, it’s just impossible. I think and I would hope the Attorney 

General would come up with an explanation in that regard. I would hope that you would limit it to the 

actual cash or bonds or whatever it may be that a political party has. To try to figure out the value of 

land, every desk, every chair and everything else, I think is impractical. 

 

The third major weakness that I am going to bring up to the Attorney General and certainly we are going 

to bring this up in third reading, that is this one once again, where this act does not have to consider, as 

revenue, services provided by individuals. Of course, what we are doing is we are once again, generating 

a Pelly all over again. Where executive assistants and special assistants can go up and take a month and 

let’s just take ten special executive assistants, go to Pelly. I would say that the average that each 

executive assistant is making in salary is $1,500 per month. All right, all of a sudden you take ten of 

them and if you count their services that is $15,000 of expenses. The federal Election Expenses Act 

demands that services be reported. This one clearly eliminates the services of individuals. I suggest that 

is a legitimate expense, for example, if a trade union wants to come in here and send in five or ten 

organizers from across the country and the trade union pays them as their contribution to the NDP; then 

they come and zero in on a provincial election campaign and because the union itself has decided that 

that is their method of contribution the NDP doesn’t have to report it. I say that they should because that 

is a legitimate expense. If you don’t, what it does is really saying we are giving the advantage to the 

government. I asked the minister in charge of public service how many executive assistants there were 

in the government and how many special assistants. We have been taking bets on this side of the House; 

some of us say it will be 60 when the list comes over, some say it will be 80. I don’t know what it will 

be but I know when the Liberals were the government we had five executive assistants . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . That’s right; maybe they didn’t. Is that the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes)? 

The last time I remember when we got talking about election expenses, you made some kind of a stupid 

accusation from the seat of your trousers and we had a very unpleasant situation in the House . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . You know, Mr. Minister, you are another one of those. You sit there and all 

you want is a piece of election machinery to be put in, an Election Expenses Act to perpetuate your own 

existence. That’s all you want, Mr. Minister. That is the major weakness in this act, the fact that this 

particular act refuses to count services and when you don’t count services you are giving a deliberate 

advantage to the government, a deliberately designed advantage to the government and of course it 

makes it very, very unfair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to repeat those three general comments that I made. Number one, I wish the 

Attorney General when he gets up to finish third reading will address himself to the problem of the 

$50,000 advertising in aggregate and the responsibility in relation to individual candidates to report that. 

Number two, the reporting of the totality of the assets or the value of a political party and how you 

determine that and how any provincial party can determine that. Number three, the failure to count 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2811 
 

services of individuals as revenue in an election campaign. If you do that then I think we can get into a 

very interesting discussion in third reading. There are many small minor points in this act that I think 

should be discussed and I am sure we can bring in several amendments that perhaps will improve the 

understanding of the act, the application of the act, because I think most people are generally supporting 

the principle of this particular act, if we can get it so that it once again meets the approval of everyone. I 

regret very much again, that the Attorney General has taken it on his shoulders and the government’s 

shoulders to draw The Election Expenses Act on their own without the input of . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— I offered to give you . . . 

 

MR. MACDONALD:— You offered to give us - what you did, you offered to give us a copy of the 

finished product and as the member for Nipawin said, you never responded to one suggestion. You 

offered to give us that act when it was finished in its completion. Then what did you want to do? You 

wanted to tie our hands . . . you say, but I gave you the opportunity to speak to it - no, Mr. Minister, we 

want an opportunity where all parties in the Assembly sit down together and figure out the rules and 

procedures that govern the election because it isn’t your prerogative and it isn’t the prerogative of the 

NDP. In Ottawa and in every other fair-minded jurisdiction that is exactly what happens. And that is 

what should happen in this particular one. Instead of that you want to set the rules yourself and you want 

to set them I suggest, that they are for the advantage of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have other things to say on this bill. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 24 - An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 65 - An Act respecting the Establishment of a Provincial Court in Saskatchewan 
 

Section 1 
 

MR. THATCHER:— Mr. Chairman, perhaps the Attorney General, for the benefit of us laymen who 

are fortunate enough not to belong to his profession, could very briefly summarize what this bill is 

attempting to accomplish. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we had a fairly good discussion this in second 

reading and the essence of this bill, I don’t mind repeating it again, the essence of this bill is in effect to 

confirm, I use that word advisedly of the independence and the importance of the present magistrates’ 

courts. This is a kind of conversion of the magistrate’s court into which we think is a higher level or a 

higher prestige kind of court known as the provincial court of the province of Saskatchewan. It will 

make this court a court of record which means that its judgments can be cited in the other courts and 

taken as such simply by reference to the case. It would give power to cite the magistrates on a contempt 

of court proceeding in these if this should be required under some circumstances. It furthermore sets up 

a mechanism for giving independence to 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2812 
 

the magistrates, the judges, by setting up what we call a Judicial Council. The Judicial Council will be 

made up of the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal, the Chief Justice of the Queen’s Bench, Chief 

Judge of the court and a couple of lay representatives, so that you can’t discipline or fire or change the 

judge without the consent of the Judicial Council. It gives it a tremendous amount more of 

independence, in fact really makes it a truly independent court. And then there are some additional nitty 

gritty things like pension improvement more akin to the pension benefits that the present federal court 

judges get. Now what this is, is an attempt to improve the provincial court, the magistrates, make it into 

a truly independent, important, well recognized and in financial and other terms recognizing the fact that 

this is the court where 90 per cent of the court business of the province of Saskatchewan takes place. I 

think that’s in the most concise terms that I can make it. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Would the Attorney General indicate whether he, perhaps you alluded to this, 

however I am not completely clear, but does this bill bring about any streamlining of our present system 

which did appear to put it very mildly was clogged and I am not asking for the Attorney General’s 

speech about how many courts we had compared to 1971, etc., etc. Perhaps the Attorney General could 

briefly answer what streamlining procedures are involved, if any. 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Mr. Chairman, I don’t think this bill itself will assist, particularly in any direct 

fashion in that problem. I think the issue of the clogging can be more directly dealt with in estimates., 

not that we are trying to shy away from it, but I have to tell you candidly, the bill will not immediately 

give any benefits that way, other than it may attract more judges of higher calibre - I think we have a 

pretty high calibre now, but more judges to the court and thereby give more court facilities and speed up 

the mechanism that way. 

 

I would simply close by saying, that in Saskatchewan, we have reduced the court time lag quite 

substantially. It used to be seven months, I think, in Regina and now it is down to about three months. 

One might say that is too much. I agree, ideally, it is but in terms of any other yardstick of other 

provinces, it is going along fairly well. Again, that is a little bit off the topic of this bill because there are 

so many other factors that are involved in it - caseloads, clerks of the court, Bail Reform Act, which is 

contributing to the clogging and so forth. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Mr. Attorney General, are you presently having a problem in attracting judges? I 

think you indicated that in your comments and I find this highly surprising. Not attempting to hold 

anything up, would you briefly elaborate on that problem? 

 

MR. ROMANOW:— Well, Mr. Chairman, one of the problems that the provincial court has always 

had is attracting senior lawyers as judges. The difficulty really comes, I think, from an historical, an 

historical problem namely, it was always thought that a magistrate’s court appointment was somehow 

not the aspiration of most lawyers. They wanted something that a federal court appointed would give 

them, a district Court of Queen’s Bench, it is a kind of a psychological thing. Again, and I don’t want to 

be political, but for a period there we felt very much in arrears on pay comparisons between the district 

court and the magistrates’ courts. We have made some considerable strides in the last few years catching 

up. So there has been a judicial problem. 

 

We have overcome that, to a large extent. I think, putting it candidly, I would prefer to 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2813 
 

see a few more interested people, with more seniority at the bar, rather than the present situation where 

we have some very competent, capable people, but with less seniority at the bar, who sit in the judges 

operations. 
 

If we are dealing directly with the aspects of the pension bill, I think it will be designed to attract more 

senior people to come to the bench, rather than the present situation where we find younger people 

interested in the bench. 
 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Items 2, 3 and 4 agreed to. 
 

Item 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Items 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 

Item 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Items 9 to 24 agreed to. 
 

Section 25 as amended agreed. 

 

Sections 26 to 29 agreed. 
 

Section 30 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 31 agreed. 
 

Section 32 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 33 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 34 as amended agreed. 
 

Section 35 agreed. 

 

Section 36 as amended agreed. 
 

Sections 37 to 41 agreed. 

 

Section 42 as amended agreed. 
 

Section 43 agreed. 

 

Section 44 as amended agreed. 
 

Section 45 agreed. 

 

Section 46 as amended agreed. 
 

Sections 47 to 50 agreed. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2814 
 

Sections 50 and 51 repealed, agreed. 

 

Section 52 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 53 agreed. 

 

Section 54 as amended agreed. 

 

Section 55 agreed. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 64 - An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 

Section 1, revised statute, chapter 1, section 21 amended agreed. 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 68 - An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 

Sections 1, 2, 3 agreed. 
 

Section 4 deleted. 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 47 - An Act to amend The Senior Citizens Home Repair Assistance Act, 1973 
 

Section 1 amended agreed. 
 

Section 2 
 

MR. LANE (Qu’Appelle):— I wonder if I could revert to clause 1 for one question, Mr. Minister? It 

seems to me that restricting the act to senior citizens receiving the supplement is becoming too 

restrictive. There are many senior citizens who - you know the supplement is now very, very marginal 

and I would urge you to extend the limit to a higher income limit. I realize that there has to be a ‘needs’, 

I am not objecting to that but I think it should be higher. Perhaps the minister would consider that. 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— That is precisely what is going to be done in case of single persons and, if you 

recall, during the budget speech I also announced that in case of single persons the eligibility criterion is 

going to be up to $7,000; in case of a couple, up to $11,000. So the former rules of eligibility are no 

longer applied. The ceiling is lifted. September 1 is when this goes into effect . . . The regulations? Not 

yet. 

 

Section 1 agreed. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 48 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act, 1973 
 

Section 1 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2815 
 

MR. MCMILLAN (Kindersley):— Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister which two 

programs are referred to. I assume one is going to be the changes which will allow the purchase of 

existing homes under the rural residential housing program and if that is correct I would like you to 

confirm that. I would also like to ask you what the other program was, that the changes were necessary 

for. 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Chairman, for the information of the hon. member, while that may be 

permissible in buying existing housing and providing the guarantees, really at this stage no decision has 

been made in that respect. It is really in case of new housing that is under construction, providing the 

guarantees. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Well, what are the new programs then - the two new programs? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Chairman, I presume the hon. member is referring to when I spoke in second 

reading and made reference to the possible two programs that the guarantees would apply to. One is (and 

no decision has been made in this respect that would be permissible) buy-back guarantees. That is - 

Now, the small contractor who would build a house - it could be purchased as part of inventory and then 

resold. Really, the main intent of this, providing the guarantees, is interim financing for small builders, 

to provide the guarantees as interim financing. As the hon. member may recall, during second reading I 

addressed myself to this. In case of small contractors, they do have problems of arranging for interim 

financing. They might build very few homes and in order to get financing they have to pay more money 

to the bank or they are unable to get it at all. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Would you say that this problem of getting interim finances by the small builders 

would have resulted in that sort of indiscreet loan from the one building corporation to the general 

manager? Do you hope to correct this problem with the steps you are taking here? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Certainly. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Well, is it the intention of your loan guarantee to provide contractors with the 

funds to operate, as construction, house builders in Saskatchewan? Are those the reasons for the 

guarantee? The interim financing is for the contractor, is it not? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— That is correct. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Can we assume that it is, in fact, a prepayment or money up front on work to be 

done, or is it a separate entity where the line of credit is extended by Sask Housing Corporation or a 

guarantee on the line of credit to allow these people to operate as contractors? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— No, it is really a line of credit. Mr. Chairman, this will not be money provided 

directly by the housing corporation. It is intended to use the current financial institutions, credit unions 

and banks. We will, once the legislation is passed, enter into discussions and negotiations with the 

financial institutions and we will provide the guarantee on loans that they would provide to the small 

house builders. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Well, maybe there is no other way to do it, but you realize the problem. If 

someone goes to you and says, a non-profit housing organization, and says we want to build these 

houses and we can’t get funding from the bank. They won’t touch 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2816 
 

us, those of us who are involved have poor credit rating and we have no experience in the housing 

construction business. We can’t get funded. What Sask Housing is saying, is O.K. you go back to the 

bank and reapply and we will put our credit behind you. So what you are in is the financing end of the 

business and I am not sure that couldn’t be better done through another department. Maybe your people 

have the expertise to run credit checks, etc. Maybe you don’t worry whatsoever about losing the money 

you might be guaranteeing. I don’t know, but it is sort of strange to find this here, where Sask Housing 

is in the financing business and out of houses themselves, out of the purchase of a house. But you’re 

financing construction companies in Saskatchewan, not construction companies but new construction 

companies. Companies with virtually no experience and no technical ability to operate as construction 

companies and I say, maybe, there is no other way to do it but it looks like pretty risky business. 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Chairman, first of all, the guarantees that we’re talking about here are not 

intended to be used for non-profit housing groups. It is intended for small builders. We’ve run into this 

problem in case of small builders when the market gets a little flat, that for them to keep building, they 

have the problem of ongoing financing. We believe that this would be a route that would assist the small 

builders. Neither is it intended . . . now it may be subject to their credibility as a new builder. Really we 

have found because we certainly don’t want to be sort of starting up, all kind of new companies that may 

not be bale to make a go of it and create difficulties. It is by the large intended for current small builders 

exclusive of non-profit groups. We have had the presentation that there is a need for this. We’ll see how 

it works but certainly we will be keeping a very close eye to ensure that the guarantees that are provided 

are provided to credible, small house builders. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Well, are the guarantees only in conjunction with those small builders that are 

doing work for Sask Housing Corporation? Or is it for any small builders in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Chairman, this is not purely restricted to housing built for Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation. It may be any small builder that is maybe building on spec to be able to sell the 

house that he has built. If he finds that he has problems with the line of credit, we will see that the 

housing is needed and we could provide a guarantee for some interim financing. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— I don’t know what prompted you to get into this field. My brother is a carpenter, 

an apprentice carpenter. He’s a small builder about 165 lbs. What’s to stop him from applying to you 

people to build houses, one after another, one at a time and just resell them. O.K., that’s the business 

he’s in. You’re saying that you’re in a position to extend to him a line of credit if he can’t get it 

somewhere else, provided that in your estimation that the house that he’s building is needed. Is that the 

terms of your guarantee? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— That’s right. First of all, there has to be a need. We think that time will only tell as 

to how effective this will be. At the present time under the terms of legislation, it is not possible for us to 

provide this guarantee. As I’ve already indicated to the hon. member that the existing financial 

institutions will be used for the purpose of providing the funds. All that we would do is provide the 

guarantee but in each case, the application would have to be made on each project. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— I know that you don’t want to get into the financing business of construction 

companies, whether they be large builders or small builders. That’s not 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2817 
 

your business. That’s Industry and Commerce business. What specifically prompted you, what specific 

case or series of situations have arise in Sask Housing which would put you in a position where you 

wanted to extend some form of financing to these people who were in the process of building housing 

and couldn’t do that? You didn’t pull this one out of the blue . . . that’s Industry and Commerce work. 

What prompts you to get into this position? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Chairman, what prompted us was really the representation we have had from 

the industry. I think the hon. member will agree that it is important for us to have the housing industry 

with capacity, you know, to produce. The member may recall, without getting political, that in the early 

‘70s we faced a problem and when we established the housing corporation, for us to be able to get 

started in building houses, we had the problem with the capacity to produce because we didn’t have the 

people, we didn’t have the management skills. Small builders are a very important facet of the house 

building construction industry particularly in smaller communities. They do have at times the problem 

of a line of credit, if they put up two or three homes, they’ve got their money tied up and at a particular 

time they are not able to sell the house in order to buy the lumber, to pay their work force. Now, we 

know that there is going to be a market for those homes. It doesn’t also mean that we will provide a line 

of credit for the total cost of the house. It may be only a partial cost that will be provided. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— Well, for your own information, I don’t intend to drag the ball any further. I 

hope it works out but I tell you, you’re in the wrong business. That’s not your job at all, that’s the 

responsibility of the Department of Industry and Commerce. If there are businessmen in Saskatchewan 

who are having trouble, whether they be large contractors or small contractors, it has always been the 

responsibility of the Department of Industry and Commerce to meet their needs within a certain set of 

restrictions. I must say I’m completely baffled as to why Sask Housing would do it. If your concern is 

that we maintain a certain level of construction in the housing field, if you feel there is a problem with 

private contractors not being able to continue as a result of shortage of credit, why don’t you build 

incentives into the industry, if that’s your concern? But to get into the financing business, I say that’s 

strange at the very best at this time. I’m willing to give you the opportunity to see if it works out but I 

must say I have some reservations about the whole idea. 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— Mr. Speaker, we are not going to be in the financing business. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— What’s the guarantee? 

 

MR. SMISHEK:— There is a difference between providing a guarantee - rather than providing cash 

directly, we are going to use the existing financial institution to provide the money. 

 

MR. MCMILLAN:— I’ll tell you there are a couple of members of this House who are going to find 

out that there is really no difference between supplying a guarantee and actually putting up the money 

and you may end up being the third in the next couple of years. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Item 2 deleted. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2818 
 

Bill No. 61 - An Act to provide for the Celebration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the 

Establishment of the Province of Saskatchewan 
 

Section 1 agreed 

 

Section 2 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN:— Section 2 - Interpretation, Board, Corporation, Member, Minister and we have an 

amendment to section 2 of the printed bill by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that we amend section 2 of the 

printed bill by striking out ‘the’ where it appears for the second time in the first line of clause (a). Is the 

amendment agreed? 

 

MR. LANE (Qu’Ap):— Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. You were going to supply some information as to 

how much you are allocating and how it is to be allocated. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— Mr. Chairman, I probably should begin by introducing the officials who are 

here with me. The House might be interested in them. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN:— I beg your pardon? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— I probably should begin by introducing my officials as the House may be 

interested in their names. This is Jim Benning who is the acting deputy minister of Youth and Culture. 

The members met him the other night. Sitting behind Jim is Yars Lozowchuk who was very recently 

appointed executive director of the 1980 celebrations. Yars is just getting his feet wet. He is from 

Hafford. Just getting his feet wet. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can’t supply the member with a list of projects. I want it clearly understood that this is a 

very preliminary list. None of these items are committed projects. It was a list of ideas which we put 

together and I just want that understood that this is just simply a very preliminary list and none of these 

projects are committed projects. If you want an idea as to how we arrived at the figure that was put in 

the budget the other night, this is it. If I could get one of the pages, I could deliver this to the member for 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Section 2 agreed. 

 

Section 3 agreed. 

 

Section 4 agreed. 

 

Section 5 
 

MR. G.N. WIPF (Prince Albert-Duck Lake):— Where will this head office be. Will it be in Duck 

Lake? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON:— The head office is yet to be determined. Certainly Duck Lake would be one 

prime candidate. I don’t know that we would want to finalize the decision here and now, though the 

other members may have an idea that it should be at Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Section 5 agreed. 



 

May 15, 1978 

 

2819 
 

Sections 6 - 19 agreed. 

 

Section 20 agreed. 

 

BILL NO. 61 — An Act to provide for the Celebration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the 

Establishment of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:00 o’clock p.m. 

 


