



















































Hansard: March 06, 1978


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Monday, March 6, 1978. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated February 23, 

1978 for meeting of the Fifth Session of the Eighteenth Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary of His 

Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock p.m. 

today, Monday, the Sixth day of March, 1978. 

 

3:03 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, was 

pleased to open the Session with the following Speech:— 

 

MR. SPEAKER, 

 

MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 

 

It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Fifth Session of the Eighteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

THE ECONOMY AND THE NATION 

 

My Government believes that Canada needs a new national economic policy. 

 

Since the last Session my Ministers have participated in a number of federal-provincial meetings with 

the objective of finding ways to improve the performance of the Canadian economy. 

 

In the coming months my Government will urge governments at all levels: 

 

— to proceed with the recommendations of the Hall Report; 

 

— to launch major electric power projects; 

 

— to develop our petroleum resources; 

 

all with a view to creating jobs today so that we may have energy and other needed services tomorrow. 

 

You will be asked to approve measures to stimulate the small business sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

My Government believes that now is the time for governments at both the federal and provincial 

levels to take decisive action. My Minister of Finance will, in his Budget Speech, announce additional 

measures to stimulate the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

LEGISLATION TO BE RE-INTRODUCED 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

2 
 

When the Fourth Session was prorogued in mid January several Bills introduced by my Ministers 

remained unpassed. Most of these Bills will be re-introduced in the current Session. 

 

ENERGY CONSERVATION 

 

My Government recognizes the need for new measures to encourage energy conservation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Conservation House, a prototype of one kind of energy-efficient house for the 

future, is now open to the public. 

 

You will be asked to approve a new Home Insulation Loan Act to set up a program to aid 

homeowners in improving the insulation in their homes. 

 

PUBLIC SERVICE PENSIONS 

 

My government will introduce amendments to The Superannuation (Supplementary) Provisions Act 

to increase public service pensions. 

 

REVENUE SHARING 

 

For some time now my Government has been engaged in discussions with the representatives of 

urban and rural municipalities to find new ways to share provincial revenues with local governments. 

 

You will be asked to approve a new Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 

 

HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY 

 

To provide for a system of voluntary vehicle inspection you will be asked to approve amendments to 

The Vehicles Act. 

 

HEALTH 

 

You will be asked to consider revisions of The Dental Profession Act and The Registered Nurses Act. 

 

ELECTION EXPENSES 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Election Act, 1971 to strengthen the rules relating 

to election expenses. 

 

AGRICULTURE 

 

In order to establish an indemnity fund to provide protection from financial loss to livestock 

producers and dealers you will be asked to approve a new Animal Products Act. 

 

SPECIAL EVENTS 

 

This year Moose Jaw and Regina will celebrate the 75th anniversary of their 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

3 
 

incorporation as cities. 

 

1978 also marks the 75th anniversary of the arrival of the Barr colonists at Lloydminster and the 50th 

anniversary of the incorporation of Yorkton as a city. 

 

This month Federated Co-operatives Limited celebrates its 50th anniversary. 

 

Saskatchewan will be the host in August for the annual Premiers’ conference. On April 13th and 14th 

the Western Premiers will meet in Yorkton. 

 

In July Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth and His Royal Highness Prince Philip will visit the province. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1978, will be submitted to you. 

 

We mourn the passing of The Honourable George Porteous the former Lieutenant Governor of the 

Province. His distinguished record of service and the special style he brought to the office of Lieutenant 

Governor will long be remembered by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to extend my sincere thank you to all those people who have sent me their best wishes on my 

assumption of the office of Lieutenant Governor. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with the full confidence that you will favourably 

discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its 

deliberations. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— I beg to inform the Assembly that Lorna Gulash, Natalie Kalk, Connie McDougall, 

Vicki Reiman, and Gail St. Onge will be the pages during the present session. 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

4 
 

MOTIONS 

 

Dispensing with Throne Speech Debate 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move seconded by the 

Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General) that: 

 

The Assembly hereby resolves to dispense with the customary formal debate on the subject matters 

of the Address of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Suspension of Rules for duration of Session. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow, 

that the following rules be suspended for the duration of this Session: 

 

(1) Rule 98 respecting lists of reports required to be tabled and; 

 

(2) Rule 10 respecting the report of the Legislative Librarian. 

 

If I have leave I will add one word to this. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— This motion requires leave, is leave granted? 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, these are simple rules which do not in any way deprive any member of 

the Legislature of any rights they may have. The one first deals with the Clerk shall deliver to each member 

at the commencement of a session a list of reports or other periodical statements which shall be tabled during 

the session and I ask that we dispense with that. We have already distributed it but if anyone wants an 

additional copy I know that the Clerk would provide any member with a copy. They are the lists that need to 

be tabled and we didn’t table them at the last session and we will need (the ones that weren’t tabled last 

time) we will need to table at this Session. 

 

The other is even of less consequence. It is one whereby a proper catalogue of the books that belong to the 

library shall be kept by the Legislative Librarian, who shall report to the Assembly through Mr. Speaker at 

the opening of each session the actual state of the library. I believe that to have been done during the fall 

session and we don’t need to have that report reproduced once again. It is meant to be an annual report and I 

think, therefore, that it is in the interest of saving paper, I would think it would be advisable to pass this 

motion. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, before the Premier takes 

his chair would he permit a question? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Yes. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Does the first rule that you were talking about have anything to do with financial 

statements or reports from various Crown corporations and others? 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

5 
 

MR. BLAKENEY:— No. It only deals with the sheet which the Clerk hands out which has the list on them. 

That’s all it deals with. It doesn’t free the government from tabling one sheet of paper that it ought otherwise 

to have tabled, if I may put it that way. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Motion for Committee of Finance 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek: 

 

That this Assembly will, at the next sitting, resolve itself into a Committee of Finance to consider the 

Supply to be granted to Her Majesty and to consider the Ways and Means of raising the Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Snyder: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed, after first having been perused by Mr. 

Speaker; that he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he shall appoint do 

presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Members to compose lists for Select Standing Committees 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman: 

 

That Messieurs Dyck, Mostoway, Pepper, Wiebe, and Birkbeck be constituted a Select Special 

Committee to prepare and report, with all convenient speed, lists of Members to compose the Select 

Standing Committees of this Assembly, provided under Rule 86; 

 

That the said Select Standing Committees be severally empowered to examine and inquire into all 

such matters and things as may be referred to them by this Assembly; and to report from time to time 

their observations thereon; with power to send for persons, papers and records, and to examine 

witnesses under oath; and 

 

That the said Select Special Committee consider the size of the Select Standing Committees and to 

report thereon with all convenient speed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords):— Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege today to introduce a group of 

people from northwestern Saskatchewan, the better part of Saskatchewan, The Battlefords. We have many 

students visit from various parts. We are not fortunate to have too many visit here during a session from 

distances as far away as The 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

6 
 

Battlefords. We get a lot from closer in. So today we are fortunate and I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to this House a group of 28 students from the Cairns Junior High. They are led by their 

principal, Mr. Walter Castina, another teacher, Miss Woodall, a chaperon, Mrs. Whittingstal and the bus 

driver, Mr. Van Horn. I would like them to stand and be recognized. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Thank you. I believe I noticed some other North Battleford people here. I would also 

like them to stand. Among them I believe is Barbara Lee MacIntosh, wife of His Honour, Mr. and Mrs. 

Arnold Robman – if there are any others from North Battleford would you please stand and be recognized. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 

word of welcome to the students from North Battleford and to point out to them and to the members of this 

Assembly the lack of politics that was just involved in that introduction. Mr. Walter Castina, the principal of 

the school, was an opponent of the Minister of Highways in the last provincial election and I welcome the 

words of the Minister of Highways as being most fitting for the occasion. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO KINSMEN — TELEMIRACLE 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, before I proceed to the next item, I wonder if hon. members would 

permit me to add a word of congratulation which I suspect members opposite may wish to join in, directed to 

the Kinsmen Clubs of Saskatchewan, particularly the district 3 clubs, on their outstanding achievement with 

the Kinsmen Telemiracle. 

 

This has become something of a tradition now in Saskatchewan, if two years makes a tradition. Last year I 

think was the first year that any place in Canada ever raised $1 million on a telemiracle. The Kinsmen Clubs 

have an outstanding record of service to the community and in latter years particularly to those 

disadvantaged members of our community and I would want to congratulate the Kinsmen Clubs of 

Saskatchewan and all of the people of Saskatchewan who contributed so generously to make this 

Telemiracle an outstanding success, even more successful than last year’s success during which more than 

$1 million was raised. This, I think, represents a great achievement for the people of Saskatchewan to show 

this sense of concern for the less favored in our community. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

Premier of course in extending my congratulations and congratulations of the Liberal Party to the Kinsmen 

Club. I think their record of achievement this year, particularly when you had the same type of canvass last 

year, is even more outstanding than last year’s effort when they topped that effort in the city of Regina. They 

are to be congratulated, I hope that they are going to continue their endeavors in this regard and I think it just 

shows what the private sector can do to raise money of this nature to help the disadvantaged people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

BRIGHT LIGHTS IN THE ASSEMBLY 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

7 
 

MR. MALONE:— Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet I wonder if I may make an observation. I notice 

several bright lights in the Assembly this afternoon and I am wondering if this is any indication if the 

government has changed its mind and has now allowed TV to enter these hallowed halls and whether we will 

be getting used to this in the days ahead? If the government hasn’t changed its mind and these lights are just 

for today’s occasion in particular, I wonder if you could use your good office to arrange to have the lights 

turned off since I see the cameras have now left. 

 

MR. COLLVER:— Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier and the Leader of the Liberal Party 

in expressing our congratulations to the Kinsmen Clubs of Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is that in 

addition to the Kinsmen there were a great many others who volunteered their services to assist in the 

tremendous effort that was put forward yesterday and the day before in the raising of the significant sum of 

money for help to the handicap citizens of our province. I’m sure that all of us join together in a most non-

political statement of enthusiastic acclaim to the Kinsmen clubs and all of the volunteers who helped to 

make that such a successful event. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I rise to move two motions of condolence. The first 

one is slightly different than our normal motions of condolence since it is not directed to the passing of a 

member of this Legislature. Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): 

 

That this Assembly unites in paying tribute to the memory of the Hon. George Porteous, MBE CM 

Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan, who died on February 7, 1978 and who rendered long and 

distinguished service to his province and its people. Throughout his career and retirement he founded 

and worked tirelessly in numerous community organizations devoted to serving the needs of the 

aged, the handicapped and the youth of the province. He served his country overseas in World War II 

and was awarded the Order of Member of the British Empire for outstanding service to imprisoned 

troops. In 1974 he was awarded the Order of Canada for his work in community affairs. As 

Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan since March 1976, His Honour’s commitment, energy and 

style in fulfilling his duties as the Queen’s representative have endeared him to the people in every 

corner of this province. 

 

In recording its deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like, in addition to the formal words of the condolence motion, to add a few thoughts 

of my own. I came to know the Honourable Mr. George Porteous well during his period as Lieutenant-

Governor. I along with others in this House was grieved at his sudden passing. He was not a young man but I 

had no reason to believe that his health was in a precarious condition. 

 

As anyone, I think, who was familiar with George Porteous’ career knows he was a man of many talents, 

abundant energy and vigorous public spirit. During his career, Mr. Porteous spent many years with the 

YMCA in Saskatoon and in Montreal and in 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

8 
 

Brantford, Ontario. After receiving his B.A. degree from the University of Saskatchewan in 1927 he worked 

with the Y as a boys’ work secretary in Montreal. During these years he also studied theology intending to 

become a minister in the Presbyterian church. In Brantford he served as general secretary of the YMCA. 

With the outbreak of the Second World War George Porteous joined the Armed Forces and served with the 

First Canadian Division as an auxiliary services officer, first in England and later in Hong Kong where he 

spent 44 months as a Japanese prisoner of war. For his work with the prisoners George Porteous was made a 

Member of the Order of the British Empire. 

 

On returning to Saskatoon after the war he resumed his involvement in community activities. For 16 years he 

was director of the Saskatoon Community Chest and Welfare Council. He was also involved with the 

Saskatoon Public School Board, the Elmwood Board for the Retarded and the Society for Children with 

Emotional Problems. He even found time to be active as a political campaigner, I am told. Although he 

officially retired in 1970 after managing jubilee residences for nearly 12 years, the word retirement had no 

meaning for George Porteous, it simply meant a different range of duties. He continued his work with elderly 

people and his involvement with cultural groups such as Persephone Theatre, for him he was a tireless 

advocate. He gave up his job as program director of Cosmopolitan Courts in Saskatoon only when he was 

appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan. Such a distinguished career of public service certainly 

merits the B’nai Brith award which he received and the Order of Canada which he received in 1974. 

 

What may not be so well known about George Porteous was his interest in poetry. I am told that one of his 

hobbies was memorizing poetry and certainly I have heard him deliver lengthy poems without any notes of 

any kind, reaching back into his memory. One of his favorite poems which he used to recite frequently when 

he met with pioneer groups was one called the "Early Days" by Robert Stead. He was particularly fond of the 

first verse and often you would hear him recite it as if he were recalling the earlier days. 

 

Yes, times have changed since the early days 

And things are different now. 

We used to tramp from dawn to dusk 

In the trail of a walking plow, 

And sow our grain from a canvas sack 

With a barrel hoop for a mouth. 

We kind of felt that Providence, 

Controlled the frost and drought. 

In the harvest work we always 

Neighbored back and forth 

And never thought of threshing ‘til 

The grain was in the stack, 

And hauled our wood in winter time 

And smoked beside the fire, 

And felt our lot was everything 

That reason could desire. 

 

That harks back to an earlier time in Saskatchewan history which George Porteous was very fond of 

recalling. 

 

George Porteous had a long and distinguished record of service to the people of 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

9 
 

Saskatchewan, to Canada and we will all miss the special style he brought to the office of Lieutenant-

Governor. 

 

Recently he had taken a special interest in the future of Canada. He arranged visits of people from Quebec to 

speak in Saskatchewan about the Quebec perception of Confederation and he spoke frequently about his own 

love for Canada as a whole. George Porteous’ whole life was one of work and service for people and 

particularly people who needed the help and strength he was able to provide. 

 

We will all mourn the passing of a distinguished citizen who never lost the common touch and who never 

lost his concern for the well-being of people in need. 

 

I know that all members will join in expressing our sincere condolences to all of the members of the 

Porteous family. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, might I add to the words 

of the Premier the condolences of the Progressive Conservative caucus to the family and loved ones of His 

Honour Lieutenant-Governor George Porteous. Certainly the simplicity and the humility that he brought to 

the job of Lieutenant-Governor was one that I think helped to bring that job to the eyes of the people and 

brought it down to the level of the people which they could understand. Perhaps it is particularly fitting that 

Lieutenant-Governor Porteous was extremely fond of poetry and especially the poetry of Robbie Burns and I 

think it is particularly fitting that we perhaps wax poetic today one of the most famous poems of Robbie 

Burns and the lines. 

 

O wad some Power the giftie gie us, 

 

To see oursels as ithers see us! 

 

Perhaps the most fitting tribute that could be paid to His Honour Lieutenant-Governor George Porteous is 

the fact that he gave us the ability to see ourselves as others see us, to see ourselves as children of God and 

as children of the province and as children of the pioneers of this province. 

 

Accordingly, I would like to add my words to those of the Premier. 

 

May God grant him eternal peace and his loved ones the joy of comfort of his life. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay our tribute 

on behalf of the Liberal Party to the late George Porteous. 

 

I was impressed, always, with the tremendous dignity and decency that the former Lieutenant-Governor 

brought to that particular office. I did not know George Porteous until he was appointed to the high office of 

Lieutenant-Governor. Shortly after meeting him I can well recall a conversation that I did have where he 

didn’t talk so much about political events of the day or his past history in Saskatoon and being active with 

elderly people and young people and service organizations and so, but his conversation was about his 

experience in a prisoner of war camp during the Second World War. I think that that experience at that time 

when he was a relatively young man must have guided his future years and brought to him that great record 

of distinguished public service that we are paying tribute to today. My generation tends to forget about wars 

and wartime because we were fortunate enough not to have to go through one. We received the benefits of 

the great postwar boom without having to suffer any of the great disadvantages of living during those 

wartime years. I think George Porteous, as a result 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

10 
 

of that particular experience, dedicated his life to serving those in his community. I don’t think there is 

probably anybody in this Assembly or indeed in Saskatoon or indeed even in the province of Saskatchewan 

who has a record of service that would equal or surpass that of George Porteous as serving his community, 

the people that he lived with whether they were young, old, whether they were businessmen, professionals or 

whatever. His serving the role as Lieutenant-governor really just ended a very distinguished career that was 

distinguished by these years of service to the people that he lived with in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

I would like to join, as I say, with the Premier and the Leader of the Conservative Party in offering our 

sincere condolences and sympathy to the Porteous family and to also say that while George Porteous is gone, 

his years of service, his dedication to the province of Saskatchewan, the memory of that will long remain and 

act as a lasting tribute to him. 

 

MR. G.H. PENNER (Saskatoon Eastview):— I, too, would like to join with other members in paying 

tribute to His Honour, George Porteous. Having lived in Saskatoon I suspect I may have had more 

opportunity than others in the province who are MLAs to have known him prior to his becoming Lieutenant-

Governor. He was very active in his work and particularly with senior citizens and that’s where I really 

remember the contact with him the most. Those with whom he worked, whether they lived in those homes or 

whether they were involved with administering those homes had a very high regard for him. This high regard 

was shown by the fact that Porteous Lodge, for example, was named after him. 

 

The reason people generally thought highly of George Porteous was because he demonstrated the attributes 

of understanding and patience, respect for others and the maintenance of self-respect, a fundamental 

understanding of human nature and a love of his fellow man. He brought these qualities with him when he 

became the Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan. I admired his vitality, humility, his untiring efforts to 

assist his fellow men and his great devotion to his country. Few Canadians have given as much as he did. His 

faith in God and his trust in the quality of the ultimate goodness of people made him a leader among men 

and an example that behooves all of us to follow. 

 

I wish to join with others in the motion put by the Premier in bringing condolences to his wife and his 

family. 

 

MR. H.W. LANE (Saskatoon-Sutherland):— As a resident of Saskatoon I can just say that we are going 

to miss His Honour George Porteous. There is not much to add to what has been said without repeating it. I 

will just say that as a member of the Saskatoon community George Porteous did more than his share in 

public works and we will indeed miss him. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity as well, if it is appropriate, to congratulate the new Lieutenant-Governor 

and wish him a long and happy career. 

 

MR. E.F.A. MERCHANT (Regina Wascana):— Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to know Mr. Porteous 

better than any member in the House. I have indeed known him all of my life. He was as Lieutenant-

Governor what we knew him to be before he was Lieutenant-Governor, perhaps that is why he did such an 

excellent job in that position. He was one of those people who gave all of himself to whatever he did and I 

almost wonder with hindsight whether giving his all to the job of Lieutenant-Governor may not in some way 

have speeded his death. I wonder that and still believe that knowing George as I do that he would have 

wanted I think, as my grandfather used to put it, "die 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

11 
 

out and not rust out," that he would have wanted to go almost doing all that he could, being as active as he 

could. Certainly his death, I think, will be mourned by a great many people in this province. We have a 

saying that what you do, that what a person is goes on and continues after them and I think that that is more 

true of George Porteous than perhaps it is true of anybody that I have ever known to die. What he was 

continues in some ways, his presence continues and the effect of what he did I think will go on in this 

province. 

 

MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to convey my condolences to 

the family of the late Lieutenant-Governor, George Porteous. There was sort of a unique situation relative to 

the late His Honour and myself in that he was my Lieutenant-Governor and I was his member of the 

Legislative Assembly. Consequently I got to know him quite well because I had occasion to attend numerous 

functions, meetings and other gatherings at which he was present. I can say with honesty that the people of 

Saskatoon and area and I know the people of Saskatchewan respected him very much. They respected him 

for his tireless efforts on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan because he did involve himself to a very great 

extent. Another thing I think his memory should be commended for is the humor which he had. It is 

something which is very often lacking these days and he had it. I think people appreciated that. 

 

His other qualities, only one of which I will mention, was his ability to get down to earth relative to his 

dealings with people. For that I do know that all people appreciated him. 

 

I want to say that if we were going to talk about the rich heritage of Saskatchewan, certainly the late His 

Honour does have a place in that rich heritage. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, there is very little I can add to what has 

already been said by other members of the Assembly to the family of George Porteous. However, I do want 

to say just a word because I did have an opportunity of working with George for a number of years when I 

was Minister of Welfare in the former government. 

 

Very few of us will ever have a living monument that will stand years after we are gone. To those of you that 

come from the city of Saskatoon and northern Saskatchewan, if you will go and visit the umbrella of jubilee 

residences you will see the kind of initiative and leadership that George Porteous provided for the people and 

particularly the senior citizens of Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. Probably no other province or no other city 

has had that kind of a development in growth in the early stages that was spearheaded by George and his 

many friends in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

I always thought that George Porteous drank of the fountain of eternal youth. I never ever really believed that 

he would pass away. He seemed to have as much vitality and vigor in his ripe old age as when he took on the 

Lieutenant-Governorship of our province. It seemed that it gave him a new spark, gave him a new youth. I 

really never did believe that George would be gone from the scene in such a short time. We in the province 

of Saskatchewan did not have the opportunity to enjoy him as Lieutenant-Governor for very long. I do 

believe that he did make his mark. 

 

I join with members of the Assembly in passing on condolences to his family and to his friends. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a brief 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

12 
 

comment or two. I have known George Porteous for a very long time. I sat on the Board of the Community 

Chest in Saskatoon when he was the Executive Director of that particular organization and I had a great deal 

of respect for his capability, his sincerity and his humility. 

 

I might just cite an incident to illustrate that. The people on my block had the privilege a year ago of having 

their Kiwanis apples delivered by the Lieutenant-Governor of the province. Just an indication of how George 

Porteous approached things. 

 

I too, would like to add my condolences and sympathies and pass them on to members of his family. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the member for Indian Head-

Wolseley (Mr. MacDonald): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of His 

Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, the Honourable George Porteous, be communicated to the 

members of the bereaved family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the member for Lakeview (Mr. 

Malone) and this deals with the untimely passing of Fern Larochelle: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former Member of this 

Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his community, his 

constituency and to this Province: 

 

FERNAND LAROCHELLE, who died on January 5, 1978, was a Member of this Legislature for 

the constituency of Shaunavon from 1964 to 1971. He was born in 1909 at Black Lake, Quebec and, 

later moved to Saskatchewan where he received his education at Ponteix High School and 

Gravelbourg College. He farmed near Ponteix as well as operating a garage and a trucking business. 

During his years as a member, he acted as government whip. He served as mayor and councillor of 

Ponteix from 1941 to 1964. He also served his community as a member of the Knights of Columbus, 

the Chamber of Commerce, the board of directors of the South-West Regional Hospital Council, the 

board of the Shaunavon School Unit and the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may add a few words to the formal motion of condolence. I knew Fern Larochelle during 

the period when he was a member for Shaunavon from the period from 1964 to 1971. I sat with him in this 

Legislature for seven years and I know that many in this Assembly will also remember him and his 

contribution to the Assembly. Fern acted as the government whip. He was a person of great humor, good 

business judgment and sound common sense and he made a contribution reflecting those to this Assembly. 

 

Fern led a full and varied life. From the brief biography which I have read you will have noted that. He was a 

man of many abilities. He was successful as a farmer, indicated by 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

13 
 

the fact that he was an officer of the Stock Growers Association, as a businessman, as a politician, mayor of 

Ponteix at the local level for many years and as a politician in provincial politics. 

 

Aside from his activities in this Assembly I knew him I think best as associated with the trucking business. 

The name Larochelle became very familiar as the trucks bearing that name rolled across the highways of 

Saskatchewan indicating that he and later his sons working with him built a very successful business. 

 

Fern lived at, or near Ponteix, most of his life and was very much a leader in that community, that 

community which by the way has given us a good number of strong leaders. Fern was a good community 

man. In spite of the demands of his busy business life he found time to belong to many service groups and 

many community groups. I know that those who worked with him and those who received his assistance will 

remember him with fondness and with gratitude. 

 

All of us in the last short time of his life regretted the fact that his health was really very bad, latterly, and it 

wasn’t the same Fern that we had known. Some of us remember him very much for the physical vigor and 

the wit and good humor which he brought to this House. 

 

Fern Larochelle was a well respected man in Saskatchewan. His service and example will not soon be 

forgotten. 

 

MR. E.C. MALONE (Leader of the Liberal Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I regret very much that I never 

knew Fern Larochelle. I had heard many stories of him and of the great contribution, of course, he made to 

the Liberal Party and to this Assembly and his years of service here. 

 

On numerous occasions in the last 18 months of so I have been in Ponteix and on each one of those 

occasions I attempted to get together with Mr. Larochelle to introduce myself and to seek his advice and 

guidance in the days ahead. Unfortunately his health was such that a meeting never could be arranged and I 

was deeply disturbed to find that he passed away recently. Yet those trips to Ponteix it became very clear to 

me however that he was certainly the pre-eminent person in this community through talking to members of 

his family and to members on the main street of Ponteix. 

 

Fernand Larochelle had an admiration and respect in the minds of those people second to none. Indeed, he 

was a man who served that community and his province in a very substantial way. Thirty years of public 

service from 1941 to 1971, either at the level of a councillor on his town council or mayor of Ponteix or 

sitting in this Legislature, is indeed, an enviable record of service of anyone to their community and to their 

province. 

 

I would like to join with the Premier and other Members of the Assembly in expressing my sympathy and 

condolences to Fernand Larochelle’s family. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Conservative Opposition):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 

words to those of the Premier and the Leader of the Liberal Party in expressing my condolences and the 

condolences of our caucus to the family and close personal friends of Fernand Larochelle. 

 

I did not know Fernand Larochelle well, but his reputation preceded him. He left a 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

14 
 

legacy, I know, in this Legislature of service and integrity that all of us would be well to follow. 

 

Again, I would like to add my words of condolence to his family. May God grant him eternal peace and his 

loved ones the joy and comfort of his life. 

 

MR. E. ANDERSON (Shaunavon):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my condolences to the family of 

Fernand Larochelle and to his many friends. 

 

I didn’t know Fern as a member of the Legislature because he represented the seat that I now represent. I 

knew him many years as a friend, a very good friend. We worked together and were together much. I always 

valued Fern for his advice. If you asked him for advice he always weighed his answer in what was right, was 

what was moral, and what was fair. He served long and well in this community. He was active as a farmer 

and well respected as a businessman. He also, as he grew up in this province, raised a large family, raised 

them well and educated them well. 

 

I think that he will be missed in the community of Ponteix especially for he was a man who spearheaded 

many projects. It was sad to see in his later years a man of such vigor struck down. I think it was most sad. 

He was not the type of a man who would sit quietly and let the world pass him by and in the latter years he 

was forced to do this. It was a shame. He bore it well and he will be missed. 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Indian Head-Wolseley):— Mr. Speaker, I want to join with other members of 

the Assembly in talking about my very close friend, Fernand Larochelle.  

 

Fern and I entered this Assembly as rookie Liberal Members in 1964 and I don’t suppose there is anyone that 

I can have any fonder memories of than Fern Larochelle. 

 

Fernand Larochelle is perhaps the Saskatchewan’s success story. When you think of his achievements in the 

field of business he has a big trucking firm and office in Regina and Moose Jaw. His trucks are now 

travelling interprovincially. He was a very, very successful farmer, garageman, car salesman and just about 

everything that Fern Larochelle did it seemed to turn to gold. He started with next to nothing and built it into 

a very great success, not only in the field of business or agriculture, but also in the field of his community 

and his church. Fern was just a great, great fellow and he did it with hard work and dedication and sincerity. 

That is why I say that Fern Larochelle is really a success story, a Saskatchewan story. 

 

He was the whip of our caucus and our government and he had that very difficult job and he handled it with 

a sense of humor and very few of us could ever argue with Fern. We also called him the chairman of the 

King’s caucus and those of you who were here a few years ago would know that all the Liberal members 

used to stay in the King’s Hotel during the session and Fern, we all called the chairman of the King’s caucus 

because many, many an evening we would spend with Fern in his room discussing Saskatchewan and the 

Legislature, his personal interests and our own. We kind of looked at him a little bit as a father. He gave all 

of us advice, including the Premier and the Premier very often would listen to his good sense. Sometimes all 

of us would have a tendency to jump off and go off the deep end and Fern would always try and bring us 

back on the right track. Ross Thatcher didn’t listen to many people, but he certainly did listen to Fern 

Larochelle. 



 

March 6, 1978 

 

15 
 

To his family, to his wife and to his children, I want to express my condolences and I am sure that I speak for 

all of his very close friends. 

 

MR. W.H. STODALKA (Maple Creek):— Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to extend my condolences to 

the Larochelle family. It is some 18 years ago that I began working with one of Mr. Larochelle’s sons and 

still today work with that same son, and by knowing that son I feel I have also met Mr. Larochelle. I knew 

Mr. Larochelle reasonably well. I know that his family held a deep respect for him. I also know that his 

community held a very deep respect for him and I also as I have said, extend my sympathy to the Larochelle 

family. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways):— Mr. Speaker, I am one of the few left in this House who 

had the privilege to know Fern Larochelle as a member of this Legislature and served with him when we 

were in opposition from 1964 to 1967. I believe that it should be particularly noted that I agree with the 

member for Indian Head-Wolseley that this was a tremendous success story. This is also a success story as 

far as the francophone community of Saskatchewan is concerned. He was one of the great pioneers and 

certainly set a wonderful example for the French community in Saskatchewan, and was a leader in that 

community. He was a man of tremendous good humor and tremendous ability. I only wish my very poor 

French was good enough to enter a few words in French into this Legislature’s Hansard in order to honor the 

fact that here was one of the people in the late sixties who served as one of French ancestry in this 

community. 

 

I had the privilege of representing the government at his funeral, and if one had any doubts of the esteem in 

which Fern Larochelle was held one had only to attend that funeral in Ponteix in that beautiful Catholic 

Church that is an edifice which Saskatchewan can be proud of — a masterpiece of architecture. All of his 

friends and neighbors who were there, more than half had tears in their eyes when they attended the funeral, 

and certainly at the grave side. 

 

I say it was a privilege to have known Fern and I certainly hope that his family and his friends can carry on 

and follow the good example that was set by Fern Larochelle. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino):— Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join in with the condolence resolution 

for Mr. Fern Larochelle. I also was a member of this Legislature when Fern was here and I want to say that 

as far as saying a few words in French in the Legislature, perhaps I could do that. Fern was very fluent in the 

French language. We often met in the corridors; we practised our french there, and I also want to say that our 

former Lieutenant-Governor, Mr. Porteous, was very fluent in the French language as well. So I too, would 

like to add my part to the condolences because when I met Fern Larochelle he wasn’t political, he was just a 

fine human being who spoke about the things of the day, and his understanding of two different languages 

made him understand two cultures, very much so. He understood other people and perhaps what made his 

success. 

 

In closing I say, "ils ne seront pas oublie, merci." 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver): 

 

That the resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased member be communicated to the bereaved 



 

March 6, 1978 

 
 

16 
 

family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Invitation – Lieutenant-Governor’s Dinner 

 

MR. BLAKENEY:— Mr. Speaker, just before I move adjournment, I would remind hon. members that Mr. 

Speaker and I invite all to attend a dinner tonight at which we hope to have an opportunity to meet in a less 

formal setting his Honour the Lieutenant-Governor and Mrs. McIntosh. All members and their spouses are 

cordially invited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:09 o’clock p.m. 

 


