



















































Hansard: March 29, 1978


749 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fifth Session — Eighteenth Legislature 

 

March 29, 1978 

The Assembly met at 2:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Government Charged for use of Centre of the Arts 
 

Mr. E.F.A. Merchant (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I will address this question to the Minister 

in charge of Telephones. It is in part a question to be directed to the Minister in charge of Telephones 

and in part a question to be directed to the Minister of Government Services. 

 

The minister will I am sure be aware that Telemiracle took place in Regina not long ago. I ask the 

minister why the government charged $12,000 to the people to use the Centre of the Arts and then made 

big fellows of themselves to give back $10,000 and at the same time refused to give any consideration to 

Telemiracle for toll rates or for the installation of telephones and in essence made a big profit off this 

charity and went so far as to refuse to allow A&W to even use . . . I am addressing the question . . . went 

so far as to even refuse to allow A&W to use the water lines at the Centre of the Arts when A&W had 

been kind enough to contribute the food? 

 

Hon. N.E. Byers (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, the Crown Corporation, Sask Tel 

receives any number of requests in the course of the year for free service or service at a reduced rate. It 

is the view of the government that assistance to groups should be provided mainly through the various 

departments of government that operate programs and can provide assistance usually in the form of 

financial assistance to groups. The family of Crown corporations through Sask Tel, one of the members, 

made a contribution of $5,000 to Telemiracle. The government in addition made a contribution of 

$10,000 for a total of $15,000. We do not feel it is proper that Sask Tel give special consideration to any 

group or any individual wishing or requesting special communication services. May I say to the hon. 

member that the cost to Sask Tel for installing all the wiring that was involved to the Centre of the Arts 

to enable Telemiracle to run from the Centre of the Arts was a very, very sizable investment on the part 

of Sask Tel. A number of Sask Tel employees freely contributed some of their time with respect to the 

installation work. Sask Tel has the investment tied up in the wiring at the Centre of the Arts. Keep in 

mind that this . . . (inaudible interjection). 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree with me that it is very 

different for Sask Tel to charge for services like toll rates, which in essence don’t cost anything, than for 

Sask Tel to charge for installation costs where there is an expense. I suggest to the minister that for Sask 

Tel to charge for the use of their lines which are there anyway, and in essence, to make a profit on a 

charity like Telemiracle where others in Saskatchewan are trying to make the project a success, to make 

a profit on something that costs nothing . . . (inaudible interjection). 

 

Canadian Bond Issue 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

750 

 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. 

Minister, I am sure that you are aware, from press reports, of a growing disenchantment in New York 

City with the Canadian bond issue floated last week by the federal government. I am sure that the 

minister is aware that the reports that it was sold out (to my friends on my right, the report said it was 

sold out) were grossly premature, and presently it has dropped 75 cents to a dollar, depending on the 

date of maturity. 

 

Mr. Minister, since this government has indicated in its budget that you will be borrowing probably 

$438 million, of which $250 million of that will be for a major Crown corporation, would the minister 

indicate to this Assembly whether or not, in light of these developments in New York, you are presently 

in the process of ruling out the American market as a potential source of borrowings? 

 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — The answer is, No. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The minister has stated in this Assembly many 

times that over a period of twenty-five years generally the Canadian dollar is favored, on the currency 

basis over the American. Would the minister tell this Assembly then with his particular logic, why he 

would have allowed Sask Power Corporation to have borrowed in 1977 some $42 million from the 

Chemical Bank of New York with a repayment date in 1979, a maneuver that may very well cost the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers up to 30 per cent in just two years! In light of this, when this American dollar 

has, in effect, declined to the point where the SPC’s interest charges have gone 67 per cent and their 

debt only 25 per cent, would the minister agree so far his department has done a poor job in playing the 

currency game. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, first of all the Saskatchewan Power Corporation did not borrow in the 

American market. Any borrowing that is done is done by the government and not by the Power 

Corporation and I am not aware of us borrowing on the American market in 1977 for bonds to be 

repayable in 1979. Obviously the member just doesn’t have his facts straight. We have borrowed on the 

American market in 1977 for a 30 year period, not for a two year period. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If the Speaker will allow me I will give you the point of reference on that. It’s the 

Regina Leader-Post under the byline of a John Twigg who usually isn’t wrong all that often. None the 

less, Mr. Minister, I would ask you that in light of the very unfavorable currency situation right now that 

we are now experiencing, is the minister in consultation with his Treasury people? Are you coming to 

the conclusion that it is a very dangerous game to be borrowing in the American market and are you 

prepared to come to the conclusion that perhaps to play it on the safe side and confine your borrowing 

on the Canadian market? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I had answered that as his first question. He is repeating his 

first question. The answer is, No. We are going to be pursuing the Canadian market, the American 

market and the offshore market. 

 

Poplar River – Generator 
 

Mr. R.E. Nelson (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister in 

charge of SPC. I wonder if you could tell us if it is the intention of the government to put the first 

generator at Poplar River into operation before the International Joint Commission on water quality 

report, expected in April 1979, is submitted? 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

751 

 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, we have authorization to 

undertake to commission the first generator and I don’t believe that any proceedings under way should 

seriously affect those permissions that are granted to us by way of licence. 

 

Mr. Nelson (As-Gr): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that the hearings are presently 

under way regarding the second generator, will the government give assurances to the people of 

Saskatchewan, in particular the people at Coronach, that if the air quality standards are not met on the 

second phase of the generator when it is put into operation that they will put in scrubber equipment on 

the smokestacks at Poplar River? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, as the member is fully aware that’s a hypothetical question. We don’t 

know what the outcome of the hearings that are now under way are going to be so that I think it would 

be improper for me to respond to what may be the case when the independent body concludes its 

investigations and makes reports to the government. 

 

Telemiracle 
 

Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Environment with regard to 

the government’s rip-off of Telemiracle. Do you not feel that it is somewhat inconsistent for the 

government on the one hand to attempt to get an awful lot of press and publicity by making donations 

while on the other hand in fact taking the maximum rate out of the charity that you are trying to get the 

publicity advantage of, and would you not admit that, in fact, he took a rather shameful and hypocritical 

position on your actions with Telemiracle. 

 

Mr. Merchant: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Government Services about the 

Telemiracle matter. I asked the Minister of Government Services whether he would inquire from the 

Centre of the Arts and ask them why they refused to allow A&W who were in a very charitable way 

contributing food and other services to people working at Telemiracle, why they went so far as to even 

refuse to allow them the use of facilities, to even refuse to allow them to use water from the Centre of 

the Arts? I ask whether the minister would not agree with me that it ill behooves the government on the 

one hand to make a big fellow of themselves with contributions and on the other to make it so very 

difficult through their facility at the Centre of the Arts. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I shall be glad to make the inquiry. I should point out that I have 

already done so. The information I was given by the general manager of the Centre of the Arts was that 

initially there was some sort of a discussion about whether or not A&W could use the facilities. 

Eventually they were allowed to use some of the facilities, specifically they were allowed to get water. I 

gather they were also allowed to use coffee facilities and so on and the information I have, Mr. Speaker, 

on the inquiry I made at one point in time was that there was no problem and everybody was happy. 

Now if the hon. member for Wascana seems to think that some other state of affairs exists, I’ll be glad to 

look into it. 

 

Government Borrowing 
 

Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. I’d like 

to ask the minister why, about three minutes ago, he deliberately 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

752 

 

misled this House. I would ask him why, on page 13 of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation report 

where it says very clearly in concise English, if you will allow me, Mr. Speaker, the province borrowed 

in advance to the corporation $126.8 million to finance capital construction in 1977. A further $44.5 

million was borrowed from the Chemical Bank of New York on a short term arrangement extending to 

1979. Would the minister tell me why you either misled this House or, if in fact, you do not know what 

is going on with your department, why you would not take notice of the question? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I did not mislead this House and I am not aware that the Power 

Corporation borrowed any money on a short term basis because we do all the long term borrowing and I 

am aware that we borrowed, as through the Department of Finance, for the Power Corporation. Perhaps 

you might be better off to direct that question to the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation 

because that’s an area in which we have not been involved. I am prepared to take a look at it. I must 

confess I have not studied the Power Corporation report. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you can send a note across 

with apologies and your comments. I would like to ask the minister, I suppose which is a repeat of my 

initial question, in 1977 when predictions were for a very disastrous drop in the Canadian dollar, how 

you or your departmental officials could have borrowed or allowed the corporation to borrow regardless 

of what form you care to put it in, how could you have ever allowed them to borrow that amount of 

money on such a short term basis with the predictions for the Canadian dollar being so disastrous which 

regrettably have been borne out? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, we borrow on free markets, the Canadian market preferably. 

Incidentally, we also have certain funds that are made available to us for borrowing purposes from the 

Canada Pension Plan. The Saskatchewan limit is in the order of $75 million. We have borrowed in 

previous years in the private market in the United States, the last two years we have borrowed in the 

public market in the United States. We have also borrowed in the Eurobond market. These are the 

markets that we have pursued and while it is true that the Canadian dollar at the present time is in some 

difficulty, the exchange rate is close to 12 per cent, but, Mr. Speaker, the experience has been that over a 

period of 25 or 30 years, over that period of time that the Canadian dollar and the American dollar have 

traditionally been at par and generally the Canadian dollar has been stronger than the American dollar. 

In this particular reference that he makes in case of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation of a short 

term, I am going to look into it but where the Department of Finance has been involved is in long term 

borrowing for capital needs of Sask Tel, Power Corporation and other Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Minister, somewhere along the line I still missed the withdrawal of your original 

comments. Mr. Minister, would you agree and is it a fair statement to say that in light of this situation, 

this terrible lack of knowledge on something within your own department, does this not conclusively 

indicate that you and your department are totally out of your league when you play this very 

tremendously complicated currency game? And is this not simply the most justifiable reason to stay out 

of the currency game and confine your borrowings to Canada? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member has just demonstrated is his own ignorance. If 

there is anybody out of his league, it is the hon. member who has just 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

753 

 

spoken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Not only out of his league, I think he is not quite out of the water because he is still so 

wet about politics and about financing. Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. member and this House that the 

Finance and Investment Branch of the Department of Finance for the Government of Saskatchewan is 

the envy of every jurisdiction in Canada, of the tremendously good job they are doing. 

 

CNS and Mood-Modifying Drugs 

 

Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): — A question to the Minister of Health. As a result of the study that 

was made public yesterday by the Alcoholism Commission with respect to the use of CNS and 

mood-modifying drugs, I’d like to ask the minister, in view of the fact that the research editor for that 

study has asked that there be further study applied to this particular problem in Saskatchewan, if the 

minister responsible for the Department of Health will give us some assurance that his department and 

his offices will pursue this topic with the intent of clearing the matter up for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would be most pleased to give 

the member an assurance that we are most interested in what the report is indicating. I have not 

personally read the report. I just received it yesterday but I think it is clear to all of us that what it is 

saying ought to be of concern to everybody involved in the health field. I might say that the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association and the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, as well as the 

Department of Health, are very concerned about the abuse of mood-altering drugs and, as a result of this 

mutual concern, I recently appointed a committee which is known as the Joint Committee on Drug 

Utilization which will review quality of care, issues such as the use of mood-altering drugs, and drug 

shoppers. This committee, I would want to the members to know, is shared by Dr. Bruce Schnell, who is 

the Dean of Pharmacy at the University of Saskatchewan and the other representatives are from the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, Dr. Stewart McMillan; from the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 

Association, Mr. Clare Castonguay; from the College of Medicine, Dr. Ian Holmes; from the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, Dr. Jim Housley and from the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan, Mr. 

Steve Petz. This committee had its first meeting on March 21 and it’s reviewing the matter of drug abuse 

and drug shoppers. We will be directing this report, which the member mentions opposite for their 

assessment and their indications on what we might do further. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to see that the minister takes 

the action of the Alcoholism Commission so seriously. In light of that, I would like to ask the minister if 

he is prepared, at this time, to give the Alcoholism Commission some assurance that future funding for 

that commission will be tied, on a percentage basis, to the net revenues that the province of 

Saskatchewan earns from the sale of liquor in Saskatchewan, in view of the fact that the Alcoholism 

Commission can do this valuable work if it is properly funded and currently it is improperly funded. 

Will you give us that assurance? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can assure the members opposite that the Alcoholism Commission of 

Saskatchewan is indeed properly funded. The Alcoholism Commission submits its budgetary 

requirements and requests to the government in the same way as any other agency or department of 

government, it is carefully considered and then 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

754 

 

during the appropriation of the funds, funds are appropriated. There is a significant amount of funding 

provided with an increase in the budget of the Alcoholism Commission this year and next year when the 

Alcoholism Commission has its programs and proposals put together we will again look at them, I can 

tell the member in a positive way, as we have always looked at it in a positive way. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, would the minister not agree that in view of the fact that the Calder 

Centre in Saskatoon, which is funded by the Alcoholism Commission, has had to close some of its beds 

as a result of a staff shortage, would not be underfunded in your own estimation? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t know where the member gets his information, but I have no knowledge of 

the Calder Centre closing any of its beds, nor do I have any knowledge of it having a staff shortage. If it 

has it certainly has not indicated that to either the Alcoholism Commission or the Government of 

Saskatchewan. I would only have to conclude that the facts on which the member opposite makes his 

assumptions have to be wrong. 

 

Answer to questions – re Candidates for Federal Election 
 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last, March 23, I took notice of a question that the hon. 

member for Indian Head-Wolseley posed to me as minister in charge of the Public Service Commission. 

 

Just to refresh everybody’s memory, the hon. member made an allegation, or the form of a question, that 

certain executive assistants are seeking nominations for the New Democratic Party and whether or not 

they have been granted leave of absence, or whether they have applied for leave of absence. The 

particular names that he mentioned, Mr. Speaker, are – Mr. Simon DeJong for Regina East, Mr. Ron 

Gates, Swift Current-Maple Creek, the prosecutor with the Attorney General’s Department, Mr. Dean 

Henley, Moose Jaw, executive assistant to Mr. Faris and Mr. Dale Schmeichel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have had a chance to look into the matter. But before dealing with that, he also in a 

supplementary, asked this question: It is also rather obvious and I am not sure whether the minister is 

aware that there is a federal civil servant that is running in Maple Creek, but he has taken a leave of 

absence. My question is, would the minister find out, Mr. Speaker? It is not within my jurisdiction to 

look into the federal civil service and I am not able to answer. Perhaps, the hon. member may check with 

the federal government of whether that is the case, because I don’t think that it is within my proper 

jurisdiction. 

 

But on the other form, Mr. Speaker, I have had the chance to look into the matter. In the case of Mr. 

Simon DeJong, Mr. Simon DeJong has been on leave of absence without pay effective January 7, 1978. 

He was nominated in Regina East on February 18. On February 20, the first working day following that, 

Mr. Simon DeJong resigned his position from the Rentalsman. 

 

The case of Ron Gates, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Ron Gates was on earned annual vacation during the period 

February 14 to February 27. He sought the nomination on February 16 and was nominated and effective 

February 27 he took leave of absence without pay from the Attorney General’s Department. 

 

In the case of David Henley, he was nominated as of March 15. Mr. Henley is devoting 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

755 

 

his full time as an executive assistant to the Minister of Education and Continuing Education. He has not 

applied for leave of absence to my knowledge. 

 

In the case of Dale Schmeichel, he is not within the civil service proper. He is apparently employed by 

the SMDC. He has not been nominated but he has indicated an interest in a nomination in the McKenzie 

constituency. Mr. Speaker, the nominating convention is apparently scheduled for April 1 but I am not 

certain about that. 

 

The hon. member will be aware that under the provisions of The Labour Standards Act, employees 

whether they are public servants or whether they are employed by a private employer have a right to 

leave of absence from an employer to seek the nomination and can pay for the nomination as well once 

they are nominated to obtain leave of absence and to work during an election campaign. That is provided 

in The Labour Standards Act. Once elected the employer is obligated to grant leave of absence to them 

without pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two other public servants who have been nominated some time ago which the 

hon. member did not mention and they are seeking election in the federal election, but as I said the hon. 

member did not mention that. They have remained on the Saskatchewan public payroll since their 

nomination. They have not sought leave of absence nor have they resigned, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

is also alleged that they may have even used MLA franking privileges to promote their own nominations 

or elections, Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I think the minister is getting into an area which can’t rightfully be 

categorized as an answer to the question which was placed on March 23. I will assume that he has 

concluded his answer and ask if there is a supplementary. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, would the minister not agree that there is a basic 

and fundamental distinction between an elected member of the Legislature or an elected officials and 

somebody who is a bureaucrat working for the NDP government in Saskatchewan? Would the minister 

not also admit that from what he has indicated there is a complete lack of consistency and policy within 

the NDP and bears out again the fact that because Mr. Faris’ executive assistant is still fully employed, 

Mr. Schmeichel or whatever his name is, is still fully employed, and actively seeking a nomination . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — Why shouldn’t he . . . 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — No there is no reason that they can’t seek a nomination. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I will ask the member to place his question rather than arguing with 

people who are not in a position to argue with him since they are not on their feet. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Would the minister not agree with me that it is time that the NDP government in 

the province of Saskatchewan established a firm and definite policy in relation to Saskatchewan civil 

servants electioneering and campaigning using the taxpayers’ money of the province of Saskatchewan to 

finance their campaigns and to finance the NDP Party. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

756 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the policy is there. It is set out in the law and is a consistent policy. It 

applies not only to the public service and employees of Crown corporations, it equally applies to the 

private sector. The law requires that any employee who seeks nomination can be granted leave of 

absence upon application and once he is nominated to have leave of absence at his request. I think the 

policy is consistent. Mr. Speaker, my I also say that whether an elected public servant or an appointed 

public servant, I think that both have certain responsibilities. May I also say, Mr. Speaker, that there are 

those particular public servants who take special privileges as, for example, the hon. member for 

Wascana (Mr. Merchant) who has distributed portraits of the Queen and the Prince in constituencies 

other than his own. I think, Mr. Speaker, it is an abuse of the privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

Provincial Sales Tax – Children’s Clothing 
 

Mr. H.W. Lane (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Revenue. The 

matter of reducing provincial sales tax on children’s clothing was raised recently in the Legislature and 

you expressed at that time some concern that some short unscrupulous non-infants might take unfair 

advantage of the program which could be the subject of some editorializing. My question is this. I have a 

report here from the most recent Globe and Mail that indicates that clothing prices will increase because 

of a new bilateral agreement between Canada and South Korea. Now, is the government at this time 

prepared to change its policy and remove the sales tax from children’s clothing? 

 

Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Revenue): — Mr. Speaker, no, the government is not prepared to 

change its policy and remove the sales tax on children’s clothing at this time as we clearly indicated. 

When we checked with all jurisdictions across Canada they advised us against going that route simply 

because of the administration of the problems related to it and I outlined those to the House some time 

ago. 

 

Point of Privilege – Abuse of Franking Privilege 
 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance today made an allegation that one of the 

members of this House was abusing franking privileges in this House. Now this is a matter of privilege 

within this House, and I would draw to your attention, Mr. Speaker, that a comment made by myself as a 

member, was subjected to scrutiny and debate in this House. The minister has been subject to this on 

several occasions; you will recall he made an allegation on another occasion that some one had 

attempted, from within the Conservative caucus, to bribe him, and I say that as a matter of privilege, he 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order! 

 

I will ask the member when he is putting a point of order, with regard to some subject, that he not relate 

it to something else but stay specifically on the point of order. I am not going to go back and rule in the 

past, on something that occurred before. That should have been dealt with before. 

 

Mr. Lane (Sa-Su): — Mr. Speaker, there has been a very clear allegation across the floor from the 

Finance Minister, that a member of this House has been abusing the franking privileges given to 

members of this House. The only reason I brought those 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

757 

 

other matters up, Mr. Speaker, was because of the historical significance given to when these matters are 

raised in the House. In a matter of fairness, he should either prove that allegation or withdraw it and 

resign his seat! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Merchant: — I rise on a similar point of personal privilege. At the time I was offended as I listened 

further. The minister, clearly by imputation in what he was saying and what he said thereafter, was 

implying that two members, I being one of them, had in some way misused franking privileges. The 

minister knows full well that all members of this House use the full amount of their franking privileges 

as I do. I ask the minister to communicate with my constituents in the same way that, I am sure, the 

member communicates with his constituents. I spend about $5,000 a year communicating with my 

constituents. Now, I ask the minister to withdraw his statement without exception. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think it is a common practise of the Legislature that the member’s word is taken as 

being acceptable to the House, and any other member who wishes to challenge that word, must produce 

the evidence forthwith. Unless the member is prepared to do that, I think he has to take the word of the 

member from Wascana as he has stated in his point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I think the record will show that I did not use any names. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Oh, come on now! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, obviously there are some members that perhaps are . . . well, Mr. 

Speaker, let us check the record. Mr. Speaker, there are certain members that might have a feeling of 

guilt about it. I think the record will show. Let me restate the words that I did speak because I had it very 

deliberately noted so that the record can be clear. If the hon. members care to hear it again, I will restate 

it, I am in your hands, Mr. Speaker. I said there are two other public servants who have been nominated 

some time ago and are seeking election in the next federal election in two Saskatchewan constituencies 

which the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley did not mention. They have remained on the 

Saskatchewan public payroll since their nomination. They have not sought leave of absence nor have 

they resigned. It is alleged that they may even have used MLA franking privileges to promote their 

nomination or election. I hope this allegation is not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I think we have had an airing of the matter from both the members that 

are involved and we can go on to interminable discussion about this which is not permitted at this time. 

The member has stated his position . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Have you made a ruling? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, I have not made a ruling. I am stating that this is getting into a discussion about 

something which is not permitted to be discussed at this time . . . Order! I will take any new points of 

order which may arise at this time. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, whether you realize it or not. Sir, you did make a ruling. You asked 

the Minister of Finance to withdraw and he had to take the word of the member for Wascana and the 

words of the Minister of Finance . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The member for Indian Head-Wolseley should 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

758 

 

understand what the word ‘order’ means. The member for Indian Head-Wolseley was completely out of 

order when he was on his feet. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, if it pleases the House, I said I hope it is not true and if it offends some 

people I am prepared to withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! I think we will close that particular matter off. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. G. MacMurchy (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 23 – An Act 

to provide Loans to Saskatchewan Homeowners for the purpose of Promoting Energy 

Conservation. 
 

Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I am finally pleased to get on 

with the business of the House. I am further pleased to be able to speak on the second reading of the 

Home Energy Loan Act. 

 

This act, Mr. Speaker, will provide the necessary legislation for the government to undertake a major 

program to provide financial aid, incentives and information for Saskatchewan people to upgrade the 

energy conserving qualities of their homes. This act, Mr. Speaker, is in keeping with this government’s 

tradition of managing our resources for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. Just as this 

government has developed policies which have retained windfall resource profits for Saskatchewan 

people, it is now embarking on programs which will provide the public access to these funds in a most 

meaningful way. Although we are a resource and energy rich province, at least by comparison to many 

provinces in Canada, it is well known that these resources have a limited future. This government 

intends to develop conservation options which will ease the transition to the future situation in which 

resources will be less plentiful. 

 

With regard to energy, Mr. Speaker, that means an effort in conservation. Not austere energy 

conservation programs, but programs which will allow rational use of our energy resources. Programs 

which will free up energy supplies for additional uses relating to the continued prosperity of this 

province. Conservation of energy means dollars in consumers’ pockets, dollars freed, Mr. Speaker, for 

other purposes. Internally, the government has already instituted many energy saving programs. Our 

new buildings are being designed and constructed to substantially reduce the total energy load. The 

Central Vehicle Agency has developed new policies which will significantly increase government 

purchase of smaller, more efficient energy vehicles. 

 

Government Services has an ongoing program which will ultimately study every government owned 

structure and make changes which will result in lower fuel bills for the government and for those 

structures. 

 

The office of Energy Conservation has been established to co-ordinate the province’s conservation 

efforts. The primary objective of this office is to designate areas within our jurisdiction where 

substantial savings of energy can be achieved and to design programs which can facilitate these savings. 

 

To a great extent, conservation of energy means change in the consciousness of people about the way 

they now use energy. It has been shown that the price structure 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

759 

 

alone is not enough to achieve a different pattern of energy use. This government, Mr. Speaker, intends 

to develop programs which will provide people with alternatives to the present wasteful and 

short-sighted structure we now have for using our energy resources. 

 

The office of Energy Conservation has many initiatives planned which will address these issues and 

hopefully increase people’s awareness about the need for energy conservation. 

 

I cite the Saskatchewan Conservation House as an example of how demonstration and public education 

can be achieved. I am pleased to report that this project has been a tremendous success in terms of 

demonstrating energy conservation ideas to the Saskatchewan public. In the three months since it 

opened, Mr. Speaker, over 8,000 people have visited this conservation house. The general purpose, the 

general response to the house has been excellent and people are indicating that the ideas they are 

learning in this house are applicable to their own homes. Technically the Conservation House is 

performing better than expected. It is a model of how to conserve energy in this climate. Working tests 

have indicated that its energy demand for space heating is 85 to 90 per cent lower than the typical 

Saskatchewan home. Mr. Speaker, 85 to 90 per cent lower than the typical Saskatchewan home – indeed 

a significant stride towards conservation of energy. 

 

Several private contractors around the province have already taken ideas from the Conservation House 

and employed them in new structures that they are building. This is what the Conservation House 

wanted to achieve. This is a demonstration of good government in action . . . a government which 

undertakes old projects which will in turn benefit our society as a whole. 

 

The public is now, Mr. Speaker, being invited to participate in another bold and I suggest to you, 

successful, government program. This is the “Warm-up Saskatchewan”, home insulation program. What 

this program is designed to do is make money available from the Heritage Fund to the people of 

Saskatchewan in a major drive to upgrade the thermal efficiency of our houses. Since the federal 

government CHIP program has proven to be an inadequate measure to quickly upgrade thermal 

efficiencies in homes and since the CHIP program was not designed for easy access by all people of 

Canada, this government has designed a program to overcome these shortfalls. Co-ordinated by the 

office of Energy Conservation, the “Warm-up Saskatchewan” program has combined the efforts of 

many government departments and agencies. First, the Department of Continuing Education in 

co-operation with the technical institute has designed home insulation courses which are now available 

through the province’s community college system. For a fee of $5 these courses are now available to the 

general public as well as to contractors and supplies in the insulation field. The courses are designed to 

instruct do-it-yourself handymen or contractors about the most up to date techniques and materials 

available to upgrade the thermal efficiency of our homes in this province. This educational effort will 

help to ensure that quality workmanship and materials are applied under this program. 

 

The second portion, Mr. Speaker, of the “Warm-up Saskatchewan” program will be interest free loans to 

the Saskatchewan homeowner. It is proposed that loans of up to $1,000 will be available to all 

Saskatchewan homeowners living in their principal residence. These $1,000 loans will be made 

available through Saskatchewan Power Corporation to cover costs of materials and labor. Eligible home 

improvements include such things as insulation, vapor barriers, storm doors and windows, attic fans, 

weather 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

760 

 

stripping and caulking, strapping and fireproofing materials for basement walls and other related 

materials. Applicants to the program will make payment of the loans through the normal Sask Power 

Corporation energy billing system over a three-year period of time. The Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation has trained its district staff to aid applicants in filling out the forms to participate in this 

program. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation will also provide a toll free hotline. This telephone will 

be manned by a conservation officer who is trained to help people who are having problems with their 

loan applications and who will also provide technical advice to consumers about home improvements. 

 

Unlike, Mr. Speaker, the federal CHIP program the procedure for getting a provincial loan has been 

designed so that consumers will not have to bridge finance. They have the option of submitting paid or 

unpaid invoices for work completed. In other words, the loans might be processed and accepted before 

work begins. This allows, Mr. Speaker, all people to participate without having to lay out money first 

and finance this money until the loan comes through. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation will 

advertise, administer and deliver this program to the Saskatchewan public. 

 

The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will be assisting the Saskatchewan Power Corporation by 

evaluating all application forms on a technical basis. A monitoring system will be set up in the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation so that materials and prices will constantly be monitored against 

prevailing trends. This process, Mr. Speaker, will help protect the consumer against overcharging or 

improper use of materials. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will also be making pre and post 

spot checks of a percentage of the applications. In order to avoid problems which other provinces have 

experienced with unscrupulous insulation installers this act, Mr. Speaker, proposed the licensing and 

bonding of participating installation installers. This licence will be issued by Consumer Affairs in a form 

similar to other licensing arrangements now in existence. Let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the 

licensing and bonding will only be required of insulation contractors who wish to participate in the 

program. Other participating contractors who might be electricians putting in attic fans or carpenters 

installing storm doors and windows will not, will not, Mr. Speaker, be required to have or obtain a 

licence. 

 

The licensing provision also has a clause which will provide restricted licenses to contractors to do only 

a few insulation jobs per year, or home handymen who might insulate their neighbor’s attic. 

 

The flexibility of this licensing arrangement will provide consumer protection and at the same time not 

be unnecessarily demanding of smaller Saskatchewan contractors. 

 

Licensing and bonding will protect the consumer because they will be dealing with insulation installers 

who are a legal entity within the province. This means, that where a bond is held by the Department of 

Consumer Affairs, consumers will have the opportunity to make a legal claim against the bond. This 

provision, also, protects the consumer from liens against his property in cases where the installer has not 

paid his supplier. It is also intended that this provision will also protect the consumer from the 

proliferation of new installation firms that have little or no expertise in this relatively new industry and 

whose financial stability may be precarious. 

 

In consultation, Mr. Speaker, with the insulation industry, we have found that they welcome the 

licensing and bonding requirement. They agree that licensing will enhance the integrity and competence 

of the industry and they see it as a protection of 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

761 

 

the credibility of established firms. 

 

Recently the industry has gone ahead on its own accord and formed a province-wide voluntary 

association. It sees licensing of its members as a necessary component to the association’s credibility. 

 

This program has been designed to allow, Mr. Speaker, homeowners to borrow up to $1,000. The $1,000 

was chosen as a loan maximum because it was found that while an average house will require about 

$600 to $800, many homes will need larger renovations. 

 

Let me, Mr. Speaker, illustrate the savings that an individual may realize by participating in this 

program. The interest free subsidy on a $1,000 loan, over three years, amounts to about $200 at the 

prevailing interest rate. However, not only will the individual save the interest, he will also enjoy lower 

fuel costs. It is estimated that if such measure as weather stripping, reinsulation of attics and the 

insulation of basements were undertaken, the heating requirements of many homes could be reduced by 

over 30 per cent, reduced by over 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker. In most cases the money saved on fuel will 

help pay back a major portion of the loan over a three-year period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the social benefits of this program. If during the three years life of this 

program one quarter of Saskatchewan’s 211,000 private homes participate, it is estimated this could 

result in a $3 million a year saving in space heating bills. Since the average life span of this housing 

stock is about 25 years, at today’s energy prices this means a total saving of something in the 

neighborhood of $75 million. That is a $75 million saving in today’s dollars, Mr. Speaker, for a program 

which will cost about $5 million in interest subsidies. 

 

We have found that the timing of this program could not have been better. Discussions with insulation 

manufacturers have indicated that they have ample manufacturing capacity to meet the expected 

increase in demand. Since spring is generally a slow time for both manufacturers and contractors they 

have welcomed the announcement of this program as a good shot in the arm for their businesses. The 

consumers, as well, should welcome the opportunity to give their homes a spring tune-up, which will 

keep them cooler in the summer and warmer next winter. 

 

This program has been designed to help people respond to the energy realities of today. It is providing 

incentive and assistance in a meaningful way which will translate into a more secure energy future for 

Saskatchewan people, a future which will reduce energy requirements in our existing homes and free up 

energy supplies for other needs. The program will be a stimulant to the economy by providing labor 

opportunities and increased sales in both the insulation and building product businesses. This program, 

Mr. Speaker, allows the people of Saskatchewan to take advantage of the money this government has so 

wisely accumulated in the Heritage Fund. “Warm-up Saskatchewan” will use this money, much of 

which was generated from energy resource royalties, for the purpose of conserving those energy 

resources. The program has been designed so that it is easily accessible to all homeowners in the 

province. It makes money available up front so that anyone can participate. It has been designed to offer 

consumer protection both through the licensing procedure as well as the monitoring function of the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. It has also been designed to offer public education about home 

energy improvements. The act before the House will empower the government to deliver this program. I 

endorse the act and I ask the Legislature to vote with me to have this Home Energy Act become law. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

762 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few short words I move second reading of this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.N. McMillan (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, it is an interesting note, I think, for members of this 

Assembly who realize that in effect this is the second conservation program brought in by the provincial 

government, particularly with the involvement of SPC. 

 

The first conservation program that you people brought in were your exorbitant windfall rates you have 

been charging the people of Saskatchewan for the past four years. Nothing more than that could have 

initiated the feeling among the public that it was mandatory that they improve the conservation 

techniques that they use with respect to heat in their homes and their farm buildings and their industries. 

There is only one reason primarily or two I suppose that the Minister responsible for SPC and Minerals 

Resources can stand in this House and brag about his ability to bring in a program that will meet a need 

of the Saskatchewan public. You created the problem and now you are going to bring in the solution 

which supposedly will correct the gas for four years and now you are bringing in a program where you 

are going to loan the money back to them on a short term basis so that they can improve the insulation in 

their homes so that they are more energy conservation-wise. I say that it is foolishly hypocritical of you 

to play the role of the great white knight in these days of energy conservation problems. You gouged the 

public of Saskatchewan, you pay 25 cents per 1,000 cubic feet for gas you buy and turn around and sell 

it to the public for $2.56. That’s the best conservation program you’ve got. It is no wonder you’ve got 

enough money to afford this program. I’ll assure you of that because you’ve been taking it out of the 

hides of the people of Saskatchewan for four years. 

 

There is just as good a reason why you should take this small step to heal the great wound that you have 

opened up with the people of Saskatchewan. There is another good reason that we need a conservation 

program and that’s that your government has been so inept at discovering and bringing into production 

new sources of energy in Saskatchewan that we can’t afford to use what we’ve got. You’ve got natural 

gas wells in proven fields in Saskatchewan cemented in and they are going to stay cemented in as a 

result of your attitude towards the petroleum industry. We have unproven fields throughout 

Saskatchewan that we should be doing developmental work on at this stage to put them in a position to 

come on production should we get in any worse position than we are in today with respect to natural gas. 

I saw briefly a headline in the paper today about marketplace in the Leader-Post about Saskatchewan 

being short of natural gas. Well, I say, yes, we need a conservation program but because of the problems 

that you have created in Saskatchewan – not problems for any other reason. 

 

Now I say that you come in and brag to the people of Saskatchewan; you have got an extensive 

advertising campaign that you are bringing up that is going to be, no doubt, thoroughly aired in 

Saskatchewan about how wonderful your program is. Every dime you’re spending on that and that 

you’re spending on subsidizing of interest rates on the loans that are taken out, you’ve fleeced out of the 

public with your 102.7 per cent increase in SPC rates for the past four years. You need take no pride in 

that. 

 

On the positive side, of course the program is going to be of some benefit to the people of 

Saskatchewan. I’m not surprised to see that you people echo more surprise about the 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

763 

 

fact that there’s a positive side than we do because sometimes it’s with a great deal of difficulty that we 

can find anything positive to say about your programs. 
 

I say that your program will go a small way towards, hopefully, making the people of Saskatchewan 

more energy conservation conscious. No people in the world need to be more that way than the people 

of Saskatchewan, given the prices we pay for our natural gas here and the kind of future production that 

we’re faced with in Saskatchewan. I expect that your program will be well received by the people of 

Saskatchewan, insomuch as it goes a small way towards returning to them, in an indirect manner, some 

of the revenue you’ve gouged out of them over the past few years. 

 

We will, no doubt, have more to say about this in the future, Mr. Speaker, and I would like, at this time, 

to beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. A.S. Matsalla (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources) moved second reading of Bill 

No. 16 – An Act of Consent respecting the adoption of the Manitoba-Saskatchewan boundary 

south of the twenty-second base line as surveyed by the Manitoba-Saskatchewan Boundary 

Commission during the years 1965 to 1972 – be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 12 – An Act 

respecting The Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association – be now read a second time and 

referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Health — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 continued 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. We are on Health Estimates, as you know, we are on Item 1. Before 

we start, might I just make one comment and I want you to take it in the manner in which it is given and 

that is that under Item 1 of all departments you certainly have the opportunity to question anything 

within that department but I do ask you to take time to look through the rest of the items if you think that 

question could come up in a better place and certainly in the proper place, I would say try and follow it 

through in that manner. I think it would make it better for all of us and we would perhaps gain from that 

matter of routine. I just ask you to try and accommodate us the best you can in that way and I think it 

will be better for all concerned. We are still on Item 1. 

 

Mr. J. Wiebe (Morse): — Mr. Chairman, before we leave Item 1, I have just a couple of questions I 

would like to direct to the Minister of Health and they are mainly questions of information and they 

pertain to what is beginning to develop into rather a sore spot in the health care delivery system within 

the province of Saskatchewan. I am dealing with the problem which many of the MLAs who represent 

the southwest part of Saskatchewan deal with and I am sure that most members of this Assembly are not 

aware of the fact of the problems that we do encounter in the Swift Current health region. The Minister 

of Finance, on paid radio broadcasts, paid by himself I might add, 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

764 

 

brings a message to the people of Saskatchewan stating that medicare is free in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Yet, in our particular area, Health Region No. 1, the southwest part of the province, that 

is certainly not the case. In order for us to obtain the same kind of benefits that people living in other 

health regions of the province of Saskatchewan, we must pay either a $7.00 premium for an individual 

or a $14 premium for a family and this pertains, Mr. Chairman, to the dental plan which is presently 

being operated by the Swift Current Health Region. 

 

I think what is more important and of greater concern to those of us who sit in this Assembly is the cost 

that is involved in the present operation of the Swift Current Health Region. I hope that the Minister, 

when I finish my remarks, will be able to explain to the members of the House exactly how the Swift 

Current Health Region operates. It is my understanding that when I, who belong to the Swift Current 

Health Region, go to see my doctor or have to spend some time in the hospital, that the doctor or the 

hospital board does not bill the Saskatchewan Medicare Commission nor the Hospitalization Board 

directly for the costs that I incurred by my visit to the hospital or by my visit to the doctor. That bill, in 

effect, must go to the health region. The health region then in turn bills Regina and Regina then in turn 

pays the health region, the health region then in turn pays the doctor or the hospital involved. 

 

It is costing the health plan in this province a fantastic amount of money for the operation of that 

particular health region and is causing a considerable amount of misunderstanding and hard feelings 

among the residents of the southwest part of the province because they do in turn have to pay that 

particular $7 or $14 premium before they can adequately receive the same type of benefits as the people 

in the rest of the province receive in regard to health care. Some erroneous directives were sent out a few 

years ago and thank heavens they have been corrected, in which the chairman of the Swift Current 

Health Region advised the doctors and the hospitals not to accept anybody unless they had a paid up 

health region card. It took a considerable amount of effort on behalf of some of the MLAs in the 

southwest part of the province to get that situation rectified where now no one, in effect, is denied health 

care even though he has not purchased that particular card. I am just wondering if the Minister of Health 

could explain to the members of this Legislature the problems that we do incur in the southwest part of 

the province and if he and his department has any contingency plans developed to hopefully save the 

Department of Health money in regard to our health and hospitalization care in the province as it relates 

to Health Region No. 1? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I know the matter the member speaks of, the pioneering work of 

the Swift Current Health Region is well known in Saskatchewan. It pioneered such endeavors and such 

programs as the original municipal doctor plans that were provided in Saskatchewan and therefore it has 

sort of molded the way for some of the developments that have taken place in following years. 

 

The dental plan that the member for Morse refers to is a dental plan that applies not to those age 

categories which are covered by the provincial dental plan, the dental plan that we have provincially for 

all children within a certain age category, it only applies to other age categories that the Swift Current 

Health Region provides a plan for. There is no requirement on our part that that fee has to be paid before 

anyone in the Swift Current Health Region should be able to benefit from health care programs like 

anyone else, anywhere else in Saskatchewan. In fact, we insist that that not be the case. There are some 

incidents which the member knows, and I know where there seems to have been some difficulty in that 

some people have not been provided some of the other benefits by the region because they fail to pay 

their dental fee. I had a meeting arranged 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

765 

 

for Tuesday to meet with the Swift Current Health Region to discuss this, unfortunately because I had to 

be away at a funeral I had to cancel out of that meeting. I am again rescheduling a meeting to discuss 

with them this problem and to see if we can iron it out. 

 

Mr. Wiebe: — Mr. Chairman, I hope the minister doesn’t take my remarks as being critical. I am trying 

to approach this particular situation from a positive manner with the hope that the problems we now 

encounter in the southwest can be solved and that in turn dollars can be saved in the delivery of that 

particular care for the southwest part of the province. There is no doubt in my mind and no doubt of all 

people in the southwest part of the province that the Swift Current Health Region did fulfil in the past a 

very useful purpose and that it did pioneer many of the health programs which we now enjoy in the 

province of Saskatchewan. The point that I am saying is that many of the residents in Saskatchewan, 

many of the people belonging to the Swift Current Health Region and the Swift Current Health Region 

Board believe themselves that the Swift Current Health Region No. 1 in effect has outlived its 

usefulness. That there are basically no other frontiers that an association or an organization such as the 

Swift Current Health Region No. 1 can conquer and they certainly haven’t demonstrated that during the 

past five to six years at which time medicare became available to all residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I am hoping that we can – it is not going to take too many more years when the 

provincial dental program will cover pretty well all the young people who are presently being covered in 

the Swift Current Health Region No. 1 under the premiums that are presently being paid. I might point 

out as well that that premium that is being collected is collected not only from families like myself 

which have children who do qualify for benefits under that program but it is also being collected from 

senior citizens who no longer have children, senior citizens who can in no way benefit from any of those 

programs. Young single individuals who no longer qualify for the program still must pay the $7 and the 

$14 premium. If someone does not wish to pay that premium the onus is then on the rural municipality 

or the local government to collect that premium and reimburse the health region. So the health region is 

sitting in a very unenviable position. The individual taxpayers in that part of the province is not bound to 

pay the premium because the onus is then on the rural municipality or the local government to make that 

payment. The minister has said that he is going down to have discussions with members of the Swift 

Current Health Region. I sincerely hope that those discussions will be fruitful and that we will, in the 

near future, be able to obtain the same kind of health benefits without the red tape and rigmarole that we 

must now go through in the southwest as other people in Saskatchewan do. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, first of all let me say that I would not want it to be misunderstood 

in this House that I was in any way insinuating the member was critical of the Swift Current Health 

Region because I was not and I know that he was not. I might be suspicious of some members opposite 

if they were to comment on this question, but not of the member for Morse, because I know him very 

well. I just want to say that ‘yes’ we have the concern, as the member has, and as I indicated I am going 

to be doing some follow-up and will be arranging a meeting to discuss this to see what we can work out. 

 

I want to also indicate because the member indicated that he was interested in the provincial dental plan 

being expanded to include other age categories and we, as a government, have made a commitment to 

expand over time the dental program to people to the age of 18 and we are progressing in that way and 

will ultimately get there. I hope in the not too distant future. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

766 

 

I also would solicit the assistance of the member and his other colleagues from the southwest to bring 

their influence to bear on the local people who have a considerable amount of local autonomy and on the 

Swift Current Health Region to try to deal with the situation as it is described by the member. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I have one thing I touched on 

yesterday and then we got side-tracked on a couple of other issues and I don’t know really where to 

bring it up except under Item 1, so I think I had better pursue it a little bit. Yesterday the minister gave 

me some figures about Saskatchewan trained doctors, Canadian trained doctors, out of Canada trained 

doctors and so forth and I wonder if he would mind repeating those figures for me. As I understand it, 

there are 186 practising doctors in Saskatchewan that were trained in the province of Saskatchewan; 233 

were trained in other parts of Canada and there was a total of something 814 practising physicians – is 

that correct? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — 914! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — 914? Can the minister then tell me too, where the other doctors come from and 

what other percentages. You gave me the figures yesterday. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — O.K. this comes from the annual report, 1977 Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Commission, table 19 on page 48 . . . Practitioners by place of graduation. Under all 

physicians 1977, there were 914; number of practitioners – 186 graduated from Saskatchewan, 233 

graduated in other provinces, for a total of well over 400; United States, Central and South America – 

16; United Kingdom and Eire – 307; Continental Europe – 26; Asia – 122 and Africa – 23; Australia – 

1. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — What was that Africa again? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Twenty-three. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Minister, I just have a few comments to make on this particular subject and I 

am sure that I am not speaking about a subject that is foreign to the minister and to the government 

because last year they considered introducing (in fact they did introduce a bill) whereby it would turn 

around and provide the same kind of uniform entrance requirements for doctors to come into 

Saskatchewan to practise as in other provinces in Canada and in fact in other parts of North America. Of 

course the government withdrew the bill. 

 

I want to say that there is a problem that is fast approaching – I just skimmed on it yesterday – is the fact 

that the predictions are that by 1981 there will be surplus of doctors in Canada. Also a few years ago, 

according to statistics, only one-third of the doctors graduating in the province of Saskatchewan stayed 

in Saskatchewan to practise. Now that number is up to two-thirds. In other words, two out of every three 

doctors that graduate from the University of Saskatchewan Medical School stay in the province of 

Saskatchewan and practise medicine and that means, of course, that the number – and the reason for that 

of course is the increased number of medical students in other parts of Canada and the number of 

graduates that are being turned out in other parts of Canada. The fact that there are not as many jobs 

available that for students graduating in the medical school in Saskatchewan, and I suppose from the 

medical bursary program where the government assists young doctors when establishing in the province, 

the same as they do dentists. This practise has been going on for some time but I think now it is reaping 

a bit more benefit. What it really means is that the province of Saskatchewan, unless it does something, 

Saskatchewan trained doctors may not very soon be able to find a job in the province of Saskatchewan. 

It is 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

767 

 

rather interesting that well over 50 per cent of the current doctors now practising in the province of 

Saskatchewan, were not trained in Canada, or are not Canadian born. I think it is also fair to say that 

doctors from other parts of the world, particularly the United Kingdom, came to Saskatchewan and 

provided a very valuable service when we were short of doctors – particularly in rural areas. That 

problem appears to be no longer with us – or is rapidly disappearing. It also appears that in 

Saskatchewan, because we do not demand the same equality of examinations for students graduating 

here as those coming from other parts of the world to practise in Saskatchewan, (in other words, the 

same medical standards or Canadian medical examinations), this may very well work to the 

disadvantage of Saskatchewan students who are graduating in the field of medicine. First of all, it may 

limit their opportunities as to where they might want to practise, and second, it may even limit the 

opportunity of practising in Saskatchewan. As we all know, the Saskatchewan taxpayers contribute a 

gigantic amount of money to train any one physician in the province of Saskatchewan – as do all 

provinces in any medical school. The student pays a very minute portion of the total cost of medical 

schooling in Saskatchewan. 

 

I may point out too, Saskatchewan has a disproportionate number of doctors practising in the province, 

who were not trained in Canada or in Saskatchewan, in comparison to other provinces. I think the 

average for Canada is about 50 per cent. In the province of Saskatchewan, it is about 57 per cent. I am 

not sure if my memory serves me correctly if those statistics are exact or not. I want to again point out to 

the minister that there seems to be a need not to discriminate against doctors coming in from other parts 

of the world, but treat them the same as we do the Saskatchewan graduate, and make sure that all of 

them have the same examinations. I also understand that the Americans have almost closed the doors on 

medical practitioners from other parts of the world coming to the United States and obtaining a licence. 

Therefore, it appears (if I am not mistaken), that the only port of entry in the United States and Canada, 

is the province of Saskatchewan and I believe Newfoundland if my memory serves me correctly. The 

American Medical Association and the American states have practically closed the doors, so that the 

only place where a doctor can go without passing the rigid standards or the examinations of other 

Canadians, (and examinations in other parts of North America, the United States in particular), is the 

province of Saskatchewan. If this is a fact, then I see there is a real danger in the years ahead that we 

may be training Saskatchewan students and Saskatchewan doctors, and unless we treat them equally 

with doctors from other parts of the world as far as examinations and standards are concerned, these 

Saskatchewan students may not be able to obtain a job. If projections are accurate, by the year 1980 or 

1981 (which is only two or three years down the road), some students who are actually now attending 

the University of Saskatchewan Medical School may not be able to find a job in Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to ask the Minister, is it his intention to do anything? I have seen press releases that they are 

going to monitor the situation, and so forth. Is it the intention of the government or the minister to 

re-introduce Bill 51? I indicated that after this discussion, I am going to make a decision whether to 

introduce it or not if the minister isn’t. I know there is some sympathetic support on that side of the 

House, and some sympathetic understanding of the problem. I think it would be rather interesting to see 

just exactly how some of the ministers and Treasury Bench would vote on that Bill, when once again it 

is re-introduced. But I would like to ask the minister, is it his intention to do anything specific about this 

problem now and in the future, within the next two or three years? 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

768 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the member spoke on quite a number of items related to doctor 

supply. Listening to him carefully I am somewhat mystified if indeed there is going to be such a great 

surplus of doctors in Canada. Why a very few years ago the federal government would have put in half a 

billion dollars of money to increase the capacity of training institutions for doctors which will no doubt 

lead to the increased number of the doctors which the member has concerned about developing into a 

surplus. I want the members of the House to know that there are efforts being made now in this 

province, as good as anywhere in Canada, to encourage graduates from our College of Medicine to 

remain in Saskatchewan, not only efforts by the province itself and by the Department of Health but 

efforts by hospitals and the Saskatchewan Health Care Association and by the College of Medicine. 

Indeed the numbers of doctors graduating from the College of Medicine in this province and staying in 

the province to practise has been increasing in recent years. I know that everyone opposite will agree 

that that’s a good trend and good sign. No doubt one of the reasons why that has happened is because of 

such things as the medical bursary program which has existed since the ’60s. The member opposite may 

know something about that. Out of 371 medical students receiving bursaries between 1968 and 1977, 63 

per cent are either repaid or repaying those bursaries in service and therefore stayed in Saskatchewan to 

practise. I think that’s a pretty good indication of the kind of trend that is taking place. I have very 

recently met with the College of Physicians and Surgeons and with the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, as well as with other organizations, at an annual meeting which we have called a ‘think 

tank’ at which we discussed this issue and agreed then to explore all of the options and alternatives that 

may be available to deal with things like quality and other questions similar to ones that the member 

opposite asks. More specifically on whether I am prepared to re-introduce Bill 51, I made it very clear in 

either August or September of last year, although I cannot remember precisely which month it was, that 

it is not at this time my intention to re-introduce Bill 51. I think it became clear in the last session that 

there was some question about it in the minds of people in rural Saskatchewan, small hospitals, 

municipalities and in small towns. It was my judgment that during this time it is not the right thing to do, 

to re-introduce that particular bill. So, the answer to the member’s question is, No. 

 

I want to add something else. There has been some talk about the so-called exodus of doctors out of 

Canada, particularly with regard to the Saskatchewan scene. I think it is of interest to note that the 

emigration of doctors from Saskatchewan from 1974 using that term of reference to 1977 has decreased. 

In 1974, 42 doctors emigrated or left the province of Saskatchewan to either other places outside of 

Canada or the United States. In 1977 that number was only 38. So there is no great dramatic surge in 

that area. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

769 

 

I also want to point out to the House and to the member opposite the kind of work that is being done by 

the Saskatchewan Health Care Association and the College of Medicine to assist in the recruitment of 

Saskatchewan trained graduates in Saskatchewan hospitals. I was really quite amazed when I first made 

some inquiries into this that I couldn’t really find over past years any kind of a mechanism like we have 

in the teaching profession with school boards where there is a system where they recruit young 

graduates coming out of the College of Education. What has happened is that in order to stimulate the 

recruitment of Saskatchewan trained physicians by Saskatchewan communities the College of Medicine 

and the Saskatchewan Health Care Association have now agreed jointly to establish procedures to bring 

practice vacancies in the province to the attention of our medical graduates, something that was not done 

as far as I am able to determine in any significant way in the past. Also that would-be graduates in the 

college be given that information and also the same information be made available to hospitals 

throughout Saskatchewan. I am confident that that kind of a concerted effort will again increase the 

trend which I already mentioned and that is the trend for more Saskatchewan trained doctors to practise 

in Saskatchewan. I don’t think we are going to reach the situation where all graduates from 

Saskatchewan are going to practise in Saskatchewan any more than any other province. We have a free 

country where people can travel. They may set up a practice somewhere else for reasons completely 

unrelated to medicine. I am not suggesting that the member suggests that it is going to be 100 per cent 

that way but I think we can improve on what has happened in the past. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, the information about the surplus of doctors came from a 

committee that his own department officials sat on, a federal provincial committee on health professions 

– on manpower in the health professions field. I just want to ask the minister before we get off this 

subject, what is the rationale of the NDP government in the province of Saskatchewan to treat doctors 

that come from other parts of the world differently than they treat doctors who graduate in the province 

of Saskatchewan. What is the rationale to force doctors who graduate in Saskatchewan and in Canada to 

pass one set of standards and one set of exams and yet you do not treat doctors from other parts of the 

world as rigidly as far as standards and examinations and difficulty in starting to practise medicine as 

you do our own graduates; what is the rationale, can the minister tell me in treating doctors from Europe, 

from the United Kingdom, from Asia, differently than the Saskatchewan 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

770 

 

graduate? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the member well knows that the licensing of physicians is a 

function of the College of Physicians and Surgeons. In the comment that the member makes he is 

insinuating that the training of Commonwealth doctors, because it doesn’t apply to doctors from 

anywhere in the world, it applies to certain medical people who come from certain parts of the world 

who are members of the British Commonwealth as I recollect the provision. The member suggests that 

the training in Great Britain is inferior to the training in Saskatchewan or Canada. I am not sure of that 

and quite frankly, I am not sure that I know that. I didn’t say that you said that but I say that you might 

be insinuating that by your argument. The licensing is therefore done by the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons. I don’t think it is a form of discrimination, I think in the past it is well known that in certain 

areas of Saskatchewan, particularly rural areas, the recruitment of doctors has been a very difficult thing 

and therefore you will find that up to 60 per cent or up to 65 per cent of doctors practising in rural areas 

and rural hospitals are indeed doctors who have come from out of the country. This is one of the reasons 

that the community clinics and that rural municipalities and that rural hospitals express their concern 

with regard to Bill 51. I think before further action is taken in that area that we need to talk to these 

people, which we are endeavoring to do and that’s why I mentioned earlier I have already had some 

initial discussions with the SMA and the College of Physicians and Surgeons on how we might be able 

to explore some of the options that might be available. While we are doing that, as I mentioned already 

as well, some other efforts are being taken to make sure that this disparity of distribution, because the 

problem is not a supply problem, the problem is one of distribution between big urban centres and rural 

Saskatchewan. We are trying to do, in the meantime, some things that will try to alleviate some of that 

distribution, such as the efforts that are being made by the Saskatchewan Health Care Association and 

by the College of Medicine. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — One other comment. I find that answer rather redundant. First of all the Premier 

and the Cabinet introduced a bill last year, Bill 51, because they were very much aware of the problem 

that existed and the fact that there was different treatment to Saskatchewan graduates in the medical 

field and graduates from others. I am not suggesting that there is a lowering of standards in Britain or 

anywhere else and if there isn’t then why shouldn’t they write the same set of exams if the quality of 

their training is as good as it was in the past? But I ask the minister, if he doesn’t believe that this was a 

problem why then did the government introduce that legislation one year ago? I merely point out again 

that it is a problem. Saskatchewan may, if it continues to be the only port of entry in North America or 

one of the very few ports of entry in North America, or at least in the United States and Canada, then 

certainly we will have a disproportionate number of doctors practising in Saskatchewan who are not 

Canadian-born and trained and particularly not Saskatchewan born and trained because if there is not an 

opportunity and when the minister talks about a supply or distribution, the distribution problem will 

always be here, always be here. When it comes to rural Saskatchewan and keeping doctors, the same as 

it is keeping good school teachers or good dentists or anyone else in small rural Saskatchewan, that is a 

problem we will always have to face, we will always have to be continually trying to tackle something 

else. 

 

One other comment, can the minister indicate now – we are talking about health professions and supply, 

there have been some rumors that have run rather rampant in Saskatchewan, some write-ups in the paper 

about nurses being attracted to the southern part of the United States with lucrative salaries and other 

enticements, advertisements taking place in western Canada. I even understand in other provinces 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

771 

 

that people are coming up to interview them and so forth. Can the minister indicate if this is a serious 

problem in the province of Saskatchewan, are many nurses leaving that the Department of Health is 

aware of and can the minister tell me is there any shortage of nurses at this particular time in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, first of all in answer to the latter question. I can assure the member 

and the House that the nursing supply in the province of Saskatchewan is very adequate. The so-called 

recruitments that the member talks of obviously have some very elaborate carrots to apply, such as 

extensive moving expenses and other kinds of things that are attached. But the impact of that is the 

province has been insignificant. There is not a problem and we do not anticipate a problem. 

 

Now, let me go back to the other comment on the supply of doctors. I don’t know whether the member 

opposite is aware of the changes that were made to the federal government to certain requirements in the 

Immigration Act but that has had a very significant impact on the number of out of country doctors that 

are coming into Canada. I don’t have the statistics right in front of me but I remember looking at them 

recently – the member says at least half – and I think that is where the ball park figure is. A doctor as in 

other professions cannot just now come to Canada because he decides he is going to come to Canada to 

practise or Saskatchewan, Canada first. He has to go through the point system and if there is not a need, 

then on the need component of that categorization that takes place, the assessment, the medical people 

right now, unless they are a certain specialization that is in need of, get zero points. I am sure the 

member will agree that that has had quite a significant impact on the numbers that have been coming in. 

We can’t assure certain things, and I think no one can. We can’t assure that if there is a political revolt 

or some other kind of disturbance in one of the Commonwealth nations that that would not change the 

circumstances to some extent. But that is normally not the kind of thing we rely on anyway. 

 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of Conservative Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the 

minister on a different tack. I notice in glancing at the statistical review for the province of 

Saskatchewan that there doesn’t seem to be itemized here any estimate of the percentages of population 

that fall into the various age categories of our province and I am thinking mostly, Mr. Minister, of those 

citizens of our province who are say in excess of 60 years. Could the minister tell me what the number 

of citizens in 1977 or an approximate answer from his department, in 1977 was say as a percentage of 

our population or in terms of total numbers in 1978 and he anticipates in 1979? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — In 1977, I will give you the figures I have, they are figures for 65 and over, the 

percentage of the Saskatchewan population over 65 is 11.2 per cent or about 105,000. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Which year? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — 1977, June 1977, here it is. We project that that indeed will increase, the total 

number will increase in the next several years so that by 1983 or the mid-80s the percentage will 

increase maybe to about 13 per cent. We are one of the higher provinces in that respect . . . no, not 

highest. Prince Edward Island is the highest, but we are one of the higher provinces indeed but we are 

also providing some of the more elaborate and more significant programs for senior citizens in order to 

be able to assist them. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

772 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate this information – 11.2 per cent, you anticipate that this is 

going to grow, that by 1983 perhaps at approximately 13 per cent of the population? Could I ask you 

then, would that increase in the percentage of the population of Saskatchewan be over the age of 65? 

Would that percentage increase levelly for the year 1978-79? Approximately, in other words, could we 

anticipate a half of one per cent increase in 1978-79? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am told that it is estimated that the growth of numbers of people over 65 in the 

next few years will be something in the area of about 2,000 a year. Now that once again is an estimate 

figure but I think fairly accurate. Now, that’s a figure. It is difficult to take that and then deal in 

percentages as I earlier did and that’s why I made certain qualifications because the total population in 

Saskatchewan has been indeed increasing and a lot of increasing because of younger people coming in. 

The last statistics which I saw, January, showed that for example more younger people came in to take 

jobs in Saskatchewan from Alberta than any other province in Canada. So that’s another factor that 

comes in when you are going to deal with percentages. But in total gross terms, about 2,000 people a 

year. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Minister, does your department have any statistical evidence on utilization of the 

hospital care system and the medicare system in Saskatchewan by those citizens in excess of 65 years? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, this utilization of physician and hospital services and in 1975, 23.7 per cent 

of volume of services rendered by physicians were provided to people over 65 and 40.5 per cent of total 

provincial hospital days were provided to people over 65. 

 

Mr. Collver: — 1975? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — 1975. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Do you have any later statistics than that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — That has not yet been analyzed but I can give you, if you are interested, some 

projections of what it is thought might be the case in 1985, which is looking quite some distance ahead. 

It is thought that about 27.9 per cent of volume of services rendered by physicians will be the case and 

46.2 per cent of total provincial hospital days. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Minister, I notice in the budget for your Department of Health that you have 

allocated some $255 million for 1978-79 to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. Could you 

indicate whether or not the $232 million estimated for 1977-78 is approximately on target? In other 

words, plus or minus one per cent either way – are you on target by the end of this month? Are you 

going to have spent for that plan approximately $232 million, plus or minus a couple of million either 

way? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The best I can do is to say ‘yes’. We are going to be underspent. There was that 

amount provided in the budget. There is going to be an underexpenditure. It’s difficult to calculate that 

at this particular time . . . The member goes like this . . . I don’t want to be making guesses when we are 

considering estimates. When the end of the year’s analysis is made we will be able to be pretty close in 

providing that information. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

773 

 

I might add to the member that this information, although it’s not up to the year that we are in, is always 

provided in the Public Accounts, so it is there. But, I’d rather not say approximately because that is 

guess work that I would prefer not to get into. I can assure the member though that indeed in spite of the 

criticisms that were made by some of the members of this House in the last year that we were 

underfunding the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and so on, that indeed less is going to be 

expended than was provided in last year’s budget. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well, Mr. Minister, since you are not prepared to provide us with any guess of whether 

or not the $232 million is a reasonable number, can we presume therefore that it won’t be over $232 

million, that’s what you’ve just said and that it could be less but you don’t know by how much, could we 

for the sake of these discussions have presume that $232 million in the year 1977-78 was the 

expenditure of the Department of Health on the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Minister, if my memory serves me right did not the Saskatchewan Hospitals 

Association just sign a contract with the employees of the Saskatchewan hospitals for a period of, I 

think, two years providing for something in the order of 13 per cent or 14 per cent increase in salaries. Is 

that approximately correct, is my memory correct on that? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — We’re not sure whether this is what the member is talking about but I am 

assuming he is talking about the Co-operative Wage Study, the job evaluation which was done by the 

Saskatchewan Health Care Association in conjunction with the Canadian Union of Public Employees. I 

don’t recall that ever being expressed in percentage terms but I do know that there is some retroactivity 

involved in meeting the requirements as provided by that negotiation study that took place. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Minister, what I am attempting to get at is that for the year 1978-79 the 

approximate increase in cost of employees for the Saskatchewan Hospital Association will be in the 

range of 13 per cent or 14 per cent over the year before, is that not correct? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — There are two components to this thing which the member has failed to point out. 

First of all the average wage increase for CUPE and SEIU last year as negotiated was 8 per cent, that 

was the average wage increase. The Co-op Study was on top of that with 3.7 per cent, for something like 

11 or close to 12 per cent. I guess that answers the member’s question. 

 

Mr. Collver: — What you are saying is that it is anticipated then that when I said 13 or 14 the correct or 

more approximate number would be 11 to . . . 12 per cent and I would guess that that would be correct. 

May I ask the minister and I am sure he has these numbers right there at his finger tips, what percentage 

of the $255 million expended on the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan represents wages and salaries 

and that kind of expenditure? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — About 75 per cent. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Now I wonder if the minister or one of his officials would just get a pencil and write 

down a few numbers for the elucidation, I’m sure, of the House and of 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

774 

 

the people of Saskatchewan. Seventy-five per cent of the $255 million represents the salaries and wages 

applicable to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. The other 25 per cent, I presume, is for contract 

work, for light, heat, plant equipment – that kind of thing. Of course the increase in power for hospitals 

has been in the range of 15 per cent, 18 per cent, an increase of 25 per cent in some instances, for 

electricity, and so on and so forth. So there have been substantial increases in that 25 per cent as well. 

Presumably 75 per cent, though, is wages. Those wages are going up some 11 to 12 per cent, in 

accordance with the minister’s own terminology and the other 25 per cent expenditure of the $255 

million for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services is for those kinds of items that have gone up more 

dramatically than the wages for the Saskatchewan hospital employees. I’m sure that the minister will 

agree that there has been a much more dramatic increase in expenditure for power, telephones and 

electricity and for other components of that 25 per cent. Certainly the private sector for the forthcoming 

year, as compared to the last year in contract amounts that are obtained by the Saskatchewan hospitals – 

it certainly is not anticipated that they are going to go down in value; they are going to go up, and 

probably by something in excess of 15 per cent. I think that is a most rational number, a most reasonable 

number to take. I’m sure the minister would agree with that. That is not going to go down. That 25 per 

cent is not going to go down as an amount for individual units of service provided in the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan. 

 

Now, what I cannot quite understand is that the minister says the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan 

has spent $232 million approximately, in the year ’77-’78. He said that the senior citizens of our 

province use approximately 40 per cent of the services provided by the Saskatchewan hospitals, to the 

people of Saskatchewan – about 40 per cent. That number is going up, he says. The number of senior 

citizens in our province is going to increase in the year ’78-’79, as opposed to ’77-’78, by some 2,000 

senior citizens or, an increase, if you like, in terms of percentage, of approximately two per cent. There 

will be two per cent more senior citizens in our province in ’78-’79 than there were in ’77-’78. The 

minister has allowed, in his budget, from the $232 million level, something less than a 10 per cent 

increase – something less, from $232 million to $255 million, just under the 10 per cent level. 

Employees who form 75 per cent of that cost are going up some 11 to 12 per cent but the overall 

increase is less than 10. The other 25 per cent component is going up, certainly by some 10 to 15 per 

cent. That’s a very reasonable estimate. Yet the overall increase for the Department of Health is going 

up less than 10 per cent. What I would like to ask the minister is this, does this indicate that the 

allocation to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan will be such that the level of service provided by 

Saskatchewan hospitals, to the people of Saskatchewan, will in fact deteriorate in ’78-’79 as compared 

to ’77-’78? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me inform the member that the number of patient days, 

for example, in the province for this coming year, are going to be up. There are provisions for that. We 

are going to make, as we have already done in Saskatchewan – as our hospitals have done in 

Saskatchewan, very efficient use of the dollars provided for health care and there indeed will not be any 

curtailment in services provided for health care, as there has not been in the past. 

 

Now, by some strange kind of logic, the member for Nipawin calculates, by using figures the way he 

chooses to use them, that somehow there is going to be curtailment. Somehow there is not going to be 

sufficient money provided in the Saskatchewan health budget to provide for our hospitals. Well, I want 

to tell the member that, just as there was in 1976 and just as there was in 1977, there is going to be a 

1978 adequate 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

775 

 

amount of dollars provided. We are providing in health care, in Saskatchewan an increase of some 9.5 

per cent in the budget. That’s a very significant and a very substantial increase provided, after taking all 

the things that the member talks about into consideration. That’s planning, that is what good 

management is all about. That is not shoeing in the dark and pulling figures out to be used to argue 

things like filthy hospitals as the Conservative members argued last year and things of that nature. I have 

some rather interesting information about that debate which maybe we’ll get back into yet in this session 

in the consideration of these Estimates. 

 

Let’s make a little bit of a comparison, Mr. Chairman. Let’s take a look at the 9.5 per cent increase that 

we’re providing to our health care programs in Saskatchewan and compare that to the 2.6 per cent which 

is being provided by the new Conservative government in the province of Manitoba – 2.6 per cent 

increase to the health care budget in the province of Manitoba! Now the member, I don’t know whether 

he talks to his colleague, the new Premier of Manitoba, Premier Lyon but he should, because obviously 

Conservatives think alike. There is likely a pretty good story that Saskatchewan people ought to know 

what would happen in this province if those gentlemen over there ever got elected. The member for 

Thunder Creek shakes his head in agreement, Mr. Chairman, which is a rather interesting sign. Let me 

tell the member, in case he doesn’t read newspapers very often that come from Manitoba that recently 

there is a great deal of concern because of this miserly 2.6 per cent increase which the Manitoba 

Conservative government is providing. It is indicated in the Winnipeg Free Press of March 25 (and I 

wish the member had been here yesterday because I wouldn’t have to repeat this again this afternoon) 

that there will be something in the magnitude of 1,000 hospital workers who will lose their jobs in the 

city of Winnipeg between now and Christmas because of the 2.9 per cent in additional money for 

operating expenses of health facilities that are being provided by that Conservative government in the 

province of Manitoba. I’m prepared to compare our 9.5 per cent to that kind of a situation. What about 

the province of Ontario which is supposedly much more wealthy than the province of Saskatchewan 

without providing an increase of some 4.5 per cent. The members in the Conservative caucus will get up 

and argue and say, oh, no, we would never put on deterrent fees. But as I said yesterday the action 

speaks louder than words. They should know, and the people of Saskatchewan do know, that every 

Conservative government has got deterrent fees. We have a Conservative government in Ontario that 

recently increased them by 37.5 per cent, so that families pay $528 a year for premiums; some of them 

pay greater amounts of health taxes regardless of whether their income is $80,000 or regardless whether 

they are able to get money from management associations or whatever company they may be able to 

run, or regardless whether they are earning $5,000. They still have to pay $528 a year. That’s an unjust 

tax and it’s got nothing to do with ability to pay and is a tax on health care. That is not the approach we 

are taking in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the member ought to know that. We are providing a 9.5 

per cent increase in health dollars for our health services in the province of Saskatchewan. I can assure 

the members of this House and I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that it is going to provide the 

kind of level of services that we have had and indeed it is going to provide some improvement because 

provisions in this budget are there to provide some very significant improvements, including an 

additional number of level IV beds, including funds to be provided for nursing homes where they have 

heavy care patients that right now they have to look after and need the additional funding to provide the 

services that they need. All of those things are being provided, a new day care hospital in the city of 

Moose Jaw to try some innovative and new approaches. Now the Neanderthal approach of those 

members opposite would say as the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland clearly enunciated yesterday here 

is that we should continue to run along 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

776 

 

merrily the way we have been doing. “Don’t do anything different. Don’t spend any money on 

prevention,” he said. “Don’t spend any money on prevention. Use that money and buy another 

machine.” You use that money and look after some more people who are going to get sick. Well I’m 

telling this House, Mr. Chairman, as I did last night that we believe there ought to be a broader range of 

services that we should be obligated to provide. Although we are prepared, as the record will show, to 

provide the kinds of services that we ought to provide with a high standard in our hospitals, we are also 

at the same time prepared to put some priorities on the prevention end of things and we will continue to 

do that. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, am I being recognized? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. The member for Nipawin. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

777 

 

Mr. Collver: — Thank you very much. I didn’t quite understand the minister’s reply to my, what I 

thought, rather simple question from a very simple person. Perhaps I will ask the question another way. 

Is the minister budgeting in the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan for fewer employees of the 

Saskatchewan hospitals? Are they allowing for fewer numbers of employees and if so, in what areas? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The answer to the question is, No. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Now, I am awfully sorry here, you have the same number of employees or more in the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Service Plan, is that correct? Is that correct, Mr. Minister? Under Saskatchewan 

Hospital Association there is either the same number of more in 1978-79 as there was in 1977-78? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can give the answer to some extent and indicate the kind of trends that are there. 

If the member had been here yesterday he would have known that all of the budgets have not been 

worked out with all of the hospitals; all of the budgets have not been finalized with the hospitals and I 

indicated that this would happen about the middle of April. I am not prepared to give him the precise 

figures but I think the record will show the kind of things that happen in health care in Saskatchewan. In 

1976 the actual staffing was 10,334.6 approved; in 1977 it was 10,406.2 approved and as I said, the 

figures for this year - I can’t give as precisely as that because all of the finalizations aren’t there but I 

can tell the member, as I told you before, that there is not a decrease. Now, I want to clarify one thing 

because it seems the member opposite is a little confused with the Co-op Wage Study and I did not 

explain quite as clearly as maybe I should have in response to one of his questions. Keep in mind that 

part of that Co-op Wage Study and the retroactivity portion of it is provided for and paid in the 1977-78 

budget so all of that does not carry over into 1978-79. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Certainly the minister would agree that the Co-op Study, the 3.7 per cent is an ongoing 

expenditure of the department and of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. So therefore the 3.7 per 

cent would be included in the following year, compared with this year. Now there might be whatever 

portion or small portion of the year that was retroactive in the current fiscal year, whatever small portion 

there might be, but that certainly wouldn’t apply in the forthcoming year. It would still be the same 

relationship so I think the 11 to 12 per cent that the minister earlier estimated was going to be the 

increased cost of wages in the year 1978-79, the minister sits shaking his head, that is not the correct 

number? That’s the number the minister gave me before, 11 to 12 per cent increase in the cost of wages 

for 1978-79 over 1977-78; are you changing the story now? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am not changing the story. I just want to clarify some more misinformation that 

the member has imagined. I want to point out that some of the positions in the Co-op Wage Study are 

red circled. Now, for the benefit of the member, so that he understands what that means; that means that 

as they are recruited and replaced in the future the increase may indeed be reduced to less than 3.7 per 

cent. So not necessarily does it mean that that 3.7 per cent carries Health totally through from 1977 to 

1978 and on.  

 

Mr. Collver: — The minister mentions the word ‘red-circled’ and I would assume that means the 

position, as it comes free, is going to be abolished. 

 

Is that not correct? 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

778 

 

It means the position is going to be downgraded? Does it mean the position is going to be downgraded? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — It is grandfathered as long as the incumbent is in it but when the new recruitment 

takes place for the position it will likely be recruited at a lower level. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, I am sorry; I just want to get absolutely clear what the minister is 

saying. You shake your head, Mr. Minister, if I am wrong in this because I just want to make sure that 

I’ve got it understood for myself. 

 

The minister approved 10,406 positions in 1977; the minister or the department approved somewhat less 

than that in 1976. The minister says that he is going to approve not less than 10,406 positions in the year 

1978. Am I correct so far? 

 

All right. So the number of employees is going to be the same. Now statistically in an organization as 

large as one with 10,000 employees I think the minister would agree with me that it’s not statistically 

significant that a few positions might be red-circled and that the grandfathers who come out are replaced 

with people who are less qualified and therefore less well paid. I am sure that the minister will agree that 

at the same time that that’s happening other people are growing in the civil service, moving into a new 

category and are developing higher paid jobs as it is going on. So statistically I think the minister could 

agree, that the 10,406 positions in 1977, would be constant. 

 

The minister has stated earlier (and has not changed his plea on this) that the cost of salaries is going to 

go up, approximately 11 to 12 per cent. Those salaries represent 75 per cent of the budget of the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. In addition to that the other 25 per cent is contract-type work and 

I am sure the minister will agree that the contract-type work and utilities and gas and electricity have not 

gone up any less and that they will not go up any less than 15 per cent. 

 

Now that has to mean, no matter how you cut it, no matter how you divide it up, that has to mean that 

the $255 million is going to be spread around on either fewer people or on less contract service. 

Somewhere there has got to be a cut because you can’t allocate 9.5 per cent increase overall when of the 

only two components of that $255 million, one is going up 11 or 12 and the other is going up 15. So 

there is no way that you could only go up 9.5. The level of service must in fact go down. What I am 

asking the minister is this, how can he possibly make the people of Saskatchewan believe that the 

allocation to health care services this year is not going to be less than last year, especially in the light of 

the minister’s stated objective of providing for more level IV beds? Now naturally the minister is 

suggesting he is going to provide more level IV beds to take up the slack of the people in level I to level 

III beds, primarily in level III who believe that they should be in level IV. He wouldn’t be going the 

other way. Oh no! Because this Department of Health and the Saskatchewan hospitals have been acting 

so efficiently I say to the man for Saskatoon Eastview . . . no, no, they have acted so efficiently says the 

minister in the last two years that no one is in a level IV or V bed today that should have been in a level 

V or VI. No one! The only differentiation (and the reason the minister says he is going to increase level 

IV beds) is that there are a number of communities – Davidson is a prime example, where very serious 

problems are occurring as a result of the lack of level IV beds. I am sure the member for Arm River (the 

Minister of Education) would certainly attest to that fact in the town of Davidson, that there was serious 

need there for level IV beds. I know that the minister has had petitions 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

779 

 

in this regard from the people of the town of Davidson to add to the number of level IV treatment beds 

in that area. 

 

It seems to us that you are saying, we are going to take up the slack of level IV into the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan. Level III, which the people have to pay a large chunk of themselves, they are the 

ones who will take the benefit of level IV. We are going to provide that, we’re going to add the same 

number of employees or more, we are going to increase their salaries 11 to 12 per cent and at the same 

time we are going to add 2,000 more older people in the province of Saskatchewan next year than last 

year and they use 40 per cent of the services, and at the same time we can do that with only 9.5 per cent 

more money. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that adds up. If you can possibly show how that adds up I would be 

more than happy to say, congratulations to you, in developing this kind of standard of health care. 

Congratulations to you for adding 9 ½ per cent. Governments who add only 2.6 per cent to their health 

care program don’t deserve to be called governments today. I believe that, Mr. Minister, I believe that 

there is a level of health care the people have come to expect in the province of Saskatchewan and they 

are entitled to receive it in a province like this. They are entitled to receive it but, Mr. Minister, you 

don’t get it both ways. You don’t get to say to the people of Saskatchewan, look at what a wonderful 

plan we are providing for you, we’re increasing here and there and everywhere, when in fact there isn’t 

an increase. I can say your 9 ½ per cent increase is certainly better than the 2.6 per cent that was added 

in Manitoba. I can say that, or $2.6 million, I can say that today and without fear of argument. But, but I 

say to you that at the same time in Manitoba they are saying, this is what we have to do with our hospital 

care system there and I’m not going to presume to speak about Manitoba because, quite frankly, the 

government of Manitoba was elected by the people of Manitoba and it is up to them to comment on the 

Manitoba situation. The fact of the matter is, you are trying to get it both ways. You are trying to say, 

we’re increasing the service, we’re increasing the allocation for our senior citizens and you’re not. You 

are in fact decreasing the service and increasing the problems for every hospital in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask you to explain how, please, how you can increase your budget by 9 1/2 but you increase the 

components of your budget by 11 or 12 or more? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the member is very nervous. The member for Nipawin, the Leader 

of the Conservative Party is very nervous about any reference that I or anybody else in this House makes 

to the disastrous record that is being so quickly established in the province of Manitoba by a 

Conservative government. 

 

Now, let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, why the member for Nipawin is so nervous. He is so nervous 

because the people of Saskatchewan in all the places he has been going around to have been telling him 

that they don’t believe him anymore. That’s why, Mr. Chairman. The people of Saskatchewan are telling 

the Conservative leader that they don’t believe him because of the lack of credibility he and his caucus 

have established in this House using the same kind of analysis, using the same kind of argument that the 

member has been using for the last half an hour or one hour in discussing the money that is being 

provided in the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan for our hospitals. And they know, as the record 

shows, that those arguments which they used in 1975 and used in 1976 and used in 1977 have been dead 

wrong, everyone of them. I’m telling you, Mr. Chairman, and this House, that once again the arguments 

that the member tries to use are going to be dead wrong because although he likes to play 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

780 

 

around with the smallest figure and apply it to circumstances as he chooses to apply it to, he used a 9.5 

per cent increase in the overall health care services while talking about the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan hospitals, he neglects to talk about the specifics. He neglects to talk about the fact that in 

the SHSP appropriation as well as the grant in assistance of clinical services provided by the medical 

education system which used to be in that position, there is indeed an increase in that field of 12 per 

cent. Now I would be interested in knowing why the member opposite chooses to ignore that figure 

which I am prepared to stand by as being an adequate provision of funds to maintain and indeed improve 

in some categories the services that are being provided by our hospitals in Saskatchewan as has been the 

case in other years. 

 

Now I can’t be responsible nor would I want to be responsible for his arithmetic. That’s his arithmetic 

and the people of Saskatchewan will have to judge on whether his arithmetic is the one that’s most 

credible or the record of what happens in health care in Saskatchewan in the coming year. And if you 

take the record of what happens in the health care in Saskatchewan in the coming year and compare to 

other years, anyone can argue and see pretty clearly if he wants to see that it’s the best record of 

anywhere or any province of Canada. 

 

The member talks about level IV beds and the need. Well, we recognize that need. I indicated last night 

that we have not been sitting idly by waiting for 1978 to provide an increase in level IV beds in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Since first elected in 1971 we have had a very substantial increase in the 

number of level IV beds in this province. Since 1973 we have increased the number from six hundred 

and some to over 1,100. So we have not been sitting idly by. Certainly we have not been using the 

technique that is being used in every Conservative province and the two Liberal provinces in Canada, 

right now, of cutting back. We are not providing funds that will lay off 1,000 workers in the hospital 

field in the city of Winnipeg alone. That is not going to happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1976 when those members used the same kind of arithmetic as the member for Nipawin used today, 

they said there were great massive cutbacks in numbers of health workers in the province. While they 

were using those arguments, the number of publicly supported health workers in the province increased 

by 898. Now if that is the kind of arithmetic the member wants to use, Mr. Chairman, he can use it and 

the people of Saskatchewan will judge on whether his arithmetic is credible or whether the performance 

of this government is credible. I maintain that the record of the government is much more credible than 

his arithmetic. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has asked for arithmetic so perhaps it is necessary to go 

through the arithmetic. I am sure the minister will, in fact, correct me if we are wrong. He was once a 

school teacher and I am sorry I don’t have a blackboard here that I could go through and do the problem 

that he suggests I do. 

 

Of the $232 million last year, 75 per cent of it was spent for wages, 75 per cent. That comes to 

approximately, more or less, $175 million. Is that correct, Mr. Minister, approximately, of the $232 

million? I will go on while the minister is checking with his advisors to see if 75 per cent of 232 is 174 

to 175. That is fine. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — $174 million. 

 

Mr. Collver: — $174 million. That was applicable to wages. Now the minister has stated, to this 

Assembly today, that the wages for the years 1978-79, with the 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

781 

 

adjustment in terms of percentage adjustment for inflation, plus the assessment that was done will 

amount to approximately 11 to 12 per cent. I would like to take the lowest number of that, or 11 per 

cent, and suggest to the minister that that is approximately $18 million. Would the minister object to that 

$18 million increase approximately, provided the number of employees stays exactly the same? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think, once again, the member in usual Conservative tradition twists and turns 

and puts out of context what I said. When I talked about the 11 or 12 per cent, I talked about last year. 

Well, don’t say that I talked about it for the coming year, which you just finished saying. It was 11 or 12 

per cent last year, which included the Co-operative Wage Study. We don’t anticipate that it will be quite 

that high this year. We don’t know that because the negotiations have not been completed. So you can’t 

argue on straight figures as you are attempting to do now with your kind of peculiar arithmetic. I am 

telling you that we have provided, in this budget, sufficient funds to make sure that the standard of 

services in the hospitals is adequate and that there will not be a reduction. 

 

I want to make another clarification on the Co-operative Wage Study, which was a 3.7 per cent increase 

last year. I mentioned earlier that that 3.7 per cent does not carry itself through into future years. Indeed, 

because of the red circling that increase goes only to 1.5 per cent and not 3.7 per cent. So you can’t use 

the arithmetic of the member opposite of taking some figures out of the air and adding them up and 

saying well this is what is going to happen. The difference between his analysis, as is usually the case, 

and the difference between the analysis by this government and the spokesmen by this government, is 

that we prefer to deal in the facts, not in the figment of the imagination, as the member opposite does. 

 

Mr. Collver: — The minister has a great tendency to use the word sufficient and use the word adequate. 

The purpose of this Committee of Finance is to determine whether it is sufficient and to determine 

whether it is adequate. Your mere statement that it is sufficient or that it is adequate is not sufficient for 

the people of Saskatchewan. They want you to prove those words, sufficient and to prove the word, 

adequate. All I am asking you to do is to tell me then if you want to go another way. 

 

You allowed for $174 million for SHSP employees last year. How much are you allowing for increase 

for employees through the SHSP grants? How much money? (Inaudible interjection). I will say it again. 

How much increase are you allowing on the $174 million for the SHSP employees for the forthcoming 

year? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I want again to reiterate what I said about the fact that negotiations 

have not been completed. Therefore, I want to help the member and provide some of the answers that he 

is asking for. If he can’t understand, through a discussion across the floor, some of the figures that I have 

been providing him (that we can provide), I will ask my people to provide an analysis and a comparison 

between last year and what is projected for this year and we will put it down on paper and provide it for 

him. As soon as we can do that, you will get it and you can take a look at it. You will get the data. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has budgeted, for the coming year, under the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan, some $255 million. The minister has said that approximately 75 per cent of that 

figure is wages – approximately – he already has said that today. 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

782 

 

Mr. Mostoway: — Those are management fees. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Well, if you want to call them management fees, Mr. Member from Saskatoon Centre, 

you may call them anything you like, but the people will understand what you are trying to do. The point 

is, Mr. Minister, you allowed for a number. All we want to know is what number did you allow for? We 

don’t need an analysis, you have it right in front of you! You allowed for a budgeted number in the 

forthcoming year, ’78-’79. What did you allow for? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the total increase in the health budget of 9.5 per cent and an 

increase of 12 per cent in hospital care. What the member wants me to do, Mr. Chairman, is give some 

kind of a figure which will somehow be tagged a salary. I am telling the member and this House that 

negotiations are going on and I am not prepared to prejudice these negotiations by giving him some 

figure about what might be in there for salaries. I am telling the member what the figures are for the 

provisional health budget – they are adequate as they have been in other years, and when the 

negotiations are completed, we will know what the requirement is. Our anticipation is, that there are 

sufficient funds to be able to cover all the needs that will be made through the hospitals. 

 

Mr. Collver: — I would like to ask the minister one question. Is his hedging on these questions the 

reason why the SHSP reports for 1977 is not yet in our hands? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, no. The report has got nothing to do with the question that we are talking 

about here, as the member well knows, and it was debated in this House last year’s legislation, in 

agreement across Canada to bring uniformity in the fiscal years of hospitals and hospital budgeting, and 

because this is the adjustment year, that report is not yet tabled, but it will be tabled, as was clearly 

outlined during the debate on the provisions to the bill, which made the changes. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, because of the minister’s response today, I would like to make a motion, 

seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, that this committee no longer examine the health 

care estimates, until the report from SHSP is tabled. I ask the member for Indian head if he would write 

it out. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to support that motion and stand on it and I would also 

like to do something else. The minister’s refusal . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! I wonder if I could have that motion in writing please. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to suggest that the minister turn around and either 

put up or shut up. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Now the Department of Municipal Affairs, everybody knows what the grants are. 

Last year we heard the minister stand on his feet and say it was adequate and sufficient and University 

Hospital . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! I am not listening to those guys, we are just waiting for the motion . . . 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

783 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — You mean I have to speak to the motion after it is put, is that what you are saying, 

Mr. Chairman? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Yes. I am just waiting for the page girl to bring it over and I will let you talk right 

away. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I know that the lawyer from the back bench is always right, but 

there has been no motion put. He said he was going to make a motion, but he has put no motion. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — He moved a motion and I am merely waiting for the page girl to bring it over and 

when it gets here I am going to have to look to make sure it is in order and then I am going to let you 

talk to it if it is. 

 

I find the motion in order. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, I want to speak just very briefly to the motion. 

 

First of all, it has been a rather strange performance. First of all there is no question about that we have 

been unable to get any information. It is the first time the Department of Health estimates have ever 

been introduced in this Assembly before hospital boards have had an approved budget. Never before in 

the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is rather interesting that health estimates were put forward early in this session of the Legislature, 

rather than at the end when the SHSP report would have been approved and when hospitals in the 

province of Saskatchewan would have been given information as to their budgets. 

 

The performance of the minister, in suggesting that in the allocation of $255 million to the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan he does not have an amount stipulated for salaries, is an insult to 

his department because the government and Treasury Board is certainly not going to approve $255 

million unless it is earmarked for a specific purpose and the minister knows it. 

 

The minister also knows that he has a responsibility in this Assembly to answer questions relating to the 

fiscal policy of his department and the spending and the expenditures of the funds of that particular 

department. There is absolutely no excuse for denying the member for Nipawin the amount of money, 

the $255 million that is earmarked for salaries. No reason, absolutely and whether the negotiations are 

finished or not, every year there is a certain amount earmarked for salaries and negotiations are still 

going on. So the minister knows that as well as anybody else. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want to suggest to the minister that in order to prove to this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan that there is adequate information, that he support this particular motion and all the 

members support it and until such time as that information is made available to all the members of the 

House and to hospital boards particularly so that there will be an opportunity for hospital boards to 

determine whether or not there is sufficient and adequate money to look after it. The minister says, we 

have increased the number of patient-days. But does that mean that the patient-days are the same in 

every hospital? He says that the number of employees is the same. Does that mean that the approved 

cost for employees’ salaries in each hospital is the same as last year? Certainly, as the member for 

Nipawin indicates, if they are expanding 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

784 

 

the services, if they expanded the number of patient-days, if they are including level IV care, there is 

going to be a reallocation of the resources of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. No question 

about it . . . a reallocation of those resources, to other hospitals, to level IV institutions or wherever those 

resources may be needed according to the program of the Department of Health. 

 

Right now the minister stood up here and asked us to approve a budget of some $255 million, plus all of 

the rest of the Department of Health, without any information, without any information going out to the 

hospital boards themselves and he uses that, and if the former minister will recall that last year when he 

put that act through, I indicated to him that this very situation would exist this year. That is all I am 

saying, Mr. Minister – say to you that I hope everybody will support this resolution. We can stand item 1 

right here for the Department of Health. There will be no difficulty. Call another department, bring that 

department in and April 1, after the SHS report is completed and in our hands, we could turn around 

then and proceed with the Department of Health estimates. Surely to heavens, the government does not 

expect us to proceed with the kind of information that is now available. As I said last night, these 

estimates are a farce, and they are a farce because not only have you not divided the SHS report – 

hospitals have not had the budgets approved and you are even refusing to give information about the 

basic budget you have allocated and that your department has presented to the Treasury Board. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 

Hon. Jean Chretien 
 

Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Chairman, we have a distinguished visitor with us 

this afternoon and I would like to introduce him to the members of this Legislature. I am pleased to be 

able to introduce the Hon. Jean Chretien, the federal Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Chretien has been in western Canada and he dropped over to Regina to see me 

and discuss some problems of mutual interest and mutual concern, particularly in respect to the 

Canadian economy and the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.H. Penner (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could join the minister in 

welcoming the Minister of Finance. We noticed that you are seated on the wrong side of the House; 

however you are welcome to come and join us here. I would also like to say that I hope that your 

expertise in the finance field rubs off on the Minister of Finance in Saskatchewan during your time here. 

 

Mr. R.L. Collver (Leader of the Conservative Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to 

join, with other members of the Assembly, in welcoming the Minister of Finance to the Assembly. He is 

either on the right side of the House over there or on the right side of the House over here. I cannot 

really recall any time he has ever been on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. E.L. Tchorzewski (Minister of Health): — Mr. Chairman, may I also, while I am on my feet, 

extend a welcome to the Hon. Mr. Chretien to the Saskatchewan 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

785 

 

Legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, just a brief comment on sort of the things that the member from the Conservative 

caucus and the member from the Liberal caucus are trying to do with this resolution. I find it rather 

interesting that when it comes to this kind of thing – when it comes to trying to make some kind of 

politics on issues that should not be even relevant, the Liberals and Conservatives can very quickly 

unite, as they have done in this resolution. But what the member for Nipawin and, surprisingly enough 

supported by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, are attempting to do, is prevent the passage of the 

health appropriations in the Legislature until the summer because the annual report, as the members well 

know will not be ready until some time in June. That should be no surprise to them; that should not be a 

surprise to the members opposite, Mr. Chairman, because last year when we had legislation changing the 

year from the calendar year to the fiscal year which is brought about in order to bring uniformity across 

Canada, the members opposite supported it. Now, after they have supported it last year and knowing 

what the implications of that were going to be, they get up in this House and they say we should not 

proceed with the Health estimates until the annual report which obviously would have different times, is 

tabled in the House. So, Mr. Speaker, the logic of their arguments in that respect fail to convince me as I 

hope they will convince every other member of this House. I would ask the members of this House to 

defeat that motion on that particular resolution. 

 

Now let me give you some information on the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and the timetable 

for making budget allocations to hospitals. On September 1 the plan determines the number of patient 

days approved for each hospital and advises the hospital of the number by September 1. Each hospital is 

then in a position to prepare its budget on the basis of approved patient days. From September 1 to 

December 31 each hospital prepares and submits its operating budget by the due date of December 31. 

From January 1 to March 15 each hospital budget is reviewed by the plan on the basis of providing a 

reasonable level of funding for the volume and type of service the hospital is expected to provide. From 

March 15 to March 31 while the greater proportion of this review which I have mentioned above is 

carried out before March 15, it is not finalized until the Health Department estimates are approved by 

the Legislature. What the members here want is to stall that even further and not approve the estimates. 

From April 1 to April 15 each hospital’s budget is finalized at which time each hospital is advised of its 

budget allocation including the approved number of staff. That is the timetable – that is the timetable 

that Saskatchewan hospitals know and clearly understand and accept and support. 

 

There is no question from people on hospital boards and there is no question from people who are in the 

administration of our hospitals about this. There only appears to be a question in the minds of the Leader 

of the Conservative party and the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. I don’t know why they don’t talk 

to at least those hospitals that they represent in their constituencies so that they would understand what 

the circumstances really are. 

 

The member for Indian Head-Wolseley when he got up, made a comment which is completely 

inaccurate. He said that this is the first time the estimates of the Department of Health have been before 

this Legislature before the hospital board – before all of the budgets have been finalized for all of the 

hospital boards. Well I want to put it on the record and make it clear to this House, Mr. Chairman, that 

that is not correct. This is not the first time. In fact, it is not an uncommon kind of circumstance or 

development. The member once, I understand from reading some history of this Legislature was the 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of health, the hon. Mr. Steuart. During that time 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

786 

 

when he was a Legislative Secretary there were incidents when indeed the estimates were considered 

before those finalizations were made and he should remember that before he makes that kind of a 

statement. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think I have said enough about this issue and I would urge the members of this House 

to defeat that particular motion. 

 

Mr. Collver: — Mr. Chairman, if I might just briefly comment on what the minister has just said to the 

members of this Assembly and including the members on his own side of the House. What he has said 

is: look take us on faith, take us on faith alone. We are the executive branch of government. I am the 

Minister of Health, says the minister. He says, take us on faith. Now the minister knows and knows very 

well, that if he wants to allocate a temporary allocation towards this budget, a month to month 

allocation, the Minister of Finance brings forward a bill to that effect and there is no problem insofar as 

the Saskatchewan hospitals are concerned. None whatsoever. The minister knows perfectly well that 

there is no possible way to examine the estimates for ’78-’79 when you haven’t got the information from 

’77 for $255 million out of $420 million of your budget, or almost 70 per cent of your budget. There is 

no way for any member whether he is on this side of the House or that side of the House to make any 

kind of an accurate assessment of the performance of the minister. Therefore, what you have to say is 

when he uses words like ‘red circled’, when he uses words like ‘sufficient’ and ‘adequate’, you have to 

take his word for it. Now surely, that’s not the purpose of estimates. Surely that’s not the purpose of any 

of us being here. Surely we are here to examine what the Minister of health is a very significant portion 

of the entire provincial budget is planning to do for the forthcoming year. Mr. Chairman, I want every 

member of this Assembly to understand something. Without an examination of the SHSP report and 

without an understanding of what the minister may be doing in the forthcoming year, the members 

opposite could be damning many citizens of Saskatchewan to receiving inadequate health care. We as 

legislators, we as individual legislators are responsible to our constituents that it is maintained and 

improved. The minister is saying to this Assembly, for administrative reasons, because it might be in 

June or whenever, and I suggest to the minister that if his department if they got working, could get the 

SHSP report out a heck of a lot before then. If they got working and took it as a priority item, they could 

get that report into our hands. What we are saying to the people of Saskatchewan is if we defeat this 

motion we are prepared to take this young man on face value for over a quarter of the budget of the 

people of Saskatchewan, we are prepared and for more than 60 per cent of his own budget. He is a new 

minister to this department. Why wouldn’t the members opposite sitting in the back benches want to 

examine this absolutely essential part of their constituency – that their constituency insists on – before 

taking this minister at face value with words like adequate and sufficient. I ask the members of this 

Assembly to consider carefully what you could be doing to your own constituents without a proper 

examination of the report of SHSP before allocating this budget. There is no reason why it can’t be 

done; none whatsoever. A monthly allocation could be made, as I have said before, by the Minister of 

Finance and the department would have sufficient to meet the needs of the hospital. I say to the 

members of this Assembly, for goodness sake, for the sake of the health of the people of your area pass 

this motion and postpone the estimates until the minister brings down his report. 

 

Mr. Penner: — I think that in the last remarks of the minister there is added truth of the need for this 

motion to be passed by the House. He has expected us to sit and accept what he says and I invite 

members to reflect upon that in the light of the statement that the minister made a moment ago and 

having come from the portfolio of Education, he 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

787 

 

ought to know better, when he indicated that there was no way that money could be allocated to hospital 

boards until the estimates have been passed. Now that is pure and utter nonsense. In Municipal Affairs 

the money has been allocated and people know exactly where they stand; rural councils, municipal 

councils, they know what the grants are that they are going to get this year. They know what the grants 

are. In the Department of Education, school boards know what the grants are going to be; they know 

darned close what the grants are going to be and you know that as well as I do. You know full well that 

that system has worked well; school boards have an indication of where they are going to stand 

financially; municipal councils have an indication and know where they are going to stand financially; 

there is no reason in the world why hospital boards ought not to know where they stand financially and 

have an indication of their funding. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Chairman, what the Minister of Municipal Affairs says is accurate. It is an 

estimate. There is absolutely no reason why the Department of Health can’t give hospital boards an 

estimate as well. When the minister turns around and says that the hospitals haven’t had a budget 

approved occasionally in years. I can remember when the session started the 20th of January, I am sure 

that that is true but they are given an estimate and the people and members of this Assembly were given 

estimates and they certainly were given information, not the denial of information that the minister is 

trying to find excuses for justifying. 

 

Mr. R.H. Bailey (Rosetown-Elrose): — I hear, during the course of this discussion, some statements 

from the Minister of Municipal Affairs saying they are only estimates and so on. Mr. Minister, if that be 

true, I think that the government of the day should perhaps be taken to task for some false advertising 

then, for this reason: You pick up a paper, Leader-Post. The first thing I see in the advertising of this 

government was, this is the name of the town, this is what they got last year and this is what they are 

getting this year. 

 

Now the first thing I would like to take the government to task on is that that is false advertising on the 

first score because what they are doing is they are taking the grant last year and not mentioning any of 

the ancillary grants and this year taking the revenue grants and including everything in it. That is false 

advertising and this government has to be taken to count on that. 

 

I challenge the minister, during this particular time, when you say that things are only estimates, if those 

school boards out there today – many of them this week formulated their budget and passed their budget 

and set their mill rate – if the statements which they receive on the amount of the grant that is going to 

be paid to them is only an estimate, the whole purpose which I went through yesterday was a farce 

simply because if it is estimates there is no degree of assurance at all that that is the amount of money 

being given. Let’s get something straightened out here. The minister is having extreme difficulty. I am 

referring to the Minister of health, is having extreme difficulty because, as a matter of fact, what has 

happened is that he hasn’t prepared himself to come to this House with estimates. He is totally 

unprepared; totally unprepared. There has to be some other branch of the government, there has to be 

some other department that is prepared to come to the Assembly and answer the questions from the 

opposition. If you are not prepared to do so, let’s move to another department. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is no point in going through more and more of this rhetoric at this time because the 

minister hasn’t got his budget in order, he hasn’t got his estimates in order and if they are not in order 

we can’t proceed. All this motion does, Mr. Chairman, 



 

March 29, 1978 
 

788 

 

is to provide the minister with the opportunity to get himself in order to come to this House, to get his 

homework done. That is all it’s asking for. I suggest to the members who are sitting in the back to 

support the motion. Otherwise, if we can’t get the answers, if we can’t get the estimates, we are going to 

be here a long, long time. For the Minister of Municipal Affairs to bring up the estimates fixed to the 

RM, I’ll come back to this, sir, on this false advertising of this government. I’m going to draw not just 

one case to the attention of this House but I’ll draw a dozen cases to the attention of this House where 

you are falsely advertising at the present time, absolutely false advertising stating that town ‘X’ got 

$17,000 last year and this year is getting, $34,000, but you failed to mention the auxiliary grants that 

was last year. That’s false advertising. The Minister of Consumer Affairs should concern himself with 

this. If a private organization in Saskatchewan did that type of advertising you’d be down on their throat 

right away, you would jump right on it. But this government can be false advertising, all kinds of it. 

How much did it cost, a big shot in the Leader-Post? You know that famous back bench lawyer over 

there that has never contributed anything intelligent to this House so far is now giving us some more of 

the same thing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the very paper that the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy) is reading 

there’s an ad in there which is false advertising. If the Minister of health cannot at this particular time, if 

he hasn’t got his budget prepared, if his estimates aren’t there, if the division isn’t there and the 

expenditures of his funds then we should support the motion; let him go with his consultants, come back 

into this House so that we can discuss it. I beg everyone in this Assembly to support this motion at this 

particular time. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 16 
 

Wiebe Clifford Ham 

MacDonald Collver Berntson 

Penner Larter Lane (Sa-Su) 

Anderson Bailey Wipf 

McMillan Birkbeck Katzman 

Nelson (As-Gr)   

 

NAYS — 27 
 

Blakeney Robbins Cowley 

Thibault MacMurchy Tchorzewski 

Smishek Mostoway Shillington 

Messer Banda Vickar 

Snyder Whelan Nelson (Yktn) 

Byers Kaeding Allen 

Kramer Dyck Koskie 

Baker McNeill Johnson 

Matsalla Rolfes Lusney  

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:06 o’clock p.m. 

 


