



















































Hansard: March 13, 1979


503 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 

Tuesday, March 13, 1979. 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. D.F. McARTHUR (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of this Assembly, sitting in the Speaker's gallery, 60 students from 

Lakeview School — students attending Grade 8 classes at Lakeview School. They are accompanied by 

their teachers, Dr. Ochitwa and Mr. Cuthbert. I might also add that they are accompanied by two 

teaching interns, Miss Winter and Miss Hebert. 

 

As some of you may know, Lakeview School has the distinction of being the school that is in the closest 

proximity to this Assembly, located approximately five blocks straight west of this building. The two 

Grade 8 classes are visiting our Assembly as part of their social studies program. They have been 

studying Canadian government and Canadian politics and are visiting here as part of that program. 

 

I am sure that all members will join with me in wishing them an enjoyable time here at the legislature, 

and a good trip back to their school. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I too have a school from my 

constituency visiting us in Regina. Lakeview may be the closest school to the Legislative Buildings. I 

can't say that St. Marys in Saskatoon is the farthest but certainly the students have come quite a distance. 

 

It is a Grade 8 class numbering approximately 23. They are sitting in the west gallery, I believe. They 

are accompanied, and I hope I pronounce the names accurately (I may not) by their teacher, Mr. Greg 

Seipp, and intern, Mr. Hunks and two parents, Mrs. Steiner and Mr. Sawchuk. 

 

St. Marys belongs to the separate school system in Saskatoon, one of the oldest and best reputed 

separate schools, elementary schools in the entire school system. I welcome the students, their teachers 

and supervisors to Regina and I hope they have an entertaining and informative day. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Moneys advanced from Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — I have a question to the Premier. As the Premier 

is no doubt aware, there is no interest paid on the moneys that are advanced from the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund to the Crown corporations such as Sask Potash and the Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation. Because of this failure to pay interest, how would the Premier categorize that 

particular investment in equity, as a 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

504 

long-term investment or a short-term investment? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I think the report of, let's say the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, refers to it as an equity investment. It refers to it in the equity section of 

the liability side of the balance sheet rather than the indebtedness portion of that side. Whether or not it 

will prove to be long-term, I think, depends upon whether or not it is decided to convert that type of 

investment into either shares which will indicate a long-term investment or some interest bearing form 

of indebtedness, debenture or bond which will indicate a short term. I think that no final decision has 

been taken on those matters at this time. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. The Premier will know that long-term 

also refers to bonds and interest bearing bonds and debentures, if they are repayable after anything more 

than one year. That is referred to, I'm sure he recognizes, as a long-term investment. Since it is shown as 

equity in the financial statements of the Potash Corporation and of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation) would the Premier not agree that it should be categorized, at least now, as a 

long-term investment. If it is converted to shares it is a long-term investment. If it is converted to bonds 

or debentures repayable in more than one year, it is still a long-term investment. Therefore, it is a 

long-term investment. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question. I hope the Assembly will bear with me on this one. I just 

have one or two quotations to make on the supplementary question. On April 27, 1978, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan stated as follows, when The Heritage Fund Act was being introduced: 

 

This bill will also greatly strengthen legislative control over revenue from non-renewable resources. It 

will require that the Legislative Assembly approve the budget for the expenditures and for the long-term 

investments. 

 

From April 27, 1978, quoting from the Minister of Finance when he introduced The Heritage Fund Act: 

 

This leads me to the third major purpose of the legislation, that is, to provide a greater degree of 

legislative control over the expenditures and investments made from the fund. 

 

All expenditures and long-term investments of the fund except the $26 million statutory appropriation 

will be subject to the approval of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I ask the Premier today, why is the legislature of Saskatchewan being precluded from approving the 

long-term investments in the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation and the SMDC and others from the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund? As he is no doubt aware, the estimates for this year and last year 

specifically exclude those non-interest bearing advances from those amounts to be voted upon. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I simply don't agree with the hon. member. I refer the hon. member 

to page 118 of the estimates which are before him which are the investments. For the purpose of easy 

description they have been called long-term investments from the heritage fund. Note that with the 

Potash Corporation of 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

505 

Saskatchewan, the proposal is for $13,400,000 — to be voted by the legislature. With the Saskatchewan 

Mining Development Corporation $78,700,000 — loans, advances and investments to be voted — 

$78,700,000. Those in fact are the proposals. That is the instrument whereby this legislature decides 

whether or not money should be moved from the heritage fund to the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, or the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, or the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation as the case may be. The three on that page are I think, clear and each provides that the 

money is to be voted. 

 

Grants for Medical Research 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. 

Recently the minister announced a $750,000 health or medical research fund was being set up in 

Saskatchewan. Since, in Alberta there has been announced a $300 million grant towards a medical 

research facility and a $30 million annual operating grant for this facility, can the minister indicate to 

this House whether or not he has had, or will have, discussions with his counterparts in Alberta to avoid 

duplication or to enhance the dovetailing of these research projects? 

 

HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the member and 

the House that I have not had discussions with the minister in Alberta. I did not know what their election 

campaign plans were going to be. Obviously that was an announcement that was made during their 

campaign. Certainly I am most happy to discuss the funds that are available with anybody in Canada. 

We have been doing so and will do so with the funding available at the federal level. I don't know what 

the purpose or how the Alberta fund is going to operate. I am sure that it is likely meant to provide 

funding for research in the province of Alberta. But we will be interested in what they are doing, as we 

are interested in what we are doing. I just want to also reply to the comment the member makes about 

the $750,000 which is the initial funding for the Saskatchewan Health Research Fund. I will be 

explaining in a very few days how the fund will be developed so that it is much more substantial over a 

period of time, when I introduce the legislation that will establish the health research board. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Alberta fund is in fact an international 

research centre and I am sure they will welcome your participation. Has the minister given any 

consideration as to what might have to be done if, as is likely to happen, we have a Saskatchewan brain 

drain and all our top researchers go to this lucrative facility in Alberta? Since the minister has indicated 

that there has been no discussion as it relates to this dovetailing — and proportionately I think it is better 

described as a hummingbird meshing with a peacock — could the minister indicate whether this 

$750,000 is a serious venture into the area of medical research or is it just for transportation costs to 

truck our people to Alberta to do the work? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, it is, indeed, a most serious venture in health research by this 

government in Saskatchewan which is something we committed in the last provincial election. I want 

the members of the House to be informed that this research fund that we are putting into place in this 

province has not been developed in isolation but has been developed in very close consultation and 

discussions with research people in the province, with all kinds of organizations such as the medical 

association and hospital association and so, therefore, it is not just a government proposal. It is a 

proposal that has been put together with the good advice of all of these 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

506 

other people which I have mentioned. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — A supplementary to the minister. You have indicated that you have 

discussed this matter with research people in the province of Saskatchewan. How do you account for the 

reference in one of the daily newspapers the other day about a research fellow at the University of 

Saskatchewan who refused to have his name made public, who thought it was totally inadequate given 

the funding given by the province of Alberta and, in fact, it looks like this amount was a surprise to the 

researchers in the province of Saskatchewan, indicating the fact that you haven't discussed it with people 

involved in medical research? 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I hesitate to comment on the comments that come second 

hand from someone who refused to have his name exposed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — How does one reply to that kind of a question? I can assure the members as 

I have assured them already that we, indeed, have had extensive consultations. We did write under my 

hand and from me to all kinds of organizations indicating what we had in mind and asking them to make 

submissions. They made those submissions and we had personnel in the Research and Planning Branch 

of the Department of Health follow up with further discussions. If this gentleman that the member for 

Qu'Appelle talks about has a point of view I would suggest he had an opportunity to express it to the 

study group which we had established. 

 

Contact Federal Authority regarding Rapist 

 

MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. 

Have you or your department made any representation to the federal authority concerning the rape 

which was committed in Regina recently by a convicted rapist out on a pass and of a subsequent 

conviction, as reported in the Leader Post January 27, 1979? 

 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, no, my department hasn't but I 

think she is directing that question to the wrong minister. 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — I'll ask the Attorney General. Has your department made any representation to the 

federal authority concerning the recent rape which was committed in Regina by a convicted rapist out on 

a weekend pass and of a subsequent conviction as reported? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Have you 

made representation? Have you expressed the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would have to have the hon. member 

give me details as to the incident, the name of the person, what institution it was, is it a Saskatchewan 

federal institution, in this province or outside the province, before we can answer that. She might, also, 

be kind enough to indicate whether she has made any representations to the federal authorities. 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Attorney General, what I am trying to say is that I believe that your 

department should make representation to the federal authorities expressing the concern of the 

law-abiding people of Saskatchewan, that we will not tolerate this so-called 'pass' system within the 

penal system. Do you not agree? 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

507 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, apart from the fact that I thought question period was to ask 

of ministers matters which are within their administrative and other areas of responsibility, I don't know 

where the federal correction system is under that. I agree with the hon. member that we are all outraged 

that any kind of a criminal offence takes place. I think that there is a proper avenue for remedy of this 

and that is the Court of Criminal Law and the submissions made to the Court of Criminal Laws with 

respect to the penalties. I need more information before I would make any specific observation in that 

specific case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Weekend Passes for Rapists 

 

MR. LANE: — A new question to the Attorney General. A serious incident happened when a convicted 

rapist was out on a weekend pass, in January of this year — the information was given and it was 

indicated by the hon. member that in fact this was a weekend pass from the federal penitentiary, not 

provincial. Do you not feel that you have an obligation as the minister responsible for the administration 

of justice, to make representations to the government in Ottawa as to the criteria they have used for 

weekend passes, which allows such a convicted rapist, out at large, to cause similar offences. Don't you 

figure that you have an obligation as minister responsible for the administration of justice? God, you 

can't pass it off! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to have the hon. member for Qu'Appelle (Mr. 

Lane) table, for this legislature, what representations he, as an elected member of the Legislative 

Assembly, has made to the federal authorities on this particular issue. I would also appreciate, since the 

hon. Leader of the Conservatives is directing his member to stay out of it, maybe the Leader of the 

Conservative Party would get into it and tell us what submissions he has made on this particular matter. 

Table the letters and we will see what the situation is. I would advise you to stay out of it. 

 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Attorney General, if you want us to take the 

responsibility for governing this province, which we could do a lot better, why don't you just come over 

to this side? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

Representations to Federal Authorities 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — A new question, then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is the Attorney General telling this Assembly that it is not the responsibility of the Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan, the chief law enforcement officer of Saskatchewan, to make representations to the 

federal government when he believes that there has been a serious affront to the administration of justice 

by someone out on a weekend pass committing the same crime again right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that the PCs treat this as a very laughing matter but I don't. 

I want to tell them this, Mr. Speaker. I want to see the leader of the PC's letter to the Minister of Justice 

and the Solicitor General. I'd like them to table that and then I'll be prepared to table what 

representations I have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

508 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, this show of lack of respect for the decorum and the law and order 

of this House is very unbecoming for the PC opposition on such an important issue. My position is that 

when an individual commits an offence against the criminal law of the country the remedy is to deal 

with that individual before the criminal courts of the country. The submissions as to whether or not day 

passes, or the pass system of the federal penitentiary system is adequate or not is something which a lot 

of us have representations and feelings about. But the fact of the matter is that the key area of resolving 

the problem is before the courts and the criminal law. 

 

That's the position that I take generally. I would like to see the specific case before me before I give any 

specific answer. I would like to know the names, the dates and the details before I could answer whether 

or not any submission has been made by my department to the federal authorities. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I'll ask a new question. Mr. Speaker. Since the Attorney General has refused to 

answer my first question, which was whether he takes the responsibility, is it now the Attorney General's 

position that it is not the Attorney General's responsibility to make representations to the federal 

government? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I'll take a new question. 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Would you not agree, Mr. Attorney General, that it is necessary to eliminate the 

so-called pass system for serious offenders within the penal system in order to protect society, or do you 

wait until a rapist gets out and mutilates a child and then take action? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

Sales Tax — Student Notebooks and Pornographic Material 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of 

Finance. Under the existing taxation policies of the province the government does not tax magazines or 

periodicals, including pornographic reading materials. But there is a tax on such items as student 

notebooks and other school supplies. Do you not feel that the NDP policy priorities are misplaced in this 

area, particularly in the International Year of the Child? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I think that perhaps the hon. member 

might direct that question to the Minister of Revenue (Mr. Robbins). I'm not the minister responsible for 

that particular area. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — A supplementary, I believe that you're in charge of the taxation policies of this 

government and I would like you to answer the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, fine, 

I'll have the Minister of Revenue answer the question. I want an answer to this question from one of you 

gentlemen. 

 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue): — Would you please repeat the question? 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Under the existing taxation policies of the province, the government does not tax 

magazines and periodicals including pornographic reading materials but there is a tax on such items as 

student notebooks and other school supplies. Do you not feel that the NDP policy priorities are 

misplaced in this area particularly in this International Year of the Child? 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

509 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that we've removed E & H tax from printed materials 

generally. Supplies to go to school are still taxable but I must inform the member that we are in the 

process of a complete study of the E & H tax. We intend to make revisions in that act at the appropriate 

time. That study will not be complete for perhaps six or eight months. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker. Will you then give me a firm assurance that you will 

consider putting a tax on the pornographic material and removing it from the school supplies? I think 

you must agree this has to be in the best interest of students and that you as a government have some 

responsibility in this aspect. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I'm no more a supporter of pornographic supplies than the member 

for Indian Head-Wolseley. The point that I think should be made clear to this House is that tax was 

removed from printed materials. We don't make the decisions with respect to the supplies that will come 

into the corner drugstore, etc. It was a flat rule change in the E & H tax which removed the tax from 

printed supplies. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Are you trying to suggest to this Assembly 

that you cannot place a specific tax — E & H tax — by rewriting the regulations on pornographic 

materials? Are you suggesting to this House that it is impossible to write the regulations in such away 

that E & H tax applies to pornographic literature alone and such publications as Playboy and Penthouse 

and not such publications as Time magazine, Macleans and other magazines? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, I'm suggesting that's impossible. 

 

Provincial Government Employees' Salaries 

 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — I believe I should be directing my question to the Minister of 

Finance but in case it is not the right minister, would the rest of you please listen so that one of you can 

answer it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — How do you explain the average provincial government employees' annual salary 

earnings at $18,740 as compared to the provincial average salary at $13,380? Why the difference 

between the provincial sector and the private sector? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether the hon. member can refer me to the source 

because I am not familiar with sort of two averages. After all, the public employees will be part of the 

provincial average and I don't know what source, if you can direct me to it, maybe I might be able to 

help him. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I'd be very happy to direct the minister to the source. The source of 

the provincial government is from your own estimates of 1978-79 and the source for the average is from 

Canadian Statistical Review, January 1979, page 55, table 15, from the library. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the publication but since he's now referred to it, I'd 

like to examine it and see whether I can give him an answer. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

510 

Gas Line Breaks 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the member for Estevan 

asked questions of me yesterday — I took them as notice — pertaining to gas blowouts in the Steelman 

plant. The blowouts did occur, Mr. Speaker. We have not been able to conclusively identify the reason 

for the blowout, although we suspect that it was either because of a malfunction in a regulator or a 

regulator pilot. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to convey to this Legislative Assembly that such 

incidents are not uncommon. I know the member, in his question yesterday, indicated that had a 

technician been on site, this would not have happened. I would like to convey to him that there was a 

local serviceman there. A technician would not really undertake to resolve the problem without some 

assistance from the centralized services for these operations, which has proved most satisfactory in the 

past. 

 

I do want to correct some other statements that the member made. He indicated that the blowouts took 

place on August 3 and 19. I think that that is the only real accurate information he conveyed to this 

House. He alluded to a loss to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation of somewhere in the neighborhood 

of $130,000 to $150,000. I would like to convey to that member that it is not quite that substantial, in 

fact, much more modest than that. The loss was some $6,184. I also want to close, Mr. Speaker, in 

conveying to the member — he alluded in his question that SPC people had been telling him that had a 

technician been in place this major break would not have occurred. I can only conclude that if an SPC 

person did in fact convey that to him, that that person was not particularly well-informed in regard to the 

system which is in place in Saskatchewan and the servicing which is required for that system. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The technician I mentioned 

who wasn't in place at the time was . . . when you moved this gentleman to Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, you 

had a minor break on August 3. Should this technician have been in place, one of the only fellows who 

understands valves and regulators, you wouldn't have had the major break on August 19. That's the point 

I tried to make to you and this is a fact. Would you not agree? 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Smishek (Minister of 

Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into a Committee of Finance. 

 

MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to say a few 

words on this budget speech this afternoon. I, of course, add my words of congratulations to you, Mr. 

Speaker, on your election as Speaker of this Assembly. I also congratulate the election of the Deputy 

Speaker, who so capably carries on his responsibility in the Speaker's absence and the Committee of the 

Whole. I congratulate the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) in the presentation of the budget which 

provides a program built on a foundation of fairness and equity for all citizens of this great province. 

 

My thanks goes out to the electors of Moose Jaw North that saw fit to return me as their representative. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

511 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — I along with my colleague, the Hon. Gordon Snyder, will continue to speak out 

and work for all of the people in Moose Jaw and Saskatchewan generally. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — Moose Jaw has had good years of past and nowhere can you find any gloom and 

doom of bygone days. Naturally there are problems in some areas, but it would be strange indeed if such 

did not exist. There is a good relationship between elected and appointed city officials with that of the 

departments of the provincial government, and this has resulted in many benefits for the city of Moose 

Jaw. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — I know this good working relationship will continue in the years ahead. Mr. 

Speaker, I could list many benefits our city has received, but I know the same will be true in every 

constituency in Saskatchewan. The program of culture and youth grants is an excellent example of a 

program used for the benefit of the community. To indicate the untiring dedication Moose Jaw citizens 

have for the city's promotion one has only to use this week as an example. By putting together a well 

documented submission a Moose Jaw delegation led by Roy Thiessen was successful in bringing the 

1979 Uniroyal sponsored Junior World Curling Championships to Moose Jaw this week. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — It makes one very humble to stand at the official opening this past Sunday and see 

the countries of Sweden, Norway, Scotland, USA, Denmark, Switzerland, France, Italy, Germany, and 

our great Canada so ably represented by young men 20 years and under accept the obligation of being 

good sports, good citizens of their respective countries, win, lose, or draw. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I know that all members in the House agree with me, and the people 

across this province and Canada, that we do wish the Canadian team success in their endeavor. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — Sometimes I believe those of us in the political field should accept losses as 

graciously as these fine young men. The people of Moose Jaw and the many clubs and associations that 

are actively spending their time and energy in the promotion of this and many other activities tell me our 

city is alive and well and will continue to be so. 

 

The second major event taking place this week in Moose Jaw can be found at the Golden Mile 

Exhibition where the now annual English horse show, with the most entries ever having been received, 

is under way this weekend. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

512 

MR. SKOBERG: — Again, Moose Jaw and surrounding good neighbor municipalities can and do work 

together and make an event such as this and others possible. I invite all members of the legislature and 

the people throughout the listening audience to come to Moose Jaw this week and see the finest junior 

curling in the world and see the finest display of horsemanship in western Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, we have come a long way in Saskatchewan and in all those years we 

have seen continued progress in our health and social fields with our economy becoming more 

diversified and stable. Our determination in having a society that is truly representative of the majority 

of the people of this province will continue under the leadership of Allan Blakeney and that is our 

determined goal in this New Democratic Party and government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — We have seen a continued attack on all of our social programs and all progressive 

legislation by a small but vocal minority of self-interest groups and politicians. These people are highly 

skilled at talking about free enterprise, private initiative and all those popular clichés, but they fail to tell 

the people most large and small business enterprises are very dependent upon good stable government 

that will provide incentives for job creation purposes. 

 

We hear the opposition say (and we have heard it in this House ever since the opening of this Legislative 

Assembly), why keep harping on the past? Why keep reminding people of programs such as medicare, 

hospitalization, first community surveys for TV, cancer care, acute care for mental illness made free, air 

ambulance created, North America's first health insurance plan, cobalt cancer treatment available, the 

elimination of deterrent fees, alcoholism commission created and the Feeling Good Program introduced, 

removal of medicare and hospitalization premiums, children's dental plan, prescription drug plan begun, 

aids for the handicapped made available and the hearing aid plan and on and on and on? Let us never 

forget, Mr. Speaker, what we take for granted today can be taken away from us by the stroke of 

legislative action supported by reactionary Conservatives. 

 

It is said a country can only retain its greatness if it retains its history. Those opposite would like to 

forget history, Mr. Speaker, especially last October 18. 

 

One has only to see what is going on in the United States at this time to see really what is happening in 

this world of ours. Responsible people, including Senator Edward Kennedy, and the trade union 

movement, are striving for a national health insurance plan modelled on Saskatchewan’s. A recent report 

indicates that medical services have long been a major source of inflationary pressure in the economy 

and contribute to a steady increase in the share of the gross national product. The health care outlay in 

the United States has gone from 4.5 per cent to 9.3 per cent in the period from 1950 to today. The same 

study indicated that in Canada a similar situation was evident when there was a fee-for-service policy, 

but today, under our universal and comprehensive quality health care plan fashioned by this province, a 

gross national product for health care outlays has levelled off to 7 per cent and yet we hear our great 

philosophers cry out for deterrent fees, hospital premiums and fee-for-service wherever we turn. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

513 

It is madness, Mr. Speaker, for a civilized society in this country to criticize growth in the public sector. 

Government, in a democratic society, is not our enemy but our indispensable ally and servant. For most 

of us it is the only ally we can look to as a means to save the society from being the private club of the 

rich and the powerful. Over and over again, we hear of an oversupply of civil servants and that terrible 

bureaucracy, but is there ever any acknowledgement from those opposite that indeed, our civil service is 

one of the lowest in all of Canada? Of course not! They are playing the game of defaming the name of 

every public service in this province with outright mistruths. 

 

It is important, Mr. Speaker, to have civil servants available to put these programs in place and available 

to the people who need them. 

 

There appears to be a type of mentality and hatred by many of those opposite for civil servants and those 

who serve in this province faithfully. We have seen an unwarranted personal attack on the integrity and 

honesty of the Deputy Minister of the Environment and now those opposite will not accept the word of 

the Director of Information Services in the latest 3 cent a package leak in the recent budget. I can tell 

those opposite, that Deputy Minister Grant Mitchell and Mel Hinds have more integrity and devotion to 

their position and to the citizens of this province than any of those being so critical of them at this time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — It is characteristic of the Conservatives, with some exceptions, to viciously attack 

civil servants and to publicly defame them, when they are not in a position to respond. I say that's cheap 

shots to say the least. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for one moment let us compare our civil servant ratio with that of some other provinces: in 

Saskatchewan, 1.8 per cent of the population; in Alberta, 2.4 per cent; in New Brunswick, 3.4 per cent; 

in Nova Scotia, 2.3 per cent. The Canadian average is 3.3 per cent. and I say again that in Saskatchewan 

it is 1.8 per cent of the population. Let us not forget, we in Saskatchewan have the most and the best 

programs to deliver to the people anywhere in North America and we have the best civil service to do 

the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this debate, the hon. member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) made 

reference to Proposition 13 in California. Let's have a look at that for one moment. 

 

Ever since the vote on Proposition 13 in California there have been those who almost believe we should 

have the same type of vote here in Saskatchewan and in Canada. It is important we realize the real 

meaning of that vote. The citizens voted to force a 50 per cent or better tax cut in property taxes. If you 

lived in California, a house that cost you $800 in taxes in Saskatchewan could be costing you upwards 

of $1,800 in some California cities and many pay out over $3,000. 

 

In the state of California all elementary and secondary school costs are borne by property taxes and 

universities are primarily financed the same way. In this province we pay 75 per cent of health costs out 

of the provincial revenues. The real message, Mr. Speaker, is that in California the people are forcing 

the politicians to lift the burden of social services off the backs of the homeowners. They are demanding 

a reduction in local taxes to a level of about where they are here in Saskatchewan at this time. That 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

514 

means there will be a general realignment of taxation just as we here have done. The New Democratic 

Party government knew our tax system had to be reformed to meet the present and future needs, or we 

would find ourselves trying to run programs in the 1980s with a tax base of that of the 1890s. In other 

words, in 1971 when the New Democratic Party took office, resource revenues were 7 per cent of the 

provincial, revenues and today our resource revenues are 26 per cent at least of that budget revenue. 

 

That is why we are able to provide the services so necessary for our society and we do not need such 

things as Proposition 13. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of resources for a moment, I am certain most of you did 

read or hear of the article in the Canadian Business Magazine. This article suggested that Saskatchewan 

is on the verge of embarrassment of riches and that with our gigantic uranium reserves we would be the 

next boom province. It follows this observation that we are as solidly financed as any province in 

Canada and we do not have a big backlog of social services. And, of course, one statistic referred to, 

which the Collver Conservatives blush with embarrassment (if that is possible) is the fact that Tory 

Ontario has 2.5 times as much debt per capita as thin socialist Saskatchewan. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if 

the financial capitalist boy wonder of the Conservatives has advised his Tory friends in Ontario how to 

run their economy and provide services we provide here in Saskatchewan without heavy premiums and 

the like of that. 

 

We are proud of our province, Mr. Speaker. We are proud that our leaders in a democratic socialist 

society have provided the people of this province with leadership, vision and sound economic planning 

in such a way that poverty and want is being looked after by using the resources of this land for the 

purposes they were intended, by using some of the heritage fund for this generation and preserving some 

for the future generations to come. 

 

That is what I consider to be sound economic and social planning. Of course that does not coincide with 

the thinking of the self-proclaimed economist of the party opposite. It has been said many times figures 

can lie and liars can figure. I suggest the financial critic of the Conservative Party. along with his leader, 

are doing their best to prove the latter, the only difference being neither of them can figure. 

 

As we listen to those opposite and as we listen to the federal Conservatives, there is little question that 

all Crown corporations in Saskatchewan and in Canada would be getting the meat axe if the 

Conservatives were ever to gain power either in this province or in Ottawa. 

 

One has only to realize Petro-Canada, the federal Crown corporation, is finished if the Progressive 

Conservatives were to be elected. They would, as they call it, privatize it and put it into the hands of 

private saboteurs and privateers. They also admit all of the federal Crown agencies, which number 300 

and some, would receive full scrutiny and a decision would be made whether to put the axe to them or 

redirect them. This is typical of the private enterprise, profit-motivated Tories, both in this House and in 

Ottawa. There is deep mistrust by those opposite for anything owned by the people of Saskatchewan or 

Canada. It is up to us, Mr. Speaker, to let the people know the assets of our Crown corporations which 

belong to the people. Even the financial bull-headed critic of the Conservative Party, full well knows 

debts incurred by needed expansions of 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

515 

our Crown corporations to serve an ever-expanding economy and population, such as Sask Tel and Sask 

Power are doing, are self-liquidating. Perhaps he and his colleagues would not want to prepare for our 

future diversified industrial economy. That is not our thinking nor will we accept such out-moded 

economic theories or warn-out philosophies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of proudness I am able to say I am a member of the New Democratic 

Party. It is with proudness that I say this party, led by Premier Allan Blakeney, is a party that respects 

the wishes of all people in this province. Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House have full 

confidence in our cabinet and their capabilities. That is why I am pleased to support the budget before us 

and will support that budget speech when the vote is called. 

 

MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to take 

part in this debate. I want to take this opportunity, first of all, to congratulate the new members on their 

election and to congratulate others on their re-election to this Assembly. It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, from 

the proceedings of this House that the re-arrangement of seats dictated by the voters added to our 

strength not only in quantity but, indeed, in quality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BANDA: — Mr. Speaker, the most notable change in the character of this Assembly from the last 

is the decline in the effectiveness and the quality of the opposition. I am not certain if the fact is an 

argument for having two leaders of the opposition as we used to have but if it is, Mr. Speaker, the public 

might, and I emphasis might, be better served if the members for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) and 

Qu'Appelle (Mr. Lane) and Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) would advance their plans and show us 

if they have any ability to handle the leadership job for the Conservative caucus. I might just add, no one 

would misunderstand their motives or their actions since they stepped into the vacuum over there. They 

would be keeping up one of the finest Tory traditions and I am almost certain they could do no worse 

than the job that is now being done. 

 

On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I want to say how pleased and honored I am to be back here as the 

representative of the people of Redberry. I am pleased that many of them switched their support on 

October 18 and that a greater percentage than before gave their support to our Premier and our policies. I 

am honored to serve them because they are as fine a group of people as you will find anywhere. They 

are hospitable, co-operative and industrious and, Mr. Speaker, some of the finest and most popular 

cooks in Saskatchewan can be found among them. I am committed to fulfilling the responsibility they 

have placed on me. I will give what abilities I have and every hour it takes to serve all of them. 

 

Since the election, Mr. Speaker, we have heard the Conservative leader complain on more than one 

occasion that this government hadn't moved to implement the programs on which it was elected. I 

thought and, I think many people had the same thoughts, this was a queer sort of performance even from 

him. Most people who understand even a little bit of how government works, know that it would take a 

session of the legislature and this year's budget before we could move to carry out many or any of our 

commitments. Even people who don't understand too well the workings of government thought this 

criticism strange in view of the track record of the NDP and Allan Blakeney when it comes to keeping 

election promises. They thought the opposition leader's comments strange, Mr. Speaker, because this 

government's record 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

516 

is a record of success unmatched anywhere in Canada. I say anywhere! 

 

On Monday, Mr. Speaker, the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) succeeded in going one better 

than his leader. In his remarks he bemoaned the fact that the NDP set out for people in clear and precise 

terms during the election campaign the things we would do if and when we were returned to office. 

Considering the speech by the Tory finance critic, I say a more open admission of the Tory approach to 

the election would be difficult to find, Mr. Speaker. The Tory approach in the last campaign was to 

make all kinds of wild promises which involved expenditure of extra public money. At the same time 

they heaped criticism on us for spending too much. That has continued into this session and has been 

pointed out by other members. The member for Thunder Creek continued the Tory approach — lots of 

harping about too much spending but no list of programs he would chop. None, Mr. Speaker! They have 

no list, just like Tories in Ottawa have none. They won't produce one, because if they did the public 

would be able to pinpoint precisely the reason for the uneasy feeling they have and rightly so — the 

feeling they would have that you can't trust Tories. Instead of a list of what they would chop, Mr. 

Speaker, Tories in this House continually trot out a shopping list of the goodies they want done. I say 

that is just not good enough. Either you Tories produce a list of what you would chop — the programs, 

the dollars and the cents — or you can expect to be upbraided every time you make the old Collver 

speech about cutbacks. You can expect to be upbraided every time you trot around with your shopping 

cart. In short, Mr. Speaker, I think the public will agree you can't have it both ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier, most clear thinking people would have thought that this session and this 

budget was the time to judge if the NDP and this government could keep its commitments. I want the 

Conservative leader to keep score. I am sorry he is not here to do that. We said we would cut personal 

income taxes as resource revenues grow. Well, Mr. Speaker, resource revenues are projected to grow to 

$515 million this year from last year's projected $462 million. That's performance, Mr. Speaker, and 

further evidence that the NDP resource policies are working, not as Tories would have them work but 

they are working for ordinary Saskatchewan people. So what have we done about cutting income taxes? 

Mr. Speaker, 1,200 people will be removed from provincial income tax rolls because the tax credit will 

be increased to $40 per dependent child. Mr. Speaker, $22 million fewer income tax dollars will be 

collected because of indexing. Members opposite might say that is not good enough. I predict they will. 

I say to them, we have made a start. This is one year, and if I were sitting over there, I wouldn't get 

myself out on a limb about the next three years. 

 

We said we would ease property taxes for senior citizens, Mr. Speaker. In this budget speech the 

Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) indicated that an additional $15 million will be spent to do just that. 

Fifty-seven thousand senior citizens who live in their own homes will get help — help we think they 

have earned and deserve. Another promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We said in our program we would eliminate the capital gains tax on farms, homes and small businesses. 

In this budget the minister announced the rebate program will go into effect with the 1979 taxation year 

. . . another promise being kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We said we would expend revenue sharing to help hold down local taxes. This year, unconditional 

funding to local governments through revenue sharing will be increased 26 per cent . . . another promise 

kept. This 26 per cent increase is substantial, Mr. Speaker, particularly in view of the fact that last year 

we increased the amount by 45 per cent. Now I see from some of the press that a few municipal 

spokesmen think it isn’t 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

517 

enough, that we should have done more. I expect we will hear criticism from the Tories opposite saying 

we should have done more. In case they do, Mr. Speaker, I want members and the people of 

Saskatchewan to keep in mind, these are the same Tories who say we should spend less. Also, I want 

members and local government leaders and people to keep these facts in mind. First, overall spending of 

your provincial government will grow by 9.5 per cent this year. Secondly, of that overall spending, the 

amount spent for programs directed by the provincial government itself have been limited to a 4 per cent 

increase. Thirdly, for the portion of our spending that goes for local governments, payments to 

individuals and other third parties, these expenses have been allowed a 12.5 per cent increase, and these 

expense items account for two-thirds of the expenses of the provincial government. To those that want 

to say that 26 per cent increase in funding for local governments isn't generous enough, I say perhaps the 

answer hits closer to home in pointing an accusing finger at this government. We're living with a 4 per 

cent increase. How is it you can't live with an average 26 per cent increase which follows immediately 

upon last year's 45 per cent increase? I don't think that is an unfair question for us to ask of those that 

want to point an accusing finger at this government, Mr. Speaker. Now having said that, I want to point 

out that I strongly support the increase in our revenue sharing for local governments. It will be 

welcomed, I know, by local government leaders in my constituency who were immensely pleased with 

Phase I last year. I hope that in the next 10 years, if not in the term before that, we can find ways of 

enriching the basic revenue sharing pool still further over the above formula that is now in place and 

which would index municipal funding. I certainly hope that we won't close the door on discussions 

about the appropriate level for the basic pool of money involved in revenue sharing, because our local 

leaders did have a target slightly higher than we're able to afford at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we said we would provide a minimum of $115 rebate for renters, to assist these people 

with living costs. The budget does that, and that's another promise kept. 

 

Five out of five, Mr. Speaker, in case the Conservative Leader hasn't been keeping score over there. 

 

We said we would provide assistance to people with their mortgages. The budget provides $18 million 

for these purposes and young families in particular will welcome this assistance of up to $250 each on 

this year's income. The Minister of Finance estimates this measure will affect more than 100,000 

taxpayers and I say to them, we expect the Conservatives to vote against this budget and when they do I 

say to you, they are voting against this $250 tax cut for all those young families, Mr. Speaker. You can't 

have it both ways. Mortgage assistance — another commitment kept. 

 

We said we would work to reduce the cost of nursing home care. Allowances for level II care will be 

increased to $156 per month; level III allowances will reach $464 per month by virtue of this budget. 

We are acting on that commitment, Mr. Speaker — another promise being kept. I'm sure that in this term 

we could do even more because there isn't one member on this side of the House who isn't committed to 

seeing that Saskatchewan's senior citizens get the best deal available in this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BANDA: — We said we would extend children's denticare to age 18 and in this budget we will 

extend the coverage to those between 4 and 13. This program, Mr. Speaker, is a model for the rest of the 

country. It's being used by more than 85 per cent 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

518 

of those eligible. That, Mr. Speaker, is a vote of confidence and that, Mr. Speaker, is another 

commitment being kept. 

 

We said we would set up a health research fund and the budget does that, Mr. Speaker — yet another 

commitment. In general, Mr. Speaker, the budget demonstrates we are keeping the commitments we 

made to see that in health care, Saskatchewan continues to lead the country. We are doing that and we 

are proud of that fact. Whether or not the Tories opposite are proud of some of the things some of their 

members — like the member for Thunder Creek and the member for Swift Current have said in the past 

about state financed medicare — I don't know, and frankly, I don't care. That's their problem. They have 

to live with the skeletons in their closet and the skeletons in their front benches, Mr. Speaker. We know, 

they know and the people of Saskatchewan know the Tory position on medicare and health care. If they 

want to continue to discuss it, I for one welcome the opportunity because their position here in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada, in other provinces, is the most dismal and miserable of any political party 

in Canada. 

 

We said, Mr. Speaker, that we'd strengthen and expand our health programs and this budget does that. 

The Tories, if they vote against this budget, will be voting against that and voting against another 

commitment being kept. Mr. Speaker, we said we'd reduce the cost of farm fuel and we're doing that. 

We said we'd take steps to aid the building of farm homes and we will be doing that. We said we would 

back the crow rate with resource dollars and this budget indicates our plans to do that also. We also said 

we'd create new jobs in heavy oil and steel and the rest and the evidence is all around. Figures have been 

provided; we are doing that. We said we would expand benefits in rehabilitation for injured workers and 

this budget will do that also. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, others will no doubt deal in greater depth with many of these programs. I hope they 

do. I know it will be welcome news to a large majority of the people of Saskatchewan because whether 

they voted for us or not, they do appreciate a government that keeps its promises. This budget, Mr. 

Speaker, indicates that we do keep our commitments. Out of 27 specific pledges we made last October, 

more than 20 of them have been carried out or acted upon in this, our first budget, within less than six 

months of the start of our term of office. That, Mr. Speaker, is another record of success — that's 

performance. It is that kind of performance that has the Tories opposite depressed, Mr. Speaker, and not 

the fiscal policy of this province. They know our position is one of the best in the country despite all of 

their huffing and puffing. They know that the people of Saskatchewan know that the debt which they try 

to make an issue of, is the second lowest in the country and that it is primarily a self liquidating debt for 

things like Sask Power and Sask Tel service expansion, not an operating debt like in Tory provinces 

such as Ontario. 

 

They know and the people of Saskatchewan know that we are in good shape financially because taken 

together, the consolidated fund and the heritage fund show a surplus this year just as they have in years 

previous. They know these things, Mr. Speaker, and that is what depresses them. Their depression was 

forecast for them by their own temporary leader who used to say before the last election, that he had to 

get rid of the NDP government in that election or it wouldn't be possible to do it for a long time after 

that. 

 

He knew and they know that this province is on the threshold of even a brighter future. If, over the next 

decade, we can properly use our resource revenues to stabilize provincial revenues, we can use those 

revenues to further stabilize the incomes of our 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

519 

primary producers and our biggest, most important industry, agriculture. We can use those resource 

revenues to develop and enhance the Saskatchewan home grown and successful secondary industry 

connected with the agriculture industry. That secondary industry, together with our resource industry 

can provide jobs for Saskatchewan sons and daughters who can rise to the top of those enterprises 

because we are the masters in our own house. 

 

We can and we will do those things. Mr. Speaker, and I suspect the opposition leader's prediction of 

their own demise will be borne out. But more important, the promise of a bright future for Saskatchewan 

people will unfold. That is my dream for our province, Mr. Speaker, and I think this budget gives reality 

to that dream. It provides more than just hope but rather, real substance to the hopes of so many people 

who dared to dream about the great future of our province. Because this budget does those things. I 

congratulate the Minister of Finance, and this government on a job well done, and I say with pride that I 

will support the minister's motion on behalf of the people of Redberry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I think one of the easiest ways ever to 

make a case that government waste is running amok would be to get someone on that side to admit that 

they are getting paid for writing these speeches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first, let me congratulate you on your re-election to your very important office. I have 

every confidence that you will carry out your duties with the same impartiality that you have 

demonstrated in the past. 

 

Throughout the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we have heard how our heritage fund is being invested. 

Government members opposite have been telling us about the wisdom of their investments, made by the 

socialist planners ensuring this inheritance to future generations; however, when the $722 million was 

evaluated by the Department of Revenue planners, who tend to be a trifle more pragmatic and hopefully 

more businesslike than the members opposite, they projected the investment income in the form of 

interest derived from this figure of $722 million would be a grand total of $4,350,000. The return on the 

investment would be 0.5 per cent. One-half of one per cent; that is socialist performance. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . they get a kick out of this. Since this is the budget speech I 

would like to touch on a few concerns expressed to me by the people of Souris-Cannington, as it relates 

to the fiscal responsibility, or lack of it, demonstrated by this government. 

 

Souris-Cannington is primarily an agricultural community and the net returns of agriculture have been 

reduced, in many cases, to a level where our young farmers just can't carry on. They are in fact leaving 

the farms and in many instances leaving Saskatchewan. They are tired of the heavy hand of big 

government, big business and big labor always digging into their pockets. They don't understand the 

increase in power rates, while at the same time this government is telling us that we are producing power 

cheaper than any other place in the country. 

 

They don't understand why we are paying twice as much for natural gas imported from Alberta as we 

would otherwise pay if we uncapped some of our own gas wells. It's even more confusing, Mr. Speaker, 

in light of the recent National Energy Board's statement 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

520 

that we will be exporting some of our natural gas to the United States and in fact the consumers of 

Saskatchewan will be subsidizing the gas consumers of the United States. 

 

They don't understand the increase in indirect health costs and, quite frankly, neither do I but we'll get 

into that one a little later. 

 

They don't understand this government's flip flop back and forth on farm fuel rebates. And they don't 

understand that if we're going to have this program, why a rebate? Why the added bureaucratic hassle? 

Why not deductions at the source? 

 

Mr. Speaker, frustration quite frankly has become a part of farming in the last few years. Consistently 

we have been faced with delays in transportation, in the handling of our grain, which has of course 

meant that we, as farmers. have lost income. The situation has deteriorated to such a point that we may 

now be in danger of not only losing our income but losing our customers as well. There has been an 

attempt made over the last few years to overcome problems are still there. As I see it, there has been a 

breakdown in co-ordination and communication between government agencies, grain companies and 

railroads. There's far too much small 'p' politics in the grains industry. On one hand, we have the Hon. 

Otto Lang through his wheat board spending money on 2,000 hopper cars. Little does it matter it seems 

that recent surveys indicate that 69 per cent of the producers were not in favor of the purchase of these 

cars, particularly since, until the port facilities are streamlined, these cars would amount to nothing more 

than more expensive storage. This amounts quite simply to subsidizing the crow rate through the back 

door. I know the government opposite has a well-defined position as it relates to crow but I wonder how 

they arrived at it? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — I wonder how they arrived at it? Did they arrive at their position on crow the 

same way they arrived at their position on PRAC (Prairie Rail Action Committee)? PRAC as, you know, 

the whole world except Otto Lang is against. I'm a little suspicious about members opposite coming up 

with the position on PRAC when on a hot line show, the minister responsible for transportation in this 

province, when asked the question, have you read the report?, said no. But I'm against it; I've read it. 

Yes, I have, all of it. The Minister of Agriculture gets a kick out of this. Quite simply, it seems that the 

only reason PRAC decided that the Lewvan line should go was a political tool of Otto Lang from day 

one. The only reason that the Lewvan line should go would be to give Ralph Goodale a chance to save it 

and to enhance his somewhat dismal odds in the upcoming federal election. 

 

During last October's election campaign, Premier Allan Blakeney stated he is running on his record of 

performance. Let's deal with this performance. From 1971 until 1976, during the period when he was 

Premier, the number of farms in Saskatchewan was actually reduced by 6,000. Remember this was 

during the period when the land bank was to help keep the young farmer on the farm. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — To enhance rural Saskatchewan, to keep the family farm a viable operation, we, 

by recent revelations, now realize that land bank in large part was designed to discriminate in favor of 

the rich. In fact, the big get bigger and the small 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

521 

disappear. They have disappeared to the tune of 6,000 between 1971 and 1976. For the benefit of you 

who haven't heard how the rich get bigger and the small disappear, it was brought up in the House here 

the other day. Suppose farmer A has a half section of land and decides to sell out. He invites Land Bank 

in for an appraisal. Farmer B, his neighbour, with 4 or 5 or 10 sections of land outbids the land bank 

appraisal by 5, 10, whatever thousand dollars, and buys the land. The transfer is made. In turn, Farmer B 

sells the land to the land bank at the originally appraised value suffering a loss to the tune of whatever 

the bonus was. The reason that he did that quite simply was just to expand his holdings to circumvent 

the intent of the program. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) says he's doing nothing wrong so 

we can't see that there's really anything terrible about this. The simple fact is it has cost us 6,000 farms 

in Saskatchewan since 1971. That's how the program discriminates in favor of the rich. To date we have 

spent almost $100 million through the Land Bank Commission acquiring land to help the big get bigger. 

There is an additional $20 million in this year's budget to stock up the land bank pot so to speak; I notice 

Bill No. 47 tabled in the legislature is just about to increase the borrowing power of the land bank from 

$100 million to $300 million. 

 

During the same period in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, the number of farms was increased and the number of 

farmers under the age of 35 was actually doubled. The Alberta fact, Mr. Speaker, was accomplished by 

the government guaranteeing loans at regular financial institutions, by government guaranteeing 

agreements for sale between buyer and seller, and in some cases, by government making direct loans to 

facilitate the transfer of land between generations — all of this, Mr. Speaker, at no direct cost to the 

taxpayer. The only thing that increased during this same period in Saskatchewan was the rate of decline 

in the number of family farms. In the same period, Mr. Speaker, our hog population has gone down from 

one million to 500,000. We have gone from three packing plants to one, and it is 45 per cent owned by 

this NDP government. I would be interested to know what the return on that investment has been over 

the years. How many millions has this government spent on its intervention into the packing business, to 

the detriment of the hog industry and to the agricultural community in general? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government which sets itself up as the saviour of the crow is in fact speaking out of 

two sides of its mouth. Since 1974 grain elevator tariffs have increased by 300 per cent, which 

represents a direct cost to our farmers of approximately $100 million, an amount approximately 

equivalent to the crow rate subsidy. 

 

The member for Morse (Mr. Gross) the other day was running off about secret meetings. Here's a 

meeting that there was absolutely no secrecy surrounding. It was a meeting, Mr. Speaker, held in 

Saskatoon early last year to discuss the increase in elevator tariffs. On an issue as important as the crow 

rate in Saskatchewan, this NDP government didn't even have a representative, let alone, present a brief. 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn to health for a while. 

 

In recent months, the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre decided that the Pasqua hospital will have no 

pediatrics ward . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Why are they laughing, Eric? Why are they laughing? 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — They don't take this seriously. This was decided, Mr. Speaker, after the medical 

staff of the hospital explained to them why the motion was passed unanimously at the staff meeting to 

alert the public in an attempt to retain a pediatrics ward. They expressed their fear — and I think a 

legitimate fear — that the loss of the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

522 

pediatrics ward will eventually lead to the demise of the hospital. There are three hospitals in Saskatoon, 

each with a pediatrics ward. There seems to be no move afoot to centralize pediatrics in Saskatoon. The 

difference, of course, is that in Regina, all three hospitals are government owned and in Saskatoon, one 

is owned by the government, one by the city of Saskatoon, and the other owned by a religious order, 

each looking after their own interest, the interest of their particular hospital. In Regina, all of our 

hospitals are government owned and in fact, the whole Regina hospital regeneration program was 

authorized by this government on the recommendations of one of their hacks, a Dr. Clarkson, who 

would tell them anything they wanted to hear in any case. 

 

The Pasqua staff made the presentation to the South Saskatchewan Hospital Board in which they 

indicated what well may happen if the pediatrics ward is removed. 

 

1. Pediatricians would not be readily available for the control of a nursery for the obstetrics ward; 

 

2. Without a first class nursery, physicians would probably elect to have their patients go to the General 

Hospital for maternity, leading to the loss of a 25-bed obstetrical ward; 

 

3. With the loss of obstetrics ward, obstetricians who are also gynaecologists would not be readily 

available at the Pasqua for consultation. This would reduce the Pasqua to medical and surgical care only. 

Often in this care, female patients need gynaecological consultation. As this wouldn't be readily 

available, these services would as well, become second class. This would reduce the Pasqua Hospital to 

surgical and medical care for male patients only. This may be a bit of an exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, but 

I think it's a necessary exaggeration in order that this government can understand what we are trying to 

illustrate. 

 

We also know that the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic is associated with the Pasqua Hospital. This 

government also seems to forget the tragic fact that children sometimes too, are afflicted with cancer. 

 

The next department to suffer in this chronology of events would be the emergency out-patient 

department. They would suffer for lack of consultation for pediatrics and later obstetrics and 

gynecology. It would, in fact, become an emergency department that couldn't handle a vast majority of 

the emergencies. This government has demonstrated time and time again that it has selective hearing. 

The medical professionals have made their case. The government hasn't listened. 

 

The projected growth for the city of Regina seems to be to the northwest. This is where all the young 

families would be living. This would be the easiest hospital for them to have access to. They have 

voiced their concern, but this government has not listened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to wind it up very quickly. My time is limited. The member who spoke before 

me robbed some of mine so I won't feel too bad about robbing some of his. 

 

I just want to touch, briefly, on the pharmacare program. I have criticized it before. You have been 

hollering at me saying, where would you trim the fat? I am going to tell you where you would trim the 

fat. I am going to use not my figures, but the figures of a study done at the College of Medicine, 

University of Saskatchewan, according to which the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

523 

first year of operation of the pharmacare program in Saskatchewan cost $10 million more than did the 

pharmacare operation in Manitoba — $4 million as opposed to $15 million. Mr. Speaker, the difference, 

by and large, is in the way the program was set up. 

 

The NDP government in Manitoba chose to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . do you want to listen to how 

it really works? I don't mind, holler all you want. It is your air time I am using now . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . We will — put in the Manitoba plan count on it — at a saving of $10 million. All the 

people are served. It is not a tax on the sick as is the situation in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan the 

sicker you are, the more prescriptions you require, the more dispensing fees you pay — a definite tax on 

the sick. I am going to wrap it up very quickly. Mr. Speaker, because my time has run out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have suggested a couple of areas where the fat could be trimmed — like the land bank, 

dumping millions of dollars into an operation that could best be handled otherwise. The time for change 

is urgent. We have budget leaks. We have no ministerial responsibility. We have our fourth consecutive 

deficit budget in what should be buoyant times and this government chuckles about it. 

 

I will not be supporting the budget. 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, I especially recognize and welcome all new 

members and former members elected to these Chambers as well as our capital city. My congratulations 

to you, Mr. Brocklebank — you are not in the Chair now — as our Speaker once again. I am pleased to 

see a lady member among us . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — . . . I am sure she will add charm and grace to this Assembly. It is good to have 

women play a part in the political annals of parliament. 

 

I thank our fine people in the Regina Victoria constituency for their faithful support given me over the 

past 15 years and electing me to this legislature has also been most gratifying. I wish to express a 

sincere, hearty thank you for their devoted confidence. I will do my utmost to live up to their continued 

faith and expectations. 

 

I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be able to enter this debate on the budget for 1979-80. I think we can say 

the budget really speaks for itself but it is important that we continue to inform our people and the 

electorate of the many great things we have done and will do in the future. Some of the budget 

highlights which stand out in my opinion and have fulfilled promises and suggestions over the years 

include: 

 

1. The 5 per cent rebate to a maximum of $115 a year for rent paid by tenants is a good one because it is 

a payment for taxes paid indirectly, similar to a property improvement grant. 

 

I may say I had advocated this in our Assembly ever since the property improvement grant was 

instituted. I may say also that I had advocated the homeowner grant idea in my maiden speech of 1965 

and it was picked up by the government of that day. 

 

2. A special property school tax rebate ranging up to $460 for senior citizens will be most welcome. I 

may say another promise fulfilled. 

 

3. We welcomed the higher allowances for citizens in nursing homes. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

524 

4. A $ 16 million reduction in farm fuel costs fulfils a promise and reduces the costs to farmers. 

 

5. A provincial tax credit of up to $250 on first mortgage interest will be a great help to a lot of families. 

 

6. 4,600 young people who will be seeking temporary work this year through provided capital programs 

is a farsighted measure. 

 

7. The creation of 1,900 new jobs shows we take an interest in our growing population seeking a good 

livelihood for the future. 

 

8. Phase 2 of the revenue sharing plan shows a marked increase from $35,400,000 to $45,400,000 for 

this year. This gives local government the reinforcements it needs to hold municipal mill rates without 

cutting services. 

 

9. I am pleased to see $4 million earmarked for the establishment of agricultural and health research. 

 

10. A rebate of capital gains taxes for farmers and small businessmen creates a stable economy for those 

who have accumulated earned assets. 

 

However, I had hoped there would be a substantial sum of money in the budget for planned capital 

spending at a Regina university over the next four years, providing necessary facilities for new and 

expanded courses for this campus promised to us in 1961, and also promised when the new act came 

into existence separating the two universities. I look forward, Mr. Speaker, for solid action over the next 

year to bring this about. 

 

The Ottawa government has hurt every province. They are destroying our financial structure in every 

province. Our Treasury here would be much better off if we were not confronted with inflation and 

gouging profits by undeserved corporates. 

 

The terribly high interest rates are the greatest contribution to inflation. The unsettled dollar is creating 

devastating inflation more and more. While it may help us out in the West to create better competition 

for trade, we are forced to pay for it at the other end — using billions to shore up the dollar. We would 

have been better off if we had passed those billions on to the people in the form of dividends. The 

monetary manipulators are causing financial confusion and, I believe, for their own benefit. Canada is 

the wealthiest country in the world with its great diversified resources. Because of that, our dollar should 

not only be at par, but should be ahead of the American dollar. This hasn't only happened now, but has 

been going on far too long. Why did we lose $25 million to $30 million while ships were docked, 

waiting for grain to be delivered to the far East? Millions of dollars were lost to the farmers, and a good 

share of it lost in revenue for the budget we are now dealing with. 

 

What are some of our needs now, Mr. Speaker? We need a new rail transportation system, with the 

continuation of the Crow's Nest Pass rates. We need continued orderly marketing with all grains under 

the Wheat Board, and we desperately need a new Minister of Transport. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

525 

MR. BAKER: — Yes, we need a new government in Ottawa — a democratic socialist government. We 

need to get rid of those in charge of this country before they drive us overboard. The same situation 

exists today, Mr. Speaker, in Ottawa as it did under the Liberal government in 1929. They led the 

country to the point of collapse. R.B. Bennett appeared federally on the horizon in 1930 and finished the 

job. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BAKER: — MacKenzie King continued during the depression until it took a war to create a false 

economy; 1944 was a great year in this province. The people of Saskatchewan elected a democratic 

socialist government, giving back its respect. It gave back a strong measure of security for the people. In 

its budget then, as the budget does today, it thought of the people — all the people, rich or poor. 

 

It was the beginning of the cradle to the grave programs. We've built on these programs, particularly the 

past eight years, in providing many health measures earmarked in the budget to be continued and 

expanded. 

 

Isn't it great to have free medicare? I am sure the Alberta and Ontario people would like that too — no 

deterrent fees in the budget, no money for the doctors who think they are going to get it by billing 

people. 

 

The budget continues to give free chiropractic service. It continues to provide added funds for nursing 

care covering higher levels. It continues to provide hearing aids within reason. It continues our fine drug 

plan. 

 

It provides more for young people for dental care. A plan, I hope, will be fully implemented for all 

people over the next three years. A complete dental care plan, Mr. Speaker, is needed so that we can all 

share in the rising costs. 

 

Yes, and all this is done under a medicare card, a card which is provided without even asking. 

 

Yes, the budget provides great assistance to local governments. Last year's revenue sharing was a good 

beginning. This year's revenue sharing grant will help Regina hold its mill rate or come close to it. 

Coupled with our thriving city economically, we hope we can hold it. In 1977 for example, building 

permits in Regina were $183 million. In 1978 they were $163 million, a drop that can be attributed to 

work stoppages by employers and employees. This year I am predicting that our building permits could 

reach a total of $200 million. I am told there is $300 million for future construction on the drawing 

boards. 

 

Yes, and I thank the provincial government for injecting moneys into our economy here and into all 

communities so that they can provide the needs of our people for a good life, and that everyone may 

have a good standard of living with full employment. Yes, the urban centres are doing well. The rural 

areas are doing well under this government. The 50 cents a bushel back pay for wheat from Ottawa will 

only plug a small leak. The $3.50 a bushel for the initial payment next year is over $1 per bushel short of 

meeting the cost of production for farmers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

526 

MR. BAKER: — Saskatchewan needs a strong agricultural economy. Regina and all centres will 

always need agricultural money. It is still our basic industry. Without agriculture the people of Canada 

would only have half of the standard of living they enjoy today. I am glad to see more emphasis on 

research for agriculture. A 30 per cent increase in wheat production by 1985 is a goal we must achieve 

not only for Canada but to help feed the hungry world. Yes, when the farmers have it, it helps keep our 

treasury full in Saskatchewan, coupled with our great wealth in potash, coal, uranium, timber and so 

many more minerals untouched. I predict in not too many years Saskatchewan will have the highest 

income on a per capita basis of any province in Canada. That is why our young people are staying here 

to build their future. Yes, this kind of wealth will also help to keep the provincial treasury overflowing. 

 

Turning to energy needs. we hear that oil and gas is fast becoming a depleting resource over not too 

many years. Then let's do some real planning and utilize our coal industry to the full. Let's build three or 

four more Coronach plants so that we can expand our electrical energy, also to be used for heating 

purposes. Let's spread plants around in inland Saskatchewan even if it means trucking our coal or having 

it brought in directly by rail. Electrical energy may be the answer for our agricultural, industrial and 

heating needs 15 years from now. Perhaps we can produce enough for most purposes. Who knows? We 

may be driving electric cars 15 years from now. Solar energy is a long way off. I say build electrical 

plants now for future needs. 

 

In this budget debate I am appalled at speakers who call for restraint in spending — in other words, 

again preaching austerity which can only lead to recessions and depressions. I have always stated in this 

House that we must have planned spending from public and private sources to meet the needs of 

creating full employment. A businessman must spend money to make money. We must spend money to 

keep up full employment and that will certainly help our finances in this province, when everyone earns 

and has a decent standard of living. 

 

Spending to create work is not inflationary. Inflation as I stated earlier is caused by high interest rates, 

outlandish profits and, of course, a wobbly monetary system created by politicians who shouldn't be 

there. The $5.2 billion trade deficit can be attributed to the falling dollar for 1978, over $1 billion more 

than in 1977. I say there should only be a small fixed premium between the Canadian and American 

dollar to make us a bit more competitive for our foreign exports. This is one form of stability needed 

soon. not only for our American trade but a fixed monetary system for world trade, even if it means 

separate trade agreements recognizing this with them. 

 

There are politicians who say that you must create unemployment to stop inflation — imagine, to be 

saddled today with over one million unemployed in this great country! Inflation is getting worse with a 

country reaching bankruptcy. Canada should not have any unemployment. The warnings are on the 

horizon; the financial structure of our country is decaying, unemployment has reached recession and 

depression proportions. 

 

Yes, in this budget we stand out as an oasis in Saskatchewan as compared to other parts of Canada, 

hopefully in the future to blossom even further. How fortunate it is for us in Saskatchewan to be able to 

share in this great wealth so that we can all be good bread winners for our families, dedicating ourselves 

in this Year of the Child to continue to build a secure life for them. Yes, God has blessed this great land 

with many resources. We must use them wisely without exploitation for the benefit of a few. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

527 

This leads me to the problem of keeping this country for future generations. I have been really 

discouraged at the outcome of the First Ministers' Conferences to help weld this country together. In 

assessing each meeting held over the years it appears they have gained nothing. The resources of this 

province belong to Saskatchewan. They took place in the early ’30s. Why should we keep defending our 

position? I say these conferences have become useless exercises. They have provided a podium for the 

Prime Minister and his colleagues to create a platform for promises for each election without living up 

to them, only to hoodwink the public, I am sorry to say all provinces have become a party to it. 

 

The appointments to the Supreme Court could be arranged by agreement if we had an acceptable, 

sensible government in Ottawa. We don't need any constitutional changes to solve the ills of Canada. 

There is nothing wrong with the constitution as it is, if the federal government would live up to it. All 

we need to do, is repatriate our constitution, bring it home. We can do anything we want now, under it. 

We are told over the years that the constitution was stopping us from doing certain things. I recall we 

were told that there needed to be a change to work out our unemployment insurance. Not until M.J. 

Coldwell got to Ottawa did we get action and it came about without a constitutional change. The family 

allowance plan was out of the question, they said, if there was no constitutional change. We got it at the 

insistence of opposition CCF members in Ottawa and you all remember that. The Canada Pension Plan 

received the same treatment and was nearly disbanded. Today, it is looked upon as the greatest thing for 

our people. 

 

Let's maintain our monarchy as a symbol for maintaining our togetherness as a Commonwealth of 

Nations. This is most important. Well, Mr. Speaker, we must go down to Ottawa to impress upon them 

the needs of our city and our province. Our international airport is long overdue. The reports have been 

completed. All we need now is money for the go ahead. We need federal support to go ahead with the 

CBC building. What about a start on the Mounted Police Administration building; we've been waiting a 

long time for this. I agree with the member across the way that the four-lane highway should be 

completed to the Manitoba border. This calls for an injection of funds from Ottawa. We need real money 

to complete our global railway re-location plans in Regina. The province has agreed to their share; the 

money is there; the city's money is there. Where in the world is Ottawa? For years and years, this has 

been jockeyed about. When are we ever going to get our fair share of finances and grants? The only 

answer is, of course, a new government and I can't emphasize that enough. 

 

Who will or should take over in Ottawa? Naturally the only kind of government that would do things 

right is one like we have in Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, I find the Tories could probably win 

with a minority by default. If this happens, it would certainly be a good thing for us in Saskatchewan 

because they would create such a turmoil throughout Canada that at the next provincial election most of 

our friends across the way here, would not be back in this Assembly. This of course, will also set the 

stage for a New Democratic Socialist Government to work toward a complete win in Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, this I believe will come true and seeing my time is up. I'm very pleased to support this fine 

budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure 

that I rise to support the budget proposed by my colleague the Minister of 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

528 

Finance. I'm very pleased to be able to support this budget. I think the Minister of Finance has done a 

tremendous job in putting together a very good program for the people of Saskatchewan. It is a budget 

that consolidates and reinforces the numerous initiatives launched by this government since 1971 in the 

areas of agriculture, industrial development, social services and resource development. The budget 

reflects the government's commitment to ensuring that the benefits from resource development and 

economic growth accrue to the present and future generations of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

With the exception of the years of the Liberal administration, the social and economic policies and 

successes of Saskatchewan governments, beginning with the formation of the CCF government in 1944, 

have given Saskatchewan a reputation of the most progressive and forward looking province in Canada. 

This is evident in the many innovative and imaginative agricultural and rural development programs 

introduced by our government during the last eight years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to just take a couple of minutes to reply to some of the charges made by the 

member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson). I’m sorry he's not here to hear what I have to say. He 

talks about the fact that we had no representation at the Canada Grains Council meeting in Saskatoon at 

the hearings last year when they were dealing with grain handling charges. I want to tell him that I, 

personally, on behalf of the government, made a separate lengthy submission to that committee. We 

outlined our concerns with the increases in the rates which were being proposed and we also outlined 

our concerns about the lack of any control over apparent over building in the elevator industry across the 

province. We see in many areas where elevators are being built not because they are needed, because 

there's any need for more space in those points but simply because that's where the competition is. I will 

deal later with the problem of the land bank issue which he dealt with. I propose, Mr. Speaker, to review 

with the legislature and in particular for the benefit of the new members opposite, the many and 

significant accomplishments of this government in furthering the development of Saskatchewan 

agriculture. 

 

The first program I want to deal with is the Grazing Lease Improvement Program and community 

pasture development. The work on improving community pastures is now substantially completed and 

the emphasis is being shifted to maintenance and rejuvenation. Since the improvement program began in 

1972, the carrying capacity in the pastures has been increased by about 10,000 head. The annual capital 

expenditure has averaged slightly over $1 million and there are now currently about 3,600 patrons 

enjoying community pasture privileges and with improved cattle prices, the numbers will no doubt 

increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another program that has significantly benefited beef producers is the Grazing Lease 

Improvement Program which was introduced in 1973. We recognized the untapped potential of much of 

our public grazing land and were prepared to invest in the improvement of that land so that lessees could 

intensify and expand their cattle operations. Since that program began, there have been over 74,000 

acres of land cleared and 95,000 acres broken. Investment in the program has averaged close to $1 

million per year and the demand continues to be strong amongst the 7,500 lessees in the public grazing 

program. Land development work carried out under the Community Pasture Improvement Program and 

Grazing Lease Improvement Program resulted in doubling of productivity in the prairie area and up to 

seven times increase in the parkland area of this province. Since 90 per cent of development under the 

Grazing Lease Improvement Program has taken place in parkland pastures, it is a having a 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

529 

significant impact on lessees by encouraging intensified production within existing fence lines. Also, 

much of the clearing and breaking has been done on small lease units, thereby benefiting many of the 

smaller operators. The same holds true for community pastures. In total, the two programs are serving 

and benefiting over 11,000 farmers. I should note that in all of these developments, a consideration is 

being given to wildlife concerns and critical wildlife habitat. 

 

Another important area of land development is the flood control and drainage and irrigation works, 

carried out by the Conservation and Land Improvement Branch. Since 1971, under the group irrigation 

program, 1500 acres have been brought under irrigation. In 1979, the Grainland irrigation project, north 

of Central Butte, will be started. The initial size of that project will be approximately 1200 acres, with 

sufficient capacity to irrigate an initial 1000 acres. It is expected that 30 to 50 farmers will benefit from 

the additional forage supplies that will be available. The total cost of this project is estimated at 

$700,000, with approximately $300,000 of that total being spent in 1979 and 1980. Under the individual 

irrigation program the Conservation and Land Improvement Branch provides free engineering and 

technical services to individual farmers to develop irrigation. This service is a significant contribution 

and over the last few years, has been requested by approximately 150 to 175 farmers per year. 

 

Since 1971, over 260 farmers have received assistance grants amounting to over $475,000. These grants 

were paid to farmers developing irrigation of over 14,000 acres — a significant amount, Mr. Speaker. In 

1979 and 1980, grants amounting to one-third of the eligible costs to a maximum grant of $35 per acre 

on 50 acres, will be available to farmers for irrigation. Since 1971, over $5 million has been spent on 

capital development on the east side of the South Saskatchewan irrigation district. Developments on the 

east side are now three-fourths completed — they are getting there, Larry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in October, 1977, we established the Outlook Irrigation Branch in my department, in order 

to provide accelerated development of irrigation acreage and to encourage production and processing of 

specialized irrigated crops in the Outlook district. 

 

We anticipate the development of 5000 acres of irrigated special crops over the next five years. The 

organization of a Saskatchewan Vegetable Marketing Commission is expected to provide real leadership 

in marketing products from this area. I expect the members opposite will oppose that marketing 

commission. I suggest that he should talk to some of his friends. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is just one more proof of this government's commitment to the goal of a further 

diversified, intensified and expanded agriculture economy in Saskatchewan. Since 1971, we have 

provided over $7 million to support the construction and maintenance of flood control and drainage 

works undertaken by local, organized groups of farmers — local control. 

 

There are approximately 85 active area authorities, including watershed associations, in Saskatchewan. 

These local authorities are responsible for assessing in excess of four million acres of farm land for 

administrative costs, and over 2,250,000 acres for project development and maintenance. These acreages 

have been on the increase for a number of years. These organizations are responsible for the upkeep of 

approximately 1,450 miles of flood control and back-flood irrigation works. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

530 

Since 1971 approximately 400 miles of main drainage works have been constructed and improved. 

There are approximately 6,000 farmers involved in organized flood and drainage control programs. The 

Yorkton Creek Watershed Association is sponsoring a major multi-purpose water development project 

near the city of Yorkton. This project, which started in 1978, is estimated to cost in excess of $1,700,000 

with my department contributing roughly $800,000 towards that project. 

 

In addition to controlling the level of wildlife and recreational lakes in the area, approximately 30,000 

acres of farm land will obtain some benefits, with approximately 9,000 acres obtaining direct 

de-watering or protection benefits. The project is scheduled to be completed in 1981. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along with this government's initiatives in developing the productive capacity of 

agricultural land, we have taken significant steps to promote the development of an even more efficient 

livestock industry in Saskatchewan. We already have an efficient and high quality livestock industry in 

Saskatchewan, but we recognize there is always room for improvement. 

 

Of particular importance are the record of performance and progeny testing programs run by our 

department. These programs enable beef, hog and dairy farmers to identify superior breeding animals for 

replacement and upgrading of their herds. Over the long run, the genetic herd improvement means faster 

average daily weight gains for cattle, leaner hogs and higher-yielding dairy cows. This, in turn, 

translates into millions of dollars of profit to Saskatchewan's livestock producers. 

 

In response to requests from the livestock industry for the streamlining and strengthening of regulatory 

programs in the area of inspection and reporting procedure, we repealed, in the last sitting of the 

legislature, seven existing acts and replaced them with the animal products act, the animal identification 

act and the stray animals act. I might add, Mr. Speaker, that all three of these acts were drafted in close 

and extensive consultation with the industry. 

 

Along with expanded productive capacity, a key to the development of agriculture in the province is 

expanded marketing opportunities. The initiatives undertaken in the marketing area since 1971 include 

— the establishment of the hog, the sheep and wool and the vegetable marketing commissions; the 

development of the farmers' market program; the creation of the market development fund, funded this 

year at the level of $350,000; the establishment of the Agricultural Development Corporation and the 

launching of the Marketing and Economics Branch of the Saskatchewan's Own Program to promote 

Saskatchewan agriculture products in our own market. Mr. Speaker, this list reflects the commitment of 

this government to the development of market opportunities for Saskatchewan products in an organized 

and effective way. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, let me now turn my attention to two of the most important 

agricultural programs introduced by this government — programs which have received widespread and 

even international attention and acclaim — I am referring, of course, to the land bank and the FarmStart 

programs. 

 

The Saskatchewan Land Bank Program came of age in 1978. As of now, there are approximately 2,550 

lessees in the province. In 1978, some 350 lessees completed five years of leasing. The Land Bank Act, 

the land bank regulations, and the land bank 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

531 

lease all set out the lessee's option to purchase, when he or she reaches that plateau. Of these, 44 elected 

to purchase, representing 12 per cent of the lessees who had the option available. The Land Bank long 

term leases continue to the leasers age of 65, and they can be extended beyond that at his request. The 

purchase option which was available in 1978 continues open to the end of that leasing term. The price 

paid by the commission is the average of what was recently paid by other purchasers for similar land in 

that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government believes that there are reasons why a farmer should want to own his own 

land. For instance, he may want to establish a borrowing base. He can put on improvements to his own 

specifications; the desire he may have to own his own land is then satisfied. With this in mind, the 

Homestead Rebate Program was put into place. The home quarter, or any other quarter, if the lessee did 

not live on his land bank land, is designated for a rebate to assist in the purchase of one quarter section. 

The rebate is 20 per cent of the purchase price to a maximum of $5,000. So long as the purchaser 

remains actively engaged in farming, continues to own the land and resides in Saskatchewan, this rebate 

is paid back in five equal instalments over the next five years. 

 

Let no one, Mr. Speaker, underestimate the benefits to the lessee of this Homestead Rebate Program. It 

provides the lessee with a lump-sum equity in the property which he can use as a security when he 

approaches the Farm Credit Corporation for funding of the balance of his loan. The grant provides a 

lump-sum benefit at the beginning of the purchase period which reduces the interest cost on that amount 

through the lifetime of the repayment period. The financial implications of the interest saving is in 

addition to the initial cash saving which he receives. There are 300 lessees from 1973 who can still 

exercise their option to purchase in 1979 or beyond. The 1974 lessees are now eligible to purchase 

which adds another 500 lessees to the eligible list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the sales record of Land Bank is commendable considering that members opposite have 

continually and vocally advised the people of Saskatchewan that Land Bank would never sell land. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: You're rotten. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — We offer them freedom to choose, Mr. Speaker, whether they wish to purchase at a 

fair price or to continue to lease at a favorable rate. The choice is theirs, Mr. Speaker, it is not one where 

we tell them that they've got to go out and buy — we simply tell them, you have a choice to buy, you 

have a choice to continue to lease. This is a far cry, Mr. Speaker, from the philosophy of some of the 

members opposite who feel that the younger farmer should have to outbid all the others, and if he hasn't 

got the bucks, tough luck Buster, you just don't get any of that. That's the philosophy we hear expounded 

quite constantly from over across the way. 

 

Another innovation in 1979 was the change to the production-based rental formula. All rents until the 

end of 1978 were based upon the percentage of land value. The rapid escalation in land prices over the 

five years made this method of rent calculation realistic. The new production-based formula uses the last 

15 years crop yield data as recorded by the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Board for each parcel of land. 

All farms are assumed to be on a 50 per cent crop-summer fallow rotation. Wheat and barley prices used 

are those of the last wheat board pooling year less average handling and freight charges for number two 

red spring wheat and for number one feed barley. Oilseed prices used are the averages of the open 

market prices on each for the previous 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

532 

calendar year. 

 

The above information permits the calculation of gross returns. The land bank charges 20 per cent of this 

as rent, on the average — the better land paying up to 23 per cent and the poorer land paying as low as 

17 per cent — and the lessee pays the taxes. The advantage of production based rent is that rents 

fluctuate up and down in relation to the returns to farming for the year. The rent more closely matches 

the ability of the lessee to pay. 

 

The big advantage to the lessee is that the good operator, a superior operator, should have no trouble in 

out-yielding crop insurance 15-year average figures, and the lessee gets the total advantage of any extra 

bushels produced. Good farming practices, therefore, pay off to the lessee, the spin-off benefit being that 

land banks should be maintained in good condition. 

 

Land under the control of the land bank is now nearly 1 million acres, for a cost of about $93 million. 

Within a few years, it is expected that the acres and the dollar figures will stabilize. Those lessees 

buying out of the program will provide a large part of the capital funds needed for the new younger 

farmers coming in. 

 

I was interested, Mr. Speaker, in the comments from the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson) 

when he said we were turning land over to rich farmers. I spent a great deal of time going around this 

province visiting young farmers across the province who got their start through the land bank and the 

FarmStart program. I didn't see any rich farmers out there, Mr. Speaker. I saw a lot of young farmers 

who are struggling very hard to try to get ahead, and I saw many young farmers and talked to many 

young farmers who thanked us for the opportunity which we had given them through the land bank 

program to get their start. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, FarmStart, along with land bank, was developed in the early 1970's 

as the core of Saskatchewan's agricultural trust to promote rural development by enabling young farmers 

to establish viable farming operations through diversification and intensification of production units. 

 

With agriculture accounting for approximately one-half of Saskatchewan's total economy, the 

agricultural recession in the late 1960's and early 1970's placed severe pressure upon the family farms 

that form the foundation of our province. In the early ’70s the family farm base was being eroded. The 

high cost faced by potential farmers was keeping them off farms and forcing others to seek employment 

in the larger urban areas. For those farmers prepared to take the risk, existing credit institutions were 

strongly biased towards large extensive grain farms. It was to deal with this situation that FarmStart was 

developed. Particular care was taken to ensure that FarmStart would provide a comprehensive rural 

credit program which combined both monetary assistance and farm counselling and training. To date 

there are over 3,000 FarmStart clients taking advantage of a regular grant and loan program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, FarmStart, with loan and grant programs, is successfully meeting its three major 

objectives: 

 

1. To provide credit and grants to eligible farmers to assist them in developing viable 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

533 

farm units, 

 

2. To encourage diversification of the agricultural industry by the promotion of livestock production and 

the more complete use of individual farm resources, 

 

3. To encourage employment in the province by providing a larger base of livestock production and 

thereby the potential for further secondary processing within the province. 

 

The average age of all FarmStart clients is 29 years. Since approximately one-third of our province's 

farmers are over 54 years of age, there certainly is a need for these young farmers to become established. 

At the present time, approximately one-third of all approved loans is going to people who have not 

managed their own farms prior to receiving their FarmStart loan. A further approximately one-third of 

all loans is going to farmers who have managed their own farming operation for a few years and have 

been forced to work off the farm to obtain a decent living. Many of these people are at a critical point in 

their farming careers and with FarmStart assistance, which includes low interest rates, grants and 

flexible repayments, they are developing viable farm units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the exciting areas of agricultural development and one that could be described as a 

new frontier within the context of the western world, is FarmStart's emphasis on irrigation. Assistance 

for irrigation is available both inside the South Saskatchewan River irrigation district and anywhere else 

in the province where feasibility can be shown for it. To date, in the South Saskatchewan River 

irrigation district No. 1. FarmStart has approved 57 loans for over $1.5 million. Forty per cent of the 

irrigation operations in the South Saskatchewan River irrigation district are receiving FarmStart 

assistance. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers have just come through a period of depressed beef prices. To assist farmers to 

maintain and expand their breeding herds, FarmStart approved 3,086 beef loans for a total of 

approximately $50 million. According to FarmStart estimates, approximately 140,000 head of breeding 

stock were purchased through this loan and grant program. In providing support to the hog industry in 

Saskatchewan, FarmStart has 597 active hog loans with approved assistance of approximately $12.7 

million. This current year alone. has been a record one for hog assistance, a 94 loans for approximately 

$3.7 million. Thirty-seven per cent of all hog producers in Saskatchewan who market 1,000 hogs or 

more are FarmStart clients . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . couldn't hear you. 

 

In the dairy industry, FarmStart has 543 loans for approximately $17.2 million. Of the approximately 

900 milk producers in Saskatchewan, over half of them have FarmStart loans. I suggest the member for 

Moosomin may know about those. 

 

FarmStart's participation in the poultry industry is witnessed by 38 loans, totalling over $1 million. In 

addition to loans and grants, FarmStart has administered several other programs which have provided 

massive assistance to the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. As an agricultural lending agency, 

FarmStart has been able to implement programs to meet urgent needs. In ’74, ’75, ’76, ’77 and ’78, 

FarmStart loaned and turned over approximately $167 million in interest-free cash advances to 

Saskatchewan's cow-calf producers. 

 

In 1976, under the Beef Industry Assistance Program, FarmStart distributed some $31 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

534 

million in outright grants to 26,000 cow-calf producers. That did a great deal to keep some of our young 

farmers in the cattle business so they are now able to take advantage of the higher prices. 

 

The currently high beef prices ordinarily would have required all of that loan to be repaid, according to 

their contract. However, due to the cash flow problems which farmers may have as a result of the long 

period of depressed prices, only 15 per cent of 3 the loan was required to be paid in 1978 and one-half of 

the balance has been required as payment for 1978-79. For those farmers with special cash flow 

problems, longer term arrangements have been made. 

 

In order to maintain and strengthen FarmStart's positive contribution to rural Saskatchewan in a period 

of continuing inflation new eligibility criteria have been developed. The new criteria are as follows. 

 

The maximum net income has been raised from $15,000 to $18,000; the maximum net worth has been 

raised from $60,000 to $113,000; the maximum productive assets have been raised from $180,000 to 

$200,000 and the loan limits have been raised from $80,000 to $90,000. These are for regular loans. For 

areas inside the South Saskatchewan River irrigation district they are substantially higher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with our new approved criteria we feel confident that FarmStart will continue to provide 

opportunities for farmers wishing to expand their farms and for people who wish to enter farming. 

 

Members opposite will no doubt say that there have been some failures and some unfortunate 

experiences. We cannot deny that, since we are lending to a risk group that most financial institutions 

would not accept. We cannot guarantee success to anyone; we can only provide the opportunity and the 

rest is up to the client. But we are proud of the many successful operations in our province resulting 

from this valuable program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I previously referred to Land Bank and FarmStart as two of the most important agricultural 

programs introduced by this government. A third and equally important one is The Farm Ownership 

Act. 

 

It is my belief, Mr. Speaker, that with these three measures this government has taken giant steps to 

ensure that young people have the opportunity to realize their dreams of going farming and that our farm 

land remains in the hands of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are great challenges ahead for the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada. Recent projections from the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations show a 

continuing rapid increase in the world population and the resultant requirement for vast amounts of all 

kinds of food products. 

 

In calculating Canada's share of the anticipated world demand, even if we were not to increase our share 

of that market, the Canadian Wheat Board has estimated that we will be able to market 30 million tonnes 

of western grain by 1985. 

 

In other words, in order to meet even our average share of the world market by 1985, we will have to 

produce 50 per cent more. No calculations or projections are available after that date but there can be no 

doubt that the demand will continue to escalate rapidly. As one of the few large surplus-producing 

regions of the world we must be 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

535 

prepared to meet that challenge. To do so will require good management, good husbandry, huge 

amounts of research into new and better varieties, and better methods of weed and insect control. 

 

As the concern for our environmental well-being increases, substitutes will have to be found for many of 

the chemical compounds now used to increase production and yet maintain the volumes required. New 

farming techniques will be required — reducing or eliminating summer fallow, continuous cropping, no 

till seeding and so on, are all in their experimental stages. Our challenge will not only be to perfect the 

techniques but to deliver the results of the research and experimentation to the farm level in a way 

acceptable to the farmers of the province. 

 

The federal government in its haste to reduce overall spending has seen fit to reduce its commitments to 

many areas of agricultural research. Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes that its funding of 

agricultural research is an investment in Saskatchewan's future. My department has aided and 

encouraged the diversification of crops in Saskatchewan. The opening, funding and development of the 

Crop Development Centre has already proven its value. Funding has grown from an initial grant of 

$348,000 in 1974 to $783,000 in this fiscal year. The centre has just developed the first variety of lentils 

to be licensed in Canada. Lentil production has grown from 15,000 acres in 1970 to 21,500 acres in 

1978. It is anticipated that the acreage will increase to 37,000 acres by 1979. 

 

The Crop Development Centre coupled with initiation, encouragement and development of a pulse 

growers' association by my department has stimulated interest in and developed agronomic practices 

suitable for the production of pulse crops in general in the province. Pea production has expanded from 

5,000 acres in 1972 and is predicted to go to 29,600 acres in 1979. Fababeans, a little known product, 

grown on only 55 acres in 1972 will be grown this year on approximately 11,000 acres. The special 

crops demonstration fund has encouraged the introduction of dry beans, grown on only 164 acres in 

1977, it is expected to be grown on approximately 550 acres in 1979. Special crops demonstration 

programs in corn and sunflowers have led to the development of small but expanding acreages of these 

crops. Sunflowers were grown on 11,000 acres in 1978 and corn sileage on 2,500 acres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the export value of special crops and the contribution of some of them to soil fertility and 

the added diversification they provide to Saskatchewan's agricultural economy will, with continued 

support, provide greater stability to agriculture in Saskatchewan. Some may say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

volume of production of these special products is small and of no real significance. We should not forget 

that it was out of such an humble beginning that our very valuable rapeseed industry started only a 

decade or so ago. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is not only in the crops area that we provide significant research funding. Farmers, 

agrologists and researchers have through the years expressed growing concerns over the ever-increasing 

problem of soil salinity in this province. Provincial funding was provided in 1974 to initiate a soil 

salinity study which prepared a tabulated inventory of soil salinity in the province. This year the Institute 

of Pedology will receive funding for $308,000 to carry on its work. Other research grants include: 

$50,000 for the POS Plant (Protein, Oil and Starch Pilot Plant) in Saskatoon; $250,000 for the 

Veterinary Infectious Disease Organization; and $50,000 to the Swine Research Unit, which is in 

addition to the $900,000 provided last year to enable construction by the University of Saskatchewan, of 

a 250 sow-swine research unit. In 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

536 

addition to this there is a grant to the Prairie Agriculture Machinery Institute of $1,067,000. This is a 

total, Mr. Speaker, of $2,508,000 in grants to agricultural research organizations. However, Mr. Speaker, 

this is not all; this government is not content to rest on its laurels. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

introducing at this sitting of the legislature The Saskatchewan Agricultural Research Funding Act, 1979. 

 

This act will provide an ongoing capital fund to support agricultural research in Saskatchewan. It will 

also include a Saskatchewan Agricultural Research Board, the majority of whom will be practising 

agricultural producers, to determine agricultural research priorities in the province and to administer the 

fund. Mr. Speaker, $3,250,000 in my department's budget will go to initiate the fund in 1979. This will 

be a capital contribution. The interest earned will be available to the board on the basis of the priority it 

establishes to launch new research projects and to increase funding for existing projects. As additional 

money becomes available this will be added to the fund. 

 

Therefore, the total funding for agricultural research in the 1979-80 fiscal year is $5,758,000. This is an 

increase of 70 per cent over last year, Mr. Speaker, and an increase of over 8,000 per cent over the last 

year of Liberal government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, these are impressive figures and I am proud of this government's 

tremendous record in the support of agricultural research. It is a record second to none. 

 

All of us are aware on almost a daily basis it seems of the incoming eroding effects of a prolonged and 

high rate of inflation. We now have lived with world-wide inflationary conditions for a seemingly 

interminal period of time with no relief in sight. Indeed, the latest oil price increases caused by the 

Iranian crisis will result in even greater inflationary pressures. As a provincial government we have no 

control over international inflationary forces nor do we control prices. What we can do is to provide a 

measure of relief through prudent fiscal measures. It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we 

re-introduce the Farm Cost Reduction Program at a cost of $9 million for this fiscal year and $16 million 

in the coming fiscal year. Hopefully the need for this type of program will over time be eliminated 

through increased returns to farmers from higher grain and livestock prices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the combined estimates from my department and the cost reduction program amount to a 

total of $70,499,000 for Saskatchewan agriculture. That is an increase of 29 per cent over last year's 

budget. These figures speak volumes about the priority of our government's place in agriculture and 

compare somewhat significantly, Mr. Speaker, with the recent figures just released from Manitoba 

where the Tory government in Manitoba cut the budget for agriculture in that province by 15 per cent. It 

indicates, Mr. Speaker, some of the significance of what this government feels needs to be done for 

agriculture and what the government of the Tory province of Manitoba feels is a priority in that 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my department in co-operation with the Department of Environment is nearing agreement 

with the federal Department of Regional Economic Expansion on two cost sharing agreements to replace 

the existing ARDA (Agricultural Rehabilitation and Development Agreement) agreement which expires 

this year. These agreements will provide cost sharing of a large number of existing and projected land 

and water 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

537 

development programs. We anticipate an early signing of these agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government firmly believes that local governments can and must assume increasing 

responsibilities for community planning and development. The local people are the ones who have the 

best knowledge and understanding of the problems, needs, and aspirations of their communities. There 

are some issues and problems such as unemployment, transportation and rail line abandonment which 

cannot be solved at the local level and require the co-operation of local and senior governments. It is our 

view that senior governments should act in a supportive fashion rather than in a directive and 

authoritative fashion. I'm happy to say that this is the guiding principle in our government's dealings 

with local communities. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — We have steadily increased the amount of unconditional grants to municipalities. 

and now, with the introduction of revenue sharing, rural municipalities are assured of transfer payments 

that will grow with the provincial economy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Furthermore, the unconditional portion of this funding has again been increased as 

will be outlined later on, I'm sure, by my colleague, the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. 

MacMurchy). 

 

Mr. Speaker, for my part I intend in the coming months to consult with, and seek the advice of, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, of regional agricultural councils, rural municipal 

councils, district agricultural boards, and other interested parties on how my department can work even 

more closely than it now does with the local communities in the development, initiation, and 

management of agriculture programs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a substantial figure of $3 million included in the estimates of my department 

earmarked for freight subsidy on processed products. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — This item is part of the package put forward last fall by my colleague. The Hon. 

Gordon MacMurchy, the minister in charge of the transportation agency and known by many as the 

MacMurchy crow rate plan. Under this proposal the government Saskatchewan would commit itself to 

providing freight assistance to agriculture products processed in Saskatchewan in return for a guarantee 

by the federal government to maintain the crow rates on grain, with the federal government paying the 

difference between the crow and an agreed-upon compensatory rate to the railways, either in cash or in 

kind, and a commitment by the railways that satisfactory service would be provided. 

 

It is our hope, Mr. Speaker, that in future negotiations with the federal government and with western 

provinces some such agreement can be achieved. This proposal is consistent with the Hall Commission 

report which recommended that the federal government accept the responsibility of maintenance of the 

crow rate and, further, recommended that a crow-related rate be established for processed products. In 

order to get some movement by the federal government on this issue we felt it incumbent on the 

provinces to show their desire to co-operate by putting forward a serious offer in 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

538 

good faith to achieve the second of Justice Hall's recommendations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

We have, therefore, committed $3 million in this budget to that end as an indication of our sincerity in 

these negotiations. This may not prove adequate as further negotiations take place and other products are 

considered in the mix to be supported. Let me make it clear, however, Mr. Speaker, that in dealing with 

the crow rate issue it is not our intention to make any deals with the railways. It is the belief of this 

government that it is the responsibility of the national government, as part of a national transportation 

policy, to stand by its statutory commitments on the crow rate. That's what Justice Hall said and that's 

what we say. Our negotiations will, therefore, be with the federal government not with the railways or 

with groups of people who meet in secret in the night. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I think that by now we are all aware of the Canadian Wheat Board's 

projections for the growth in the world grain trade between now and 1985. If Canada just maintains its 

share of that trade, our grain exports in 1985 will reach 30 million tonnes. This is an increase of 50 per 

cent over the current level of exports. But the challenge faced by Canada is not just to meet the export 

demand for grains in 1985 and beyond, it's also to meet the export demand of today. 

 

According to the wheat board, if transportation had been available when there was a demand, exports 

could have reached 25 million tonnes in the last crop year. Actual exports were only 21 million tonnes. 

As a result of lack of grain cars and co-ordination of the system, the board had to defer over 2 million 

tonnes of committed sales in the 1978-79 market year. Besides the deferral, the wheat board had to turn 

down sales of another 2 million tonnes of export grain. In effect, Mr. Speaker, this means 4 million 

tonnes of lost sales to prairie farmers. At the current price of $190 per tonne, this means a loss to the 

prairie economy of $760 million and if Saskatchewan's share of the market is 56 per cent, the loss to the 

Saskatchewan economy is roughly $426 million. I understand another million tonnes had to be deferred 

from last fall's shipments. I suggest that at the rate it's going this year we are going to have another 

shortfall this year. 

 

Considering the projected rate of growth in grain exports and the rate at which boxcars are going out of 

service, there will be a shortfall of over 15,000 grain cars by 1985 resulting in export losses of between 

10 and 14 million tonnes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wheat board says it can market 30 million tonnes in 1985. There is a general agreement 

that farmers in the Canadian Wheat Board area can meet that target through reduced summer fallow, 

increased fertilizer usage, high-yielding varieties, improved farming practices and so on. This golden 

opportunity, however, will be lost unless steps are taken now to develop the grain delivery system to 

meet the grain export demands of today and in the 1980s. 

 

Farmers can, and they will, produce the additional quantities provided they can be assured they can 

deliver their grain and, of course, receive a fair price. 

 

As a part of the national transportation policy, it is the responsibility of the federal government and the 

railways to provide adequate trackage and rolling stock to enable western farmers to take maximum 

advantage of expanding world grain markets. This is 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

539 

particularly so because there are no practical alternative modes for transporting grain, in effect, making 

farmers captive to the railroads. For their part, the grain handling companies must ensure the 

development of necessary terminal facilities and a country elevator system that provides the most 

efficient and least cost service possible to farmers. It is an intolerable state of affairs, Mr. Speaker, when 

the wheat board sees no other alternative than to use producers' money to purchase its own hopper cars 

and feels compelled to consider providing loan guarantees to grain handling companies for construction 

of terminal facilities on the west coast. Adequate capacity to move grain, however, is only one part. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you in favor of the car venture or are you against it? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — I'm in favor of the cars. We've got to move that grain. Adequate capacity to move 

grain is, however, only one part of the equation for enabling the Canadian Wheat Board to compete 

effectively in a world grain market. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Do you disagree with the wheat board on the purchase of cars? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — The other part is control and co-ordination of the grain delivery system. Efficient 

legalization of the system for export movement is impossible as long as the current domestic feed grains 

policy with its unregulated off-board grain deliveries continues alongside the orderly wheat board 

marketing system. Mr. Speaker, on top of an inadequate grain car fleet and an abomination of a feed 

grains policy which are costing Saskatchewan farmers hundreds of millions of dollars, we now have the 

Prairie Rail Action Committee report, which must rank as one of the worst hatchet jobs ever perpetrated 

on rural Saskatchewan. The abandoning of 756 miles of branch lines, as recommended by PRAC, would 

have a devastating effect on the fabric of rural Saskatchewan. Removal of rural lines will raise the cost 

of farming and will mean lost revenue for municipalities and higher road costs for provincial and 

municipal governments. It is quite clear that PRAC's sole objective was to minimize federal upgrading 

expenditures through maximum abandonment and cost transfer to rural municipalities. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Did you read the PRAC report, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — No. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — He didn't read it. He didn't read it . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Did I read it? Yes, I read it. I'm sure that I have more to do than read 1,000 pages 

. . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Our government will lend assistance to local retention committees in 

their fight to reverse the abandonment recommendations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to reflect for a moment just on what the member for Kindersley (Mr. 

Andrew) said in the House the other day on March 6th. First of all, I would like to commend the 

member for Kindersley for having indicated his support to the crow rate and the Hall Commission. It's 

nice to hear somebody from the other side of the House make such a statement but I find that the 

member is not too well advised in short-term political history. He alluded to the apple pie and the home 

cooking way of life that was supposed to cover western Canada during the Diefenbaker era. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, he stated, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Diefenbaker in his own way, in his own unique way, painted a dream for 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

540 

the future of this country and for the future of western Canada and the North. 

 

That was unique indeed, Mr. Speaker. If that particular era had continued, we could have seen the 

eventual loss of the crow rates, the abandonment of thousands of miles of rails, and the farmers of 

Saskatchewan forced to pay unrealistically high shipping rates a decade ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I refer directly to the MacPherson Royal Commission on transportation report of ’71. The 

members opposite seem to be rather sensitive about the MacPherson Commission. This Commission 

was commissioned by the Diefenbaker Tories; a report that could have become federal law had that era 

continued. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to outline just briefly a few of the recommendations set forth by Justice 

M.A. MacPherson and I quote from his report, Mr. Speaker, and it says here, quote: 

 

The immediate need is to release the railways from the burden of uneconomic lines. 

 

Now I ask, Mr. Speaker, does that sound like rail line retention? Further, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

In the free enterprise environment, it cannot be expected that the costs of transportation should not 

normally be borne by others than the users. 

 

I ask again, Mr. Speaker, does that sound like supporting and maintaining the crow rates? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, quoting from the MacPherson report but rather I would suggest 

to the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew), all members opposite, to read that report and to see for 

themselves how fortunate we are on the prairies that the federal Conservatives were ousted before they 

could accelerate that Tory report into federal legislation. I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that when the 

next federal election rolls around the people of Saskatchewan will remember who inflicted the PRAC 

(Prairie Rail Action Committee) report on them and will deal with those people accordingly. 

 

There's a great deal more I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, on the issues of grain transportation and rail 

line abandonment and orderly marketing for grain, the issues that are of extreme importance to the 

well-being of the agricultural industry. In the interests of time I will refrain from doing so now but I 

want to assure you that I will be taking part in the debates on the resolutions pertaining to these very 

important issues at the appropriate time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal in this budget to benefit rural Saskatchewan. There's a fuel cost 

reduction program at $16 million. There's a commitment for research and agriculture at $3.25 million. 

There's revenue sharing, an additional $6 million for rurals and $10 million for urbans. Much of that is 

going to benefit rural Saskatchewan. 

 

There's going to be an extension of a rural Saskatchewan Housing Corporation program to farm owners, 

something they've waited for, for some time. The removal of the provincial share of capital gains tax on 

farms and small businesses — no small significant move there. Senior citizens property tax rebate — 

there are 8,000 farmers 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

541 

who are expected to benefit from this and there are many more retired farmers in our small urban centres 

who will benefit. And then there's a commitment to a crow rate package of $3 million. 

 

These are valuable new programs for rural Saskatchewan, besides the many valuable new programs 

which are common to all Saskatchewan residents. These are programs which reflect the serious 

dedication of this government to maintaining a strong rural structure in this province. I am pleased 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, to let you know that I will be lending my full support to the budget as outlined 

by the Minister of Finance. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I want to, first of all, avail myself of the 

opportunity to congratulate all the new members to this legislature with specific reference to the 

members on this side of the House. I would like to also congratulate the Minister of Finance (Mr. 

Smishek) for the budget that he brought down last week. It is another in a series of good budgets for the 

province of Saskatchewan. It is a budget that demonstrates fiscal responsibility similar to the previous 

seven other budgets that have been brought down since 1971. It is a budget that is responsible in a fiscal 

way unlike many budgets brought down by other provincial jurisdictions across Canada. The province 

of Ontario, for example, is running deficits at a very high rate indeed. As a matter of fact, Ontario has 

presented seven straight budget deficits. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who is the government in Ontario? 

 

MR. DYCK: — It is a Tory government in Ontario. The budget for this fiscal year calls for a deficit of 

almost $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. That is more than equal to the entire budget of the government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It surprises me when affluent and wealthy Ontario has to run budget deficits of the size that they have 

been running in recent years, and it particularly surprises me when the Conservatives talk so frequently 

and allude so often to their great fiscal responsibility. 

 

As a result of our resource tax policies in Saskatchewan, these huge budget deficits are not necessary; 

they are not required. While at the same time, our grants to other jurisdictions within the province have 

increased substantially. The municipal grant to the city of Saskatoon, for example, went up this year 

alone 34 per cent, and the city of Saskatoon is experiencing that delightful problem they had last year. 

They are facing that problem of how to spend their money. I quote from the Star Phoenix, yesterday's 

edition, which describes some of city council's deliberations about their own budget for the city of 

Saskatoon: 

 

Council members realize the possibility that they could be in the position of not having to increase 

property taxes to cover the city's operating costs in 1979, therefore consideration was given to what 

could be done with funds left over, once a zero increase point has been reached. 

 

Alderman, Henry Dayday suggested council might want to somehow establish a reserve pool fund to 

carry the city through the years when it will not have the benefit of a 34 per cent increase in grants 

from the province. 

 

Last year they had some difficulty spending $300,000, and again this year they are having that same 

delightful problem. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

542 

I think, certainly, the resource policy that we have pursued in recent years is paying big dividends to the 

people of this province — big dividends in the form of lower taxes, big dividends in the form of solid 

programs to help people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I spoke in this legislature for the first time after the 1975 election, I welcomed seven 

new Conservative members at that time. I welcomed them in 1975 and I am very delighted to see some 

of them back again. I said that I wished to see them back again and I wished to see them back a little 

weak and a little run down but I wanted to see them back. Sure enough, there they are back in this 

legislature, a little weak and a little run down, but there they are, definitely. Mr. Speaker, they are here 

definitely, physically, and the reason I know this is because I can see them across the floor. I find that 

reassuring because if I couldn't see them physically, I would have some doubts as to whether or not they 

were, in fact, in this building. 

 

I have often said the Conservatives serve one very much needed purpose in the political arena of this 

province and that is to make the Liberals look almost palatable and I emphasize the words, 'almost', 

palatable because certainly, the history of the Liberal governments of this province hasn't been one that 

anyone would use as any lofty goal or measuring stick of success. One need only go back to the long, 

lone, lean and hungry years of Ross Thatcher. But nevertheless the failures of the Liberal Party over the 

years have only been surpassed by the failures of the Conservative Party when they were in office, only 

the one time, from 1929 to 1934. I have no reason in the world to believe that there has been any 

improvement in that party since then. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of the resource policy of this government we have seen a rapid expansion in the 

cities of Saskatchewan, particularly the city of Saskatoon. It is expanding at a rapid rate and the city 

economy is very buoyant. With the large number of people entering the city there has been a real 

pressure for industrial property and even more particularly a real pressure for residential lots. 

 

If you look at the price of housing in the cities of Calgary and Edmonton, Alberta, you will find that the 

price of homes has gone up very dramatically, in the last five years particularly. In many instances, the 

price of homes in these two major cities is way out of reach for many of the classifications of people in 

those cities. Really what has happened in those two cities is very tragic, very tragic for many people who 

want to own their own home. The land assembly is controlled by a few private developers. By 

controlling the land in the areas around the cities and by controlling the number of houses that come on 

the market each year, the developers have been able to make exorbitant profits. The costs of homes in 

those cities is anywhere from 25 per cent to 40 per cent higher than the cities of Saskatoon or Regina. 

 

Let me quote, Mr. Speaker, some statistics from the Financial Post, statistics from the Canadian Real 

Estate Association: prices of homes, for example, last year in the city of Calgary averaged $66,428, in 

the city of Toronto — $64,000, (Calgary is even higher than Toronto), Saskatoon — $43,900 — a 

tremendous difference in prices between the two cities. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, one would not be able to 

argue that the costs of production are that much higher in building a home in Calgary or Edmonton than 

they are in Saskatoon or Regina. In fact, the house costs in the cities of Calgary and Edmonton are 

indeed the highest all across Canada right now. No, Mr. Speaker, the answer lies elsewhere. The answer 

lies in a very prohibitive type of profits being made by present developers in those areas. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

543 

I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, a very major policy that could assist in even reducing the costs of homes 

in Saskatchewan cities. I think our government along with SUMA Saskatchewan Urban Municipality 

Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) should give serious 

consideration to zoning all land in the province around urban areas as agricultural land. This land would 

be zoned agricultural and if the public need of certain properties or certain lands around the cities 

became necessary and more important than the private ownership, then the purchase price of this 

property should be related to some large extent to the agricultural value. 

 

I want to reiterate and emphasize that in any expropriation procedure or any negotiation procedure 

carried on by the city, for example of Saskatoon, to acquire property for the development of residential 

lots, that the owner should be fairly and reasonably compensated. In the case where there is negotiation 

or expropriation for land around the city of Saskatoon, the owner of such land, who would perhaps be 

forced to move or have his farm unit impaired or interfered with, should be compensated way and above 

the agricultural value. For example — and this is a very arbitrary sort of figure — he could be 

compensated as high as double the agricultural value because of a number of reasons: sentimental value 

attached to a certain farm, the upset of a farming operation or whatever. At the moment, however, Mr. 

Speaker, the cost of land around the city of Saskatoon is extremely high and the owners of land around 

the city have made windfall profits . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You did too! 

 

MR. DYCK: — . . . didn't do too bad . . . not even closely related to the agricultural value. The same 

farmers living further away from the city do not enjoy windfall profits when they dispose of their 

property. But in addition to reduced prices for raw land, I would like to see the city of Saskatoon, 

perhaps coupled with the province of Saskatchewan, provide a larger bank of serviced property at all 

times. If there was at all times an inventory of readily available lots, serviced lots, in the city of 

Saskatoon then an individual could go down to City Hall and acquire a property of his own. The 

individual should be able to do this without a long waiting period, without placing his name in a draw or 

without parking outside of City Hall all night. Having acquired a certain property with a reasonable 

choice of say 300 or 500 lots in the city at any given time, he would then have the opportunity to pursue 

a number of avenues. He could either build a house for himself or he could engage a small contractor or 

he could hire a large contractor or he could have the house built by handling his own sub-trades and act 

as a general contractor. If the individual person had, at all times, these lots available to him and he built 

his home in one of the ways mentioned, then certainly, this would lead to competition in the industry 

and lower prices for all. Prices for housing will not go way out-of-reach if this policy is pursued as it has 

been in certain cities in Alberta. I think that this would be a most important program to ensure lower cost 

housing, particularly for young families. Legislation and financing at the provincial level is already in 

place. The onus is on all urban areas to ensure that this inventory of serviced lots is always available to 

the public. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as one member of this legislature, I will be working to see if we cannot 

ensure now and in the long-term future, that we have a land banking policy to guarantee a reasonable 

price for a very important need for any family; namely a roof over their heads and stop the rip off 

presently taking place by developers in most major Canadian cities. Of course, along with this Mr. 

Speaker, there would have to be a 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

544 

reduction of interest rates for people buying homes. 

 

I would like to turn, Mr. Speaker, to a matter of the Canadian economy. While the province of 

Saskatchewan has one of the lowest unemployment rates in Canada, while the economy is buoyant and 

while, as I have mentioned earlier, we have a responsible government this is not the case in Canada as a 

whole. 

 

For 112 years now, we have had a series of Liberal and Tory governments. And what is our situation 

after these long 112 years? 

 

Our country, Mr. Speaker, is in an economic mess. Inflation continues each year at a very high and 

unprecedented rate, eroding the savings of many people particularly many of our senior people. 

Unemployment is extremely high particularly in some of the Conservative maritime provinces, Mr. 

Speaker. Our national debt is somewhere over $60 billion and 16 cents of every taxpayer's dollar goes to 

service the national debt alone. 

 

What Mr. Broadbent, the Leader of the New Democratic Party has been saying for months and what the 

New Democratic Party has been saying for years, and what Canada so desperately needs at this time is 

an economic strategy for this country. We are a country, as we all well know, with vast resources, large 

geographical areas of land and a small population of about 23 million people. Yet we have 

unemployment at a rate that is completely unacceptable and much worse than most western European 

countries. 

 

One of the things that has had such a devastating effect on our senior people, particularly, the ones who 

saved their money for their retirement years, is inflation, the cost of living. There are reasons why we 

have inflation at the rate we do, with prices rising year after year after year. One of the reasons is the 

enormous profits of the multinational firms operating in Canada who are operating in an oligopoly type 

economy and who can place virtually any price tag on the goods or services that they sell. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a press release from the Centre for the Study of Inflation and Productivity 

dated February 6, 1979, dateline Ottawa. The information they have provided could be too much for the 

present government, so I understand that that organization has just recently been disbanded. But I do 

want to quote from some of their news releases. 

 

A substantial increase in the profits of Canada's non-financial corporations was reviewed by the Centre 

for the Study of Inflation and Productivity. At $9.3 billion for the first nine months of 1978, these profits 

were 21 per cent above the same period a year earlier — a much higher rate than recent salary and wage 

settlements. Total value of sales, in this period, rose only 11 per cent, indicating that profit margins had 

increased substantially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is quite apparent that profits are running well ahead of sales and, therefore, the mark ups 

must be increasing. Mr. Speaker, the press release goes on to say, and I quote 

 

The marked profit increases in retailing are especially noteworthy, giving the visibility of that sector in 

consumer prices. The total profits at large department stores advanced by 87 per cent; those of motor 

vehicle dealers, 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

545 

42 per cent; (Listen to this. Listen to this!) food stores by 42 per cent. 

 

The cost of food as the consumers of Canada well know has risen dramatically in recent months and this 

particular news release indicates that certainly the food stores are enjoying this price increase because it 

affords them much larger profits. 

 

May I go on to quote from the news release: 

 

Particularly large profit increases occur in a number of manufacturing groups — wood products 87 per 

cent, primary metals 47 per cent, electrical products 44 per cent, but food and beverage manufacturers 

at least 20 per cent. Last year, Zellers Company alone, a large retail establishment, had profits of $14.1 

million, an increase of 54 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I have demonstrated quite clearly, one of the major reasons for the large increases 

in the prices to the consumer. One of the main reasons for these high prices is due to extensively high 

profit margins. There are other reasons why the cost to the consumer is higher. You know, conventional 

wisdom has it that the so-called corporate enterprise system is an efficient system — this is conventional 

wisdom. It is efficient, allegedly, in many areas — production, distribution, financing and so on. I want 

to suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that in fact, there are many inefficiencies in the private, corporate, free 

enterprise system that we know so well in North America. 

 

Let me give you some examples in terms of inefficiencies in the distribution system of goods and 

services. In 1951, the average supermarket in Canada was around 4,500 square feet. By the 1960s the 

standard store was around 20,000 square feet. The size of the store increased to accommodate the 

proliferation of food and non-food items in the store. At the end of World War II, the large retail food 

stores carried about 4,000 items. By the mid-1970s the average urban supermarket carried between 

8,000 and 10,000 items. In 1975, National Grocers, one of the western empire's large wholesalers, 

announced that it was going to reduce the number of items on its inventory from 27,000 to 16,000. 

 

Now, it is readily apparent, Mr. Speaker, that only a large operation has the economic power to engage 

in this form of large scale marketing. As a result, we have seen the growth of the large scale retail 

chains, to the detriment of the smaller retailer. The result is less competition in the industry and further 

to that of course, higher profits result 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — The rich become richer. 

 

MR. DYCK: — The food industry in Canada today is dominated in fact, by five major corporate chains 

— the empire created by George Weston, Dominion Stores, Canada Safeway and those firms operating 

more or less in eastern Canada, Steinbergs and A & P of Canada. In addition to these of course, there are 

a number of voluntary chains, the largest one being IGA Canada Limited, which is in fact, controlled by 

two large wholesalers, M. Loeb and the Oshawa group. 

 

These corporate giants have steadily increased their share of the food market, from 32.2 per cent in 1951 

to 60 per cent in 1975. The share of the market held by the smaller, unaffiliated stores has fallen from 63 

per cent in 1951 to 14 per cent in 1975. Mr. Speaker, wherever a large chain store or supermarket is 

opened, any existing small grocery stores in the area are either forced out of business, or must at least 

reduce their operation in terms of sales. So I suggest to you that the clear trend in Canada is towards 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

546 

greater and greater market concentration by the corporate chains, and the highest degree of retail market 

concentration is right here on the prairies. Canada Safeway alone has around 50 per cent of the total 

food sales in this province. These large institutions have a tremendous advantage over their competitors 

through the market power which comes from vertical integration backed through wholesaling to 

manufacturing of food, and even primary production in some cases. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, first of all there is no competition in the industry and, as a result, 

corporations are able to write virtually their own price tag and in that way enjoy high profit margins but, 

in addition, there are still other reasons. The other reasons include the very inefficiency of the 

distribution system. For example, it was found in a private study that retail firms on the prairies have 

almost twice the amount of floor space to service the same populations. For example, an area in the 

United States would require about half the floor space as the same sort of population would use in 

Saskatchewan. Using the American average as a base, the private study concluded that there is twice as 

many stores in the prairies as the population required and this was costing the consumer an additional 4 

per cent per year on their grocery bill alone. This refers, Mr. Speaker, only to the extra cost because of 

extra space requirements. It doe not refer to all the extra costs as a result of fancy dan advertising, 

packaging merchandising, and so on. I could refer here, Mr. Speaker, to the pharmaceutical industry, for 

example, which has a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . preponderance of it costs in the advertising area. 

 

But in the final analysis, Mr. Speaker, we know that there is a tremendous mark-up between the price of 

food at the farm gate and the retail store. Profits in relation to sale appear to be low and yet the food 

industries and the food retailing firms are doing quite well. The consumer is paying not only for the 

profits but for the inefficient methods distribution. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the matter of inflation particularly could be solved if some action was taken at 

the federal level. If we had public control of land assembly around our cities, and there were more 

smaller contractors in the house construction industry across this country, then people on low incomes 

could afford to buy homes. If we had effective competition in the retailing of food and clothing across 

this country, there would be lower profit margins, greater efficiency and lower prices to the consumer. 

there were fewer supermarkets, with all that expensive floor space, then food prices would be lower. If, 

Mr. Speaker, we had fewer people in Canada selling, merchandising, advertising, packaging, all of 

which the consumer ultimately has to pay for, if we had fewer of these people creating unnecessary 

wants and needs, in our society there would certainly be lower prices to the consumer. 

 

If for example, the automobile industry would discontinue its mindless, completely mindless, annual 

change in the style of automobiles (providing four and five different models in each different range, so 

many different sizes and shapes of cars) if it would stop redesigning its cars every year, which 

necessitates the maintenance of inventory of parts for all these different sizes and models across the 

whole continent which necessitates the retooling of entire factories, providing new moulds, new 

materials ad infinitum — Mr. Speaker, if the automobile industry did this, then we would have lower 

transportation costs to the consumer, not to speak of lower insurance rate that would result by not having 

to repair these fancy dan automobiles that we have running around the country these days. Surely, Mr. 

Speaker, when we can put a man the moon, then surely we should be able to design an automobile that 

will go more than 15 miles to the gallon. Of course, Mr. Speaker, if that happened, the oil companies 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

547 

would be unhappy. If, Mr. Speaker, the financial institutions pared the enormous profits that they have 

been making in recent years and modernized their internal operations and made them more efficient, 

then certainly the consumer would be in a position to borrow funds at lower rates of interest. 

 

Now, when you wrap all of this together, if we had a government in Canada that had some courage, that 

had some will and desire to look to some of the solutions that I've mentioned to this devastating ill that's 

called inflation, then I'm sure that they would find some of those solutions. But I regret to say that after 

112 years of Tory government and Liberal government and then Tory government and then Liberal 

government, we have not succeeded in solving some of the real, fundamental, economic problems of our 

country. Because we have not found solutions to these fundamental economic problems, people are 

being hurt. Older people are being hurt because their savings are being eroded. Younger people are 

being hurt because they cannot derive the earning capacity to purchase those things that they need. The 

unemployed are being hurt when they try for months to find a job and cannot find a job and I have said 

before and I will say it again, that it is completely immoral to have a situation where a person wants to 

work but can't find a job. That situation, Mr. Speaker, is immoral and should not be tolerated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to concentrate on another major topic in this speech. I would like to discuss 

the matter of the Indian people and the problems they face, particularly in our urban areas. In recent 

years, we have seen a large number of Indian people move to our urban areas in this province. I think 

this is a development which is taking place all across Canada, to a lesser or to a greater degree. Our 

Indian people are suffering a great deal in our cities. They are suffering from a lack of jobs, they suffer 

from a lack of skills to compete in the job market, they suffer from poor housing and they suffer from 

discrimination. Now, there's no doubt these areas of concern that I have mentioned apply to all people, 

but certainly by far and away, there are a much larger percentage of Indian people and Metis people in 

these problem categories that I have described. I want to emphasize at the outset that there is no simple 

solution to the matter to the solving of these problems. There is no simple solution and in fact, the 

problem will not be solved overnight. It is a longer-term solution that is required and a long term 

solution is one that we must seek. In my view, Mr. Speaker, one of the prerequisites, the most 

fundamental and essential prerequisite to providing a better way of life for our Indian people and Metis 

people across this province and particularly in our cities, is a better understanding on the part of the 

white population. As I travel around the country and the province, I hear white people talking about 

Indians and they say they drink too much, oh they don't want to work, or when they have a house they 

burn it down. Everywhere I go I hear these accusations at one time or another. These accusations are 

detrimental and harmful not only to the Indian and Metis people, but they are harmful to all of us, Mr. 

Speaker. I consider these comments and statements to be a result of a lack understanding of the native 

person, as an individual and as a group. 

 

Just for a moment, Mr. Speaker, imagine what would happen to the white people if suddenly someone 

came along and took away our way of life, took away our language, our religion, our lifestyle, took 

away our value system and finally, put us on certain geographical pieces of land and said that we would 

have to remain on those geographical areas. I say, Mr. Speaker, if that was ever done to white people, if 

suddenly overnight we were conquered, vanquished, what would be our reaction? I think we would 

respond in a way that would shock most of us. Through a process like that we would lose a lot of our 

dignity, we would lose our self-respect and we would in act in such a way that most of us would be 

abhorred. Well that's exactly what Christian white people did to the Indian. We came out to North 

America a few hundred 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

548 

years ago and over a period of time we did to the Indian people what I believe was very disgusting and 

verging on the barbaric. We took away their way of life, their way hunting, fishing and trapping. We 

took away their religion. We took away the language. We put them on reservations. We did all these 

things to the Indian people and then we said, you pursue our way of life and your problems will be 

solved. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, after you receive a cultural shock as the native people have done as a result of the 

devastating change of their lifestyle brought about by white people, it was not that easy to pursue 

another way of life. Another way of life was with different values, different work ethics, different 

religion, different language, different everything. And so I say, while we white Christians took over this 

great continent with all its resources, and after we exploited it and developed it to our own advantage, I 

say that we owe the Indian people a great debt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK: — After all we are living in their country. If we try to understand the fact that Indian 

people for some 6,000 to 8,000 years lived a certain way here by hunting and, fishing and soon — if 

they had lived for that long in one way and suddenly were asked to change so dramatically then it 

becomes a very serious problem indeed. And so I say we should approach the Indian problem with a 

much greater understanding because all they want is a fair deal. They don't want charity, they want 

justice. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK: — They want to have the right to hold up their heads and be proud and have that same 

self-respect that they had before we white Christians arrived. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK: — And so we need to concentrate on this important area in the years ahead, and certainly 

some real responsibility lies with the Indians themselves. You cannot help someone who will not help 

themselves. But equally certain the main responsibility lies with the white people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK: — And the first step is a matter of trying to understand why Indian people do what they 

do, because they do have their reasons. We need in our cities to ensure that Indian and Metis people 

alike develop job skills. In that context it is necessary that the training and plant facilities be made 

available so that these job skills can, in fact, be developed. 

 

We need to assist in creating jobs. This is a real challenge because Canada, as a whole, has 8 per cent to 

9 per cent or 10 per cent to 12 per cent unemployment depending on where you are. But jobs need to be 

made available for Indian people, jobs with a challenge, jobs with a potential for advancement and so on 

— the same kinds of jobs, Mr. Speaker, the same kinds of jobs that white people want. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DYCK: — And, Mr. Speaker, finally we need to provide the means whereby Indian people can 

acquire better housing for themselves. Some of the places where some of 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 

549 

our Indian and Metis people live are deplorable. Certainly in an affluent society as we live in, in Canada, 

it is immoral to have situations where some people live in very expensive residences and other people 

live in nothing less than hovels. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a major challenge of this government and the people of Saskatchewan — a 

major challenge to take the first step to solving the problems faced by the Indian and Metis people, 

particularly in our urban areas. But I want to warn you, Mr. Speaker, that these people are running out of 

patience. They are saying they want an opportunity and should we not respond at this time, the 

consequences will be very painful indeed. 

 

While it is a challenge and a responsibility for the white people, there are obligations on the Indian. 

Indians have an obligation to develop capable and reliable leadership. They have the obligation to work 

with their people to formulate programs and objectives to put before various governments and, along 

with governments, to ensure that these programs and objectives are carried out. Indian people must 

retain their own identity, culture and heritage just as such other peoples of other ethnic origins have 

done. But without compromising their heritage, they have an obligation, however, to work within the 

present societal situation to achieve their economic and social goals. 

 

While I am saying this, I know there is a commitment from the Premier of this province and this cabinet 

to assist and to try to arrive at some solution. The record bears this out. If you go to northern 

Saskatchewan and ask the people there how things are there today, they will say that in northern 

Saskatchewan things are better today. There are more people working and fewer people unemployed. 

People in northern Saskatchewan are living in better homes. People in the North have water and sewage 

services in their communities where they didn't have them before. People in the North have better 

schools, better health care facilities, and better roads. People in the North are developing 

self-government and are beginning to run their own affairs. It has been some struggle but certainly, there 

has been a great deal of accomplishments in northern Saskatchewan. I think that if we put our minds to 

it, we can have the same successes in our urban areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can I call it 5 o'clock? 

 

The Assembly adjourned from 5 until 7 p.m. 

 


