



















































Hansard: March 19, 1979


781 

 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 19, 1979 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you, a group 

of Grade 8 students. I believe they are 30 in number, from the Weyburn Junior High School, and they are 

sitting in the west gallery. 

 

These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Jim Nedelcov, Mrs. Rae Keefe and Miss Carol Boryf. 

Their bus driver is Mr. Delbert Foote, and Mrs. Boryf. 

 

I am sure that you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of this Assembly join with me when I say, welcome them 

to our Legislative Buildings. It is our wish that their stay here proves to be pleasant and educational. I look 

forward to meeting them a little later this afternoon. I am sure that we all wish them a very safe journey 

home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Provincial Auditor’s Report 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct my question to the 

Premier, in the absence of the Minister of Finance (Hon. W.E. Smishek). Would the Premier not agree that 

the spectre of the auditor of Public Accounts arguing publicly with the head, or acting head of the 

Department of Finance over something as fundamental as the presentation of the financial information to the 

people of Saskatchewan, is in some way, and in many ways, a spectre that the people of Saskatchewan 

should not have to face? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — No, I would not agree. I think that the auditing is not an exact 

science. Opinions will differ as to the appropriate way to present a financial statement and if there are 

differences of opinion between people of competence in the field, I think the best thing to do is to air their 

differences and I see no particular problem arising from this. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier not agree that since there 

is no possibility that the Government of Saskatchewan would ever allow any Crown corporation to renege on 

its liabilities, that in effect, a guarantee exists between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Crown 

corporations in Saskatchewan, and that therefore, the provincial auditor is correct in his assessment that in 

order to adequately reflect the liability position of the Government of Saskatchewan, that the Crown 

corporation borrowings, whether or not guaranteed, should be reflected in the Public Accounts of the 

government of the province of Saskatchewan and if they are not reflected by the Government of 

Saskatchewan the people of Saskatchewan are being misled. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I would not agree with that. I can see the merit of including them 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

782 

and see the merit of excluding them. Please understand that the full facts are made available, since the 

financial statements (the audited financial statements) of the Crown corporations are made available to the 

public as well. What we are talking about is whether or not it is appropriate to put out a consolidated 

financial statement which includes all the assets of the Crown corporations and all of the liabilities of the 

Crown corporations. This has, so far as I am aware, never been a practice of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, whether or not it should be. The financial statements in the past have, as I have recalled them, 

disclosed the net equity of the Crown corporations but have not always shown on the asset side accumulated 

surpluses of Crown corporations. But be that as it may, obviously a case can be made for including both the 

assets and the liabilities of Crown corporations on the balance sheet, or excluding the assets and liabilities, or 

certain of them on the balance sheet. No case can be made for simply including either the assets and ignoring 

the liabilities, or the liabilities and ignoring the assets. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. The Premier obviously is attempting to cover 

up for this obvious dispute between the provincial auditor, who is responsible to this Assembly, and the 

acting head of the Department of Finance who is responsible to the Minister of Finance (who has exhibited 

to this Assembly at any rate during the last couple of weeks, his irresponsibility). Mr. Speaker, my question 

to the Premier is quite simply this (and I am going to give a little example first, if the House will permit me). 

Today, we are presented with a financial statement from the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund and on page 11 of 

this Saskatchewan Heritage Fund statement it indicates that there is $75,586,686 due and payable from the 

consolidated fund (or in other words, in cash or short-term assets) in the Energy and Resource Development 

Fund as of March 31, 1978. Yet two to three weeks later an order in council was issued by the Government 

of Saskatchewan distributing that $75 million to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, even though prior 

to March 31 it was known in this Assembly that that $75 million would be committed to the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. Is the Premier not aware that by his failure to include in the liabilities of the 

province of Saskatchewan those loans that are borrowed by the Crown corporations that he is opening the 

door to the Crown corporations borrowing moneys that are not reflected in the consolidated accounts, the 

Crown corporations in turn using that money to transfer moneys to various agencies and other corporations 

of government, and thereby covering up mistakes and shortfalls in cash in so far as the Government of 

Saskatchewan is concerned and the various agencies of the government. Is he not aware that that is what the 

provincial auditor is driving at? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Premier not aware that the provincial auditor in 

insisting that all loans for Crown corporations and other agencies of government be reflected in the 

consolidated accounts is merely attempting to tell the people of Saskatchewan and the Treasury Board . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. The member is debating the issue. This puts me in the position of either cutting 

the member off or allowing the person who responds also to debate the issue. That is not the purpose of the 

question period. The purpose of the question period is to have a brief preamble, followed by an interrogative, 

such as who, what, where, why and when. Now, I don’t think the member for Nipawin is conforming to that 

and I would ask him to conform to that. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Fine, then. When will the Premier become aware of the fact that the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

783 

provincial auditor is telling the government of Saskatchewan and telling the acting Deputy Minister of 

Finance (Mr. Wallace) and telling the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) and tell you, Mr. Premier, that 

unless these liabilities are reflected in the financial statements of the consolidated fund, there are 

opportunities for manipulation of the books? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that the provincial auditor has at any 

time suggested that there has been manipulation of the books. Keep in mind that the provincial auditor has 

the authority to audit all the books of the government, whether Crown corporations or not. Keep in mind that 

the provincial auditor has the authority to audit all books of the government, whether Crown corporations or 

not, — is what I said — and that he certainly. . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — He passed an act last year that wouldn’t allow that. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I continue? . . .that he has the authority to do that. It is true that 

with respect to Crown corporations in certain instances, other auditors, outside auditors are engaged. Fair 

enough. But there is no suggestion, I am sure, that the provincial auditor does not have available to him all of 

the financial records of the government and he can make such reports as he thinks are appropriate on them. I 

think what we are facing here, Mr. Speaker, that which the member for Nipawin is alluding to, is essentially 

a technical disagreement as to whether or not it is better to leave out the assets and liabilities of Crown 

corporations when they are not guaranteed by the consolidated fund, or run through the consolidated fund or 

whether it is better to put them in. Now heretofore, we have simply not put the assets of Crown corporations 

on the asset side of the consolidated fund. We have not done that and if he can find a statement, a 

consolidated statement which includes the net worth (note what I’m saying, the net worth) of the power 

corporation as an asset on the asset side of the balance sheet at any time, I’d like to know when. This has not 

been the practice. Perhaps it should be the practice but it is at least a highly debatable point whether it should 

be the practice and the suggestion that somehow this is a cover for inappropriate transactions is totally 

without foundation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question. Is the Premier not aware that the provincial auditor himself 

has specifically stated that he would teach or show the Government of Saskatchewan how to do this if the 

Government of Saskatchewan would not listen? In next year’s report, it would be shown to the Government 

of Saskatchewan how to do it. Furthermore, is the Premier not aware that when a Crown corporation 

specifically appoints an outside firm of auditors that that does not make those records available to the 

provincial auditors; the provincial auditor only has . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I’ll take a new question. 

 

Increase in Telephone Rates 

 

MR. G. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — I have a question to the Minister of Telephones (Mr. Cody). How 

can you justify a 6 per cent increase in telephone rates and at the same time come before this House with Bill 

No. 22 and ask permission to invest the so-called profits? 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

784 

HON. D. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, the attitude of the government and the attitude 

of the Crown corporation, that Sask Tel and its board of directors is they should have a reasonable return on 

their investment, about a net of 4.5 per cent or so, 5 per cent, gross of about 11 per cent. As a result of not 

having that percentage, we have had to have an increase. With regard to the bill that’s before the House, that 

bill is so that the Crown corporation has the opportunity to invest in short-term investments. 

 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is this 6 per cent increase designed to cover the losses 

due to CPN (Co-operative Programming Network) and to cover the expected losses from the expropriation 

difficulties from the downtown Regina development? 

 

MR. CODY: — Well at this time we haven’t anticipated any losses in CPN. I suppose if that’s part in parcel 

of it, maybe that will go to pay for that as well as paying for putting in telephones in the town of Wolseley or 

paying for putting in telephones in the southern part of Regina or in Arm River or anywhere else. That’s all 

part in parcel of running a telephone company, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Would the minister not agree that the time has long since passed when monopoly 

Crown corporations should be required to justify any rate increases before an independent public review 

agency in accordance with the PC (Progressive Conservatives) demands of the last four years? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODY: — Well as far as I’m concerned, the members have an opportunity when the Crown 

Corporations Committee meets to scrutinize that annual report just like they have the opportunity to 

scrutinize any annual report. They can ask all the questions they want at that time, in so far as why the rates 

were to be increased. They’ll have to do that at next year’s Crown corporation’s sitting, I would think, but 

there’s certainly nothing wrong with the members asking any questions they wish at that particular time. 

That’s when we scrutinize the workings of a Crown corporation. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister telling this Assembly that he 

would have us believe that Crown corporations is in any way designed to justify future rate increases on 

behalf of Sask Tel or Sask Power or any other monopoly Crown corporation? Is the minister sincerely trying 

to have this House believe that Crown corporations has the ability to roll back any price increases? 

 

MR. CODY: — No, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I said that. I said that if you wanted to scrutinize on a proper 

basis any of the workings of Sask Tel, the proper place to do it is in Crown corporations. I am sure you will 

have that opportunity very shortly. 

 

Assistance for Reconstruction of Grid Roads 

 

MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Members of 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) are registering quite a bit of concern over the 

government’s refusal to provide assistance for the reconstruction of the grid roads that are now becoming 

some 20 years or more old and are worn out. Is the government prepared to provide some assistance for the 

reconstruction of the older grid roads? 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

785 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member’s question, I think I indicated at the SARM Convention that we were aware of the concern put 

forward re reconstruction of roads. I indicated also that the government felt there was some relationship 

between the reconstruction of grid roads issue, and the super grid policy and the consideration of changes in 

the super grid policy. The hon. member will be aware that there is a committee established to look at the 

super grid policy, namely the issue of oiled roads versus reconstruction of gravel roads. We will be asking 

the committee (I think it is already there) to consider the concern expressed by the municipalities through 

SARM on reconstruction as it relates to possible changes in the super grid policy. 

 

MR. SWAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The SARM have shown an interest all right in the super grid 

but most of them are expressing a concern that the super grid program is moving forward slowly and that the 

reconstruction is a must at this time. Is the minister prepared to divert some of the super grid funding into the 

reconstruction program to go ahead now to keep these roads in shape to use in our municipalities? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the last question of the hon. member, are we prepared 

to shift money? The answer to that is no, not at this time certainly. I think that while there has been a slow 

pace established with respect to super grid, that is because both the municipalities and the government are 

just not sure at this time what the policy should be. Obviously there is a concern about the high cost of 

oiling; there is a concern of the maintenance of the oil system. We are aware of that as are many of the rural 

municipalities. I think before we make any decision regarding reconstruction, we should examine our super 

grid policy. It may well be that the reconstruction issue can be taken care of in a change in super grid. As I 

put forward to the convention, perhaps we should be looking at a 10,000 or 11,000 mile system of which 

only 2,000 or 3,000 would be oiled and perhaps 7,000 to 8,000 graded and gravelled. The actual financial 

commitment would be roughly the same as we have already established in the 5,000 mile regrading, 5,000 

mile oiling but that possible change, which the committee is looking at, could accommodate the issue of 

reconstruction. 

 

4-H Program 

 

MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — A question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of 

Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. A year ago there was an agreement made between the Saskatchewan 4-H Council, 

this government and the University of Saskatchewan whereby the 4-H Council would incorporate in order to 

independently administrate its government grants. My question, Mr. Premier, is why, then, last Friday was 

this decision reversed, the autonomy of the 4-H Council destroyed and the administration of the 4-H program 

taken over by the Department of Agriculture? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with the matter as raised by the hon. member and I will 

take the question as notice. 

 

Heritage Fund 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I have one more question to address to the Premier today. I alluded to it 

earlier in this question period. This is with reference to the kind of financial reporting that is going on in the 

Government of Saskatchewan today. Is the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

786 

Premier aware that on this heritage fund balance sheet that is presented to us today, it indicates some $75 

million as at March 31, 1978 — it indicates some $75,586,000 are held in current reserves. Is the Premier 

aware that on an order in council dated March 28, 1978 some $75 million was authorized to be transferred to 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan three days before the March 31 deadline, yet the actual transfer of 

funds did not occur until April of 1978 as is reflected in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan financial 

statements dated June 30, 1978. In other words, is the Premier aware that even though the order in council 

was dated before March 31 transferring the $75 million, in order to show a $75 million balance in the 

heritage fund it was postponed until after the deadline? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not familiar with the date on the order in council but I certainly don’t deny what 

the hon. member says because there is nothing very remarkable about the circumstances. Certainly the 

money wouldn’t be transferred until after the order in council was passed, and if it was passed late in March 

it’s certainly not surprising that the transfer wasn’t made till early in April. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Is the Premier not aware that that is a misrepresentation of the facts on the heritage 

fund for the people of Saskatchewan and that in auditing terms, for the Premier’s information, it’s known as 

kiting? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, that is not quite what is called kiting in the ordinary sense of the word. 

We had other politicians in this province many years ago who had more experience at kiting than perhaps 

any of us have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member for that particular area will be familiar. But, no, 

would I don’t think there be anything very remarkable about showing in the asset side $75 million less as 

due from the consolidated fund and $75 million more as an investment in the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. I want to advise the hon. member that we’re not at all bashful, and not at all ashamed of our 

investment in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. We think it’s going to be a good investment, is 

already a good investment and if we did not feel this way, obviously there are many ways we could structure 

the books so that some of this heritage money would be in the Power Corporation. We could borrow money 

for the Potash Corporation — there’s no problem. And there is no significance to be placed upon the fact that 

a transfer was made on one side or the other of March 31. There are transactions around each month end and 

there’s nothing of any significance with respect to that one. 

 

Workers’ Compensation Levy for Small Businesses 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). A case has been 

brought to my attention of a small electrical contractor working in the oil field. I believe the contractor has 

14 employees, and it has seen its workers’ compensation levy increase in the past three years from $2,100 to 

$3,800 and now to $6,100 this year. Over the 31-year history of this company there has only been paid out 

on its behalf through workers’ compensation something less that $3,000. Now I don’t expect the minister to 

be aware of the details of this particular situation but should there not be a preferred rate somehow for a 

small business that has proven not to be an insurance risk in this field? 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — I think the hon. member is suggesting we should dispose 

of or set aside the whole process that has been acknowledged since 1928 of collective liability. This allows a 

small business such as the one that you draw attention to, to escape the possibility of a horrendous lawsuit 

that could result when an 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

787 

accident (perhaps a fatality or a number of fatalities) takes place in a small industry, perhaps through no fault 

of the employer but as a result of an unfortunate chain of circumstances. You’ll know that the assessments 

are levied on the basis of the accident experience. As a matter of fact, there have been a number of instances 

where the assessment on the employers has been reduced in the order of 25 cents to 50 cents per hundred of 

payroll over the last 12 months. So there has been a decrease in the number of instances where the industry 

itself has shown a decline in the number of accidents that have taken place. The industry, in that particular 

classification, sets its own rates relative to the number of accidents and claims that are adjudicated in the 

period of any 12 months. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — A fair statement, but does it not also indicate that when you’re starting to get to a figure 

of $6,100, that’s a substantial expense for small business? I suggest to you that perhaps something should be 

made so that there is an incentive for those businesses that in fact do practice safety in their particular field. 

 

MR. SNYDER: — What the member should do is get a copy of the Muir report. There was a very thorough 

review done by Judge Alistair Muir, two employer representatives and two employee representatives who 

indicated quite clearly that they did not recommend the merit system of determining individual company’s 

assessments. What they suggested was that the whole process of collective liability is one that should 

remain. The Muir committee has not suggested that any such thing should take place. I’m not familiar with 

the figures you gave. I’m rather surprised that assessments should increase by that amount. If the member 

will give me the name of the firm I can certainly chase it through with the Workers’ Compensation Board 

and let him know the circumstances surrounding that particular assessment which has been levied on that 

group of employers — not just that single employer of course, but the group of employers for the industry 

with which that employer is associated. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — One final supplementary. It strikes me that when you get into a situation at $6,100 

you’re getting to the point where you could probably get into the private field and buy insurance cheaper. I 

don’t suggest that that’s the field but that’s not the purpose of the workers’ compensation. Surely their rates 

should be lower than those in the private field where a profit has to be made. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve indicated, at least on two occasions since the question was 

originally raised, that the rates will be levied on the basis of the accident experience. It’s the individual 

classification that makes that determination as to what the assessment rate per hundred of payroll would be. 

If you’ll give me the details I’ll certainly provide the additional information he’s looking for. 

 

Trans Canada Pipeline Proposal to Store Gas 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of Sask Power 

Corporation. I noticed in today’s Leader Post that Trans Canada Pipelines has proposed storing gas 

approximately one-third of Ontario’s use in caverns in southeastern Alberta. With the profit you’re able to 

make (about 600 per cent on Saskatchewan gas at the present time from Saskatchewan producers) have you 

given any thought to storing in caverns out in that area where we have this gas? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, let me first 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

788 

comment on the profits the member for Estevan relates to. He may want to interpret them as profits but it’s 

because of the present policy in effect for Saskatchewan gas, that we have lower gas rates than most other 

regions throughout Canada, excluding the province of Alberta. Had we not that kind of policy I can assure 

people, consumers of gas, natural gas in Saskatchewan, they would be paying a much, much greater rate than 

what they are now. 

 

To respond, Mr. Speaker, more specifically to the question of whether or not SPC is looking to the storage of 

natural gas in its empty caverns, the answer is yes, we do it extensively and our policy, if we have one in 

effect, is to attempt to use a cavern capacity as extensively as possible, hopefully placed throughout the 

province so that we have reserves of gas when they will be required because of some interruption in the 

system of transmitting that gas throughout the province. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. By your own admission, Mr. Minister, you have stated that 

the cost of producing gas each year is going up. Now, don’t you think it would be wise to go on an extensive 

program, the fact that you do have gas at a fairly low price and that we should really produce this gas now 

and go all out on it? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was the wisdom of this government, some years ago, to put 

together an independent body known as the Natural Gas Conservative and Development Board, to not only 

assist us in providing us with factual information as to what the reserves of gas may be in the province of 

Saskatchewan, but also what might best be the development policy of the province in developing and 

proving up, in fact, distributing that gas. It is that independent board’s policy that we are pursuing now. They 

have made some recent recommendations that the government is giving consideration to, I think that we will 

continue to give first consideration to such recommendations from that board, which has done a justifiable 

job up to this point in time and I am sure will continue to be of some real assistance to the province in 

escalating or expanding its gas operations for Saskatchewan. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Passing of Alfred Bellegarde 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I wonder if I might indicate to the House, for 

those who may not have heard, the unfortunate news of the untimely passing of Mr. Alfred Bellegarde, the 

Chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. It was a very sudden passing and I know that all of us 

would like to convey, not only to his family, but to all members of the federation, our condolences. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I also would like to add the word of the 

opposition to the words of the Premier that Mr. Bellegarde was only recently elected to his position as the 

head of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. He had great promise for the future and was a great leader 

of his people. We, too, express our condolences to his family. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 17 — An Act to 

amend The Oil Well Income Tax Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill, an Act to amend The Oil Well Income Tax Act, along 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

789 

with a number of other bills, some of which were directed to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, deal 

almost exclusively, in fact they do deal exclusively, with metrication, and the oil industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I do believe that it would have been more appropriate for this legislature to have directed all 

of those amendments to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, as it would have greatly enhanced and 

saved the time of the members of the Legislative Assembly in looking at the routine amendments that 

metrication brings about. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, having been given the opportunity to address a few words to the second reading of 

these bills, starting with the Oil Well Income Tax Act, I am pleased to be able to have the Assembly consider 

them. The items do not necessarily emanate from action solely by the province of Saskatchewan, or the 

Government of Saskatchewan. They are more products of the federal government’s 1970 White Paper on 

Metric Conversion. The decision to proceed with metrication led, as some members will be aware, to the 

establishment of steering committees across Canada. These committees, Mr. Speaker, were responsible for 

planning and assisting various segments of society in that conversion process which is now well under way. 

 

The items that I present to this House deal only with a small portion of the overall conversion plan, 

specifically petroleum and natural gas industries and services and, to a very much lesser degree, with some 

of the bills that I will be introducing for second reading later today. 

 

Members of this Legislative Assembly should understand that metrication of the petroleum and natural gas 

industry has not been hastily conceived, nor is it an action that has been imposed on the industry by this 

government. Certainly, in discussion with the oil industry, they to a large extent do not really believe that it 

has been imposed on them by the federal government either. The members of the sector dealing with oil and 

gas have been meeting, as I have stated, since the early 1970s. The plan adopted by the committee has been 

accepted, Mr. Speaker, by all major petroleum and natural gas organizations on behalf of their industry. The 

plan, and as a result, the legislation before you, has the support of the Canadian Petroleum Association 

(CPA), and the Canadian Association of Well-Drilling Contractors. I would think it goes without saying that 

the major producing provinces and the federal government concur with our action. Evidence of this rests in 

the fact that these governments have already presented metric legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Department of Mineral Resources is well along the way to implementing metric reporting 

in the oil and gas industry. I’m not aware, as minister, of any objections having been received. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, well drilling and completion data has been submitted in the metric unit form since August of 1978 

and beginning with the month of January of this year, 1979, production data are also being submitted in 

metric units. I might say that this has been voluntarily undertaken by the oil industry themselves. Department 

staff have revised forms and undertaken changes to computer systems in order to accommodate this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by noting that: (1) industry is both sympathetic and fully in support of this 

legislation, (2) industry and other governments have participated in formulating but you will be asked to 

approve, (3) your approval is a procedural step to attain mutually desired housekeeping objectives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with those few short words that I move second reading of an Act to 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

790 

amend The Oil Well Income Tax Act. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the minister that our party certainly 

agrees that this is just a housekeeping move towards metric and we will be supporting the bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 19 — An Act to 

amend The Oil and Gas Conservation, Stabilization and Development Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, again as I have indicated in the short comments which I made pertaining to the 

preceding bill, an Act to amend The Oil Well Income Tax Act, this act and its amendments to The Oil and 

Gas Conservation, Stabilization and Development Act, are again to deal exclusively with metric conversion. 

I have pointed out that there is no significant opposition to these changes, these amendments. In fact a 

significant portion of the industry has already converted to metric on its own. This legislation will simply 

provide for the complete changeover from the present system to metric and I would ask that all members 

give support to this legislation. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, having said only a very few short words in second reading of this bill, I would ask 

members to approve second reading of An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation, Stabilization and 

Development Act. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, again we recognize this as another part of the conversion and we will be 

supporting the bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 20 — An Act to 

amend The Road Allowances Crown Oil Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, again, Bill No. 20, An Act to amend The Road Allowances Crown Oil Act, is a bill 

which deals exclusively with metric conversion. I think that I have already indicated to this legislature the 

reasoning behind that and the support and the progress that has already been made pertaining to that metric 

conversion. 

 

I would, therefore, ask all members to support second reading of an Act to amend The Road Allowance 

Crown Oil Act. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Just one comment on this, Mr. Minister. I believe some of the oil 

companies are concerned over the fact that in measuring out oil, you only take it to one decimal place. There 

is a chance at times in measuring your 4.6 barrels to a metre, you could, quite likely in some cases, take away 

one or two barrels of oil from these companies by only going to one decimal place in your measurement, and 

in other places they can go to three or four decimal places. I wonder if you would check into this. We will be 

supporting this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. MESSER moved second reading of Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Pipe Lines Act. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

791 

He said: Mr. Speaker, again for the fourth time, this bill also pertains exclusively to metric conversion. I 

would therefore ask the members of this Assembly to agree with second reading of an Act to amend The 

Pipe Lines Act. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, we will be supporting this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. MESSER moved second reading of Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation 

Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this bill to amend The Power Corporation Act. For the most part, 

the amendments are meant to update the act in order that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation can carry out 

its functions with a greater and more improved administration efficiency. Some of the amendments are 

required to allow the corporation to fulfil its corporate objectives more efficiently and more effectively, in 

keeping with the present economic and social conditions that it finds itself operating in. That is not unlike 

any other corporate structure attempting to amend or change its mode of operation in relation to changing 

circumstances. 

 

Of most importance, the amendments to section 8 and to section 55(1) will be of, I think, the most interest to 

members of this Assembly. In these sections, the purposes and the powers of the corporation are to be 

amended to permit the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to engage in energy conservation programs, 

programs similar to the Warm Up Saskatchewan Loan Program introduced last year. 

 

In 1978, the Home Energy Loan Act authorized the corporation to provide interest free loans to home-

owners who are improving the energy efficiency of their residences. To the end of February, Mr. Speaker, 

loans totalling more than $1 million have been made. This program allows loans to all home-owners to a 

maximum of $1,000, interest free. Because there are no restrictions on the age of eligible homes and because 

labor costs are also covered, the program, I believe, is having excellent response. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we’re not satisfied that this single program is enough. And that is why we are 

amending section 55(1) to allow the corporation to enter into yet new conservation programs with customers 

other than residential. We believe that greater energy savings can be accomplished in the commercial and the 

industrial sector as it is in those areas that very significant quantities of energy are consumed in this 

province. We do not, without the proposed amendments, have the power to properly introduce conservation 

programs for their consideration and hopefully, to their benefit. 

 

The consumption of natural gas by residential customers has — we’re happy to say — declined in recent 

times. And we believe this to be a continuing positive trend. We also believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Warm 

Up Saskatchewan program is part of the reason for this decrease in consumption. Certainly, when we relate 

the $1 million that I have mentioned, one has to also relate to thousands of home-owners who have taken 

advantage of that program in order to get better utilization of the energy that they consume in their homes. 

 

However, in some areas of the province, customers have unfortunately been slow to respond to the necessity 

of upgrading insulation levels. I would like to, when I address myself to these amendments, Mr. Speaker, 

urge all members of this legislature to promote this program, particularly, Mr. Speaker, the members 

respecting the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

792 

communities of Rosetown, Kindersley and Wilkie where in our mind the response to the program is the 

poorest in all of Saskatchewan. I do not, in conveying this to the Legislative Assembly, want it to be 

interpreted that it is the fault of the members that that is the case. But I do bring to their attention that those 

three constituencies by comparison to other areas in Saskatchewan have performed very poorly. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, to the end of 1978 only 14 home owners in those three constituencies of the province had 

participated in the Warm Up Saskatchewan program. I believe, Mr. Speaker, we all have an obligation to 

improve on this performance and I use those three only as an example. There are other areas which, even 

though they have performed much better than those three constituencies, still in our mind are not at a 

satisfactory level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, moving on, section 10, sub 1 of the act, will be amended to allow the corporation to sell and 

lease back property which it considers necessary for its own purposes. Section 25 and section 26 are to be 

amended to allow the corporation and the legal council, or assistant corporate legal council, of the 

corporation to sign expropriation documents. For the purpose of administrative efficiency it is necessary now 

to have additional officers within the corporation available to sign these documents. Section 27 will be 

amended so that disputes as to the compensation for expropriations are settled under The Expropriation 

Procedures Act. This amendment brings the act into line with the actual practice that’s being followed in 

expropriation cases. The official valuator is no longer used by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and has 

not been used for a good number of years. This will streamline the efficiency of the corporation and make it 

recognizingly legal to do what it has been doing for a number of years. 

 

Section 30 will be amended so that releases of easements may be executed on behalf of the corporation by 

the corporate legal council or the assistant corporate legal council of the corporation. This amendment is 

made solely for the purpose of administrative efficiency and brings this section in line with the changes 

being made in sections 25 and 26 of this bill. 

 

A new section 30, sub 1 is to be added and would give statutory protection to certain unregistered easements 

of the corporation. This is a new section, Mr. Speaker. This section only refers to rural service lines at 14.4 

kva and 25 kva voltage supported by single pole structures. It would have no application, Mr. Speaker, to 

other lines. Lines serving industrial customers would be a good example or, for that matter, 32 kba single 

pole distribution lines or high voltage H frame transmission lines. Those would be excluded. For these lines 

registerable easements of 30 to 100 feet in width are obtained and compensation is paid with the right to 

appeal the amount of such compensation under The Expropriation Procedure Act. As further information, a 

similar amendment to The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act was assented to on January 12 of 1978 by 

this Legislative Assembly. Section 42 is to be amended to provide for the guarantee of indebtedness or 

liability of the corporation, such as that required in a lease arrangement, to be guaranteed by the province. 

This is to coincide with the proposed amendment to section 10. Section 44 dealing with the investment 

powers of the corporation is to be amended to permit the corporation to invest in a greater range of securities 

than those now allowed. Section 48 is to be amended so that a person other than the provincial auditor may 

be appointed to audit the books and accounts of the corporation. Although the provincial auditor normally 

acts as the corporation’s auditor, instances may arise where he is unable to perform his function and an 

alternate auditor may well be necessary. Section 49 will be amended to omit the references to government 

finance office and replace them with the Crown Investment 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

793 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. It is, Mr. Speaker, proposed that the fine which may be imposed for an 

offence under section 60 of the act be increased to $500 from the present $50 amount. This section deals 

with persons damaging corporation property, altering meters, or improperly increasing the amount of energy 

supplied by the corporation. Mr. Speaker, it’s with those words that I move second reading of Bill No. 39, 

An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. 

 

MR. LARTER: — There are certain things in this bill, Mr. Minister, that we would like to look over more 

carefully, particularly where you show making the government of Saskatchewan liable for leasing. I’m 

wondering if a liability is going to show up as a liability to the province of Saskatchewan on a lease, if it will 

show up as a permanent liability during the term of the lease. There are a number of other things such as 

expropriation of land here that we would like to go into a little deeper and so I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation) moved second reading of the Bill No. 

24 — An Act to amend The Highways Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 24, an Act to amend The Highways Act, is another act today similar to much 

of what my colleague has just introduced. It is to accommodate our measurements and so on under The 

Highways Act, to accommodate the metric system in Saskatchewan. 

 

This gradual move towards metrication is something that apparently is sliding along with a number of people 

complaining, but still acquiescing in going along with it, for reasons best known to themselves. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I accept no responsibility for Canada’s move towards the metric system. I know that it is 

going to mess up a number of things that we have been used to. I don’t know how we are going to use some 

of those old sayings — ‘Missed by a mile’, or ‘An inch is as good as a mile’, or ‘Give an inch and take a 

mile’, or ‘A country mile’. I don’t know what they are going to do with ‘The grave of seven foot Davis’. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, when we refer to the member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck), we are going to have 

trouble telling him that some part of his anatomy is out a foot. 

 

Anyway, I think that when we stop to look at the metric system and the measurements — some of these refer 

to changing one chain or 66 feet — nice comfortable numbers — to 20 metres. Maybe another generation 

may be glad that they are multiplying by tens, or the old one yard, which incidentally was devised because it 

was an inch or so plus the distance from the end of King Henry’s nose to his thumb. That was a tremendous 

scientific measurement but time honored, and it is awfully difficult to change those old clumsy habits. I find 

that difficulty to be very real in adjusting at this point in time. 

 

You know I hear this mumbling from across the floor, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to point out to them, 

maybe once more that this is not our problem. That problem, if it is a problem, was created at Ottawa in 

1971. The act was passed in Ottawa in 1971. And they say, well that is another one of those damn Trudeau 

ideas. In fact, I heard believe it or not, a constituent of Moosomin, the member’s constituent say, just giving 

in once again to those Frenchmen. 

 

It might be interesting to the House to note that Quebec has not agreed with metricity 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

794 

so far. Maybe they have. But it is also interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that if the Tories are opposed to this, 

as a party, then you know it is amazing because when that act was passed in the House, it passed 

unanimously New Democrats. Social Credit and Tories must have either been delinquent or acquiescent, one 

or the other. They can’t have it both ways. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Passed that by order in council. 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, the member will have his opportunity to speak in his usual eloquent 

fashion, I am sure. He’ll have his turn. I simply want the record clear that the act was passed. It is a Canadian 

act. It is a Canadian law. We don’t have to like it but like many other things, I imagine we’ll go along with it 

and down the road we will join the other 90 per cent of the world with a decimal system which may be 

appreciated by future generations. So, Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of Bill No. 24, 

an Act to amend The Highways Act. 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, just a comment or two. We have full intentions in this 

caucus of supporting the changes in the bill. Perhaps I may make a comment or two in respect to the 

minister’s remarks. I heard recently that the United States is delaying its change to metrication. I for one, and 

I think probably most of the public, have maintained that if the United States wasn’t changing we shouldn’t 

have changed either. However, we are in it now. Would the minister permit a question with respect to the 

bill? I note under section 9, it concludes by, in each case, substituting 90 acres. Really, it doesn’t make a 

whole lot of sense that the entire bill is changing measurements from imperial to metric, but that one appears 

to remain imperial. Can you explain that? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Normally it is not permitted for a member to ask a question after the 

member has sat down. I will allow the matter to be decided here if the members wish. I’ll put myself in your 

hands. Are you prepared to permit a question? 

 

MR. KRAMER: — Well simply, Mr. Speaker, the answer to that (I’ll go into more detail in Committee of 

the Whole) is the fact that we are not changing to hectares in Saskatchewan because that is obviously going 

to be an impossibility. Therefore, the reference to acres will continue to maintain. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I will just inform the members that I will try to stick to the rule that if the member 

wishes to ask a question of a brief nature for clarification, he must rise immediately upon the minister taking 

his seat. Otherwise it will be regarded as debate and will not allow a question. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources) moved second reading of Bill 

No. 27 — An Act to amend The Forest Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill proposes amendments to the provisions of The Forest Act which set out the 

boundaries of the provincial forest. Hon. members will note this from the content of the bill. You will see 

various descriptions of lands that are being transferred. Let me put it in a nutshell. The purpose for this bill is 

for updating and setting out boundaries of the provincial forest. The Department of Agriculture holds land 

adjacent to the provincial forest boundary which have forest potential. Some of 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

795 

these lands are not being used for agricultural purposes. Agreement could be reached with the co-ordinating 

committee that is set up to take these lands into provincial forests. On the other hand, forest land which 

could be used for agricultural purposes, agreement may be reached to remove the land from the forest and 

place it into agriculture. I want to point out that since jurisdiction for the forest resource was transferred from 

the federal government to the provinces in 1930, the legislature has always been asked to approve any 

changes in boundaries of The Forest Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments serve three purposes. Firstly, they change the boundaries of the provincial 

forest to include some additional lands. The inclusion of these lands has been recommended by the 

Provincial Co-ordinating Committee on Land Use. This committee is composed of officials of my 

department and the Department of Agriculture. The lands, with which these amendments are concerned, are 

adjacent to the existing boundaries of the Porcupine River and Torch River provincial forest in northeastern 

Saskatchewan. They are not presently being used for agriculture and have little agricultural potential. The 

Co-ordinating Committee on Land Use has determined that their forest potential is much greater and I have 

accepted this recommendation. This part is being dealt with in section 4 of the bill. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the amendments propose changes in wording to clarify boundary descriptions. This 

will make administration of the provincial forest more efficient for officials of my department and it will 

make dealings with these provisions more straightforward for the forest industry. 

 

Thirdly,. Mr. Speaker, the amendments propose to make the boundary of the Meadow Lake Provincial Park 

coterminous with the boundary of the provincial forest. This change will simplify administration and 

improve land use in the park area. I believe that is dealt with in section 3 of the bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will assist us to continue to manage Saskatchewan forests in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people and in the best interests of the resource itself. I urge this House to join me 

in supporting these amendments. Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of Bill No. 27 — an 

Act to amend The Forest Act. 

 

MR. J. GARNER (Wilkie): — I would like to study further the recommendations by the co-ordinating 

committee on land use and also study the maps of the area where these boundary changes are to take place. I 

beg leave to adjourn this debate before it gets too gross. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 28 — An Act to 

amend The Apiaries Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in 1978, the province’s 68,000 hives belonging to more than 1,000 registered 

beekeepers produced honey and beeswax in this province valued at around $6 million. Honey production, on 

an intensive scale, constitutes a rural agricultural pursuit which can provide a good livelihood for an 

energetic farmer and his family. It has been my government’s pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to encourage qualified 

people through the FarmStart program to firmly establish in beekeeping and be witness of a steady increase 

in the production of honey in Saskatchewan over the past few years. The responsibility for providing the 

necessary beekeeping knowledge to honey 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

796 

producers together with the task of controlling contagious bee diseases rests with the apiary administration 

division of the plant industry branch of my department. Mr. Speaker, our beekeepers in Saskatchewan, 

through their 56 year old Saskatchewan Beekeepers Association, constitute an organization which actively 

encourages good beekeeping practices in the province and maintains a close liaison with my department. It is 

at the request of the Saskatchewan Beekeepers Association and my staff that certain amendments are now 

proposed to the province’s Apiaries Act. 

 

The Apiaries Act is basically involved with sanitation in the beekeeping business. Two fields of sanitation 

are involved. One involves the cleanliness of handling honey as a human food. This involves visits to 

extracting and honey packing plants to see that high standards of cleanliness are maintained and the other 

kind of sanitation involves the health of the bees themselves. Honey bees, like any other form of life, are 

subject to their own specific diseases. One specific disease called foulbrood and caused by a bacterium kills 

the young bees in the immature stages. It does not affect the adult bee or any other living organism. When 

this disease becomes established in a beehive, the young bees fail to mature and the hive population 

dwindles. The infested hive soon becomes weak and unproductive. The nurse bees in attempting to remove 

the dead brood, inadvertently spread the bacteria to healthy larvae across the province. Healthy hives, within 

a three or four mile radius of the diseased hive, will during a shortage of nectar, plunder the weak or 

depopulated infected hive and in so doing will carry the infection back to their heretofore healthy hives. 

Foulbrood thus becomes a highly contagious bee disease in beekeeping circles and its spread is prevented by 

good management, inspection and treatment. 

 

Amendments to The Apiaries Act will require of beekeepers that they pursue their profession in a manner 

that does not impose risks on neighboring apiaries through the possible transfer by bees or commerce of 

disease from infected components of healthy neighboring apiaries. The monitoring of apiaries in 

Saskatchewan for disease control requires that all persons engaged in beekeeping be registered by the 

Department of Agriculture. Maintaining registration is not difficult when people involved are residents of the 

province. It is more difficult when a person or persons, residents in other provinces, move bees and 

equipment onto farms in Saskatchewan in order to obtain a honey crop. The proposed amendments to the act 

provide for the registration and inspection of such migratory beekeepers by requiring renewal of licences 

annually before moving into the province. I would therefore, like to move, Mr. Speaker, an act to amend The 

Apiaries Act and that it be read a second time. 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the member for Rosthern, whose 

responsibility is on this particular subject and I’m sure the member for Rosthern will perhaps have a few 

words to say on this, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 29 — An Act to 

amend The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this act is entitled An Act to amend The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act 

and it contains only two provisions. The first provision is merely a change in the terminology and the second 

provides for the repealing of a section of the original act. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

797 

Since the passage of The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act in 1974, The Agricultural Implements 

Act, 1968, was amended to simplify certain terminology used to define the various sectors of the agricultural 

machinery industry. In the latter act, the term general provincial distributor was shortened to distributor 

while dealer was substituted for the word vendor. This was done to provide uniformity in terminology 

between the three prairie provinces. The amendment before you, proposes to change the terminology in this 

act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second provision is to repeal section 22 of the act. This section requires that whenever an 

evaluation report on an item of machinery is published by the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute and a 

copy of this report is provided to any person or firm offering such a machine for sale, that person or firm 

must provide a copy of the report to all prospective purchasers. Mr. Speaker, I feel that the Agricultural 

Implements Board is not performing that function and protection that was originally contemplated by this 

section and I propose to repeal it because of the following reasons: 

 

1. This section applies only in Saskatchewan, whereas subsequent to enactment of the original legislation, an 

inter-provincial agreement between Saskatchewan, Alberta and Manitoba, provides for support of the 

institute as a three province venture. 

 

2. The legislation does not define new or used machinery and thus, could apply to resale of machinery 

henceforth for many years which was not its original intent. 

 

3. Where identical machine models are sold under different trade names and color — and this happens quite 

often when a jobber does work for a number of companies — and only one of them is evaluated and reported 

on, other manufacturers, distributors and dealers would not be obligated to provide reports to prospective 

customers resulting in inequitable positions. 

 

4. The enforcement can only be done feasibly when complaints are brought to the attention of authorities. 

The institute, as it is presently constituted, does not have an inspection staff, nor does it provide for any 

regulatory function. 

 

5. Because the institute is now publishing evaluation reports on 50 or more machines every year, the logistics 

and cost of providing copies of reports to all dealers, for all prospective customers, has become formidable. 

 

It is proposed that a provision similar to section 22 be inserted in the regulations under The Agricultural 

Implements Act. These regulations would require that an up-to-date manual of all test reports issued by 

PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) on the machines being offered for sale be maintained by the 

dealer, and that the manual be available for public perusal during regular business hours. 

 

The Agricultural Implement Board, acting pursuant to the authority of The Agricultural Implements Act, is 

provided with an enforceable regulatory function which can be, and is, exercised in contrast to the limited 

authority granted under The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act. I would therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

move second reading of the bill to amend The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that the minister saw fit to remove the section where we 

would have had to supply the report from the institute for every machine. This, as you’ve mentioned in your 

supplementary, would have been an almost 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

798 

impossible situation. I might suggest to the minister that when the licenses are purchased by the different 

vendors or dealers now, copies of the books that are to go to the dealer should be part of that licensing. I 

don’t think they are at the present time. I think you have to solicit those publications. I think that should be 

part of your licensing program if they’re required to keep a copy of those books. We will be supporting the 

bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 30 — An Act to 

amend The Noxious Weeds Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it has been the policy of my government and my department to allow greater freedom 

to municipalities in initiating and managing agricultural programs. Because of the federal government’s 

failure to provide programs and controls which will adequately curb consistent inflation, urban 

municipalities are experiencing difficulty in recovering costs incurred for weed control measures undertaken 

on urban property. 

 

The Noxious Weeds Act limits the amount which can be charged against urban property without previous 

notification to the owner, to $20 per lot. Where land has not been subdivided the limit is $50 per acre or any 

part thereof. Where the owner has been notified of the problem and has first been given the opportunity to 

undertake control measures but fails to do so, the municipality may undertake the required measures and 

charge the resultant cost against the property. In this case present legislation limits charges against the 

property to $50 per lot or $100 per acre where the property is not subdivided. 

 

The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association has advised that due to the steadily rising costs, the 

limits placed on charges do not allow for the recovery of costs incurred and it requested that all limits be 

removed. Our government believes that it would be an infringement upon the rights of an individual to 

remove the limits to charges made against property without previous notification to the owners. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation proposed deletes only the limits which may be charged against property where 

the owner has first been notified of the problem, and allowed an opportunity to undertake the required 

measures. The limits to expenditures, which can be made without previous notification to the owner, will 

remain in order to safeguard the rights of those individuals. I will therefore move, Mr. Speaker, that an 

amendment to the The Noxious Weeds Act be read a second time. 

 

MR. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Again the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) has indicated that he is in 

favor of this particular legislation and we will not (inaudible). . . 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 31 — An Act to 

amend The Pest Control Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, my department has encouraged the development and has undertaken the servicing of a 

number of pest control programs throughout the province. All six regional extension areas have adopted 

warble fly programs and almost all municipalities are participating. My department has, through its district 

agriculture field worker policy, encouraged the initiation and development of programs for the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

799 

control of rats throughout the province. Interest has increased and municipalities are taking positive steps to 

initiate action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Pest Control Act is enabling legislation which provides municipalities with the authority to 

undertake such programs. The municipality may by a by-law provide for control and destruction of 

designated pests and provide for the employment of any means of controlling or destroying those pests. The 

present legislation states that such a by-law is only valid in the year in which it is passed. Such a limitation 

may be satisfactory for pest control problems of limited duration. Where long-term programs are necessary 

for control of a pest such as rats, the passage of a by-law each year becomes an unnecessary burden. With the 

initiation of long-term rat control programs in the province, municipalities have objected to present 

legislation and have requested an amendment. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, it may take several months to have a by-law passed and approved. Second, there is an 

added cost involved in advertising for each new by-law. Third, where joint municipal programs are 

undertaken, it is often necessary to renegotiate new intermunicipal agreements after each new by-law. 

 

One of the reasons for requiring yearly passage of the by-law was that the advertising which accompanied 

this passage served to remind ratepayers of obligations thereunder. We believe, however, that continuous 

pest control programs can and must be accompanied by suitable informational programs to remind ratepayers 

of their obligation under the by-law and to remind them that the continuity of the program is most important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would therefore propose that this amendment be passed for a second time. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, just briefly. We will be supporting the bill. 

The reason we will be supporting the bill is that it has been part of our policy since 1975 and, to use your 

own example that the reason for the amendment is to influence municipalities in getting rid of the rats, I 

would urge you to exercise what influence you could to have a co-ordinated program to get rid of the rats. 

For instance, start on the western boundary of the province and, instead of fighting on three fronts, move the 

things. You won’t get them into Manitoba anyway, they’ll probably go into North Dakota . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . but, you know, a co-ordinated effort, rather than fighting on three fronts. Get the job done 

and, you know, great stuff . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . right. 

 

We agree totally with the intent of the bill. We think it’s great. After all the rumblings that came from that 

side of the House over the last three years, perhaps in jest, that, you know, it was stupid legislation, etc., etc., 

we’re glad that you’ve finally come to our side of the fence and made this amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 36 — An Act to 

amend The Department of Agriculture Act. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

800 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Department of Agriculture Act is, as you are aware, that act, which establishes a 

department of the Government of Saskatchewan charged with the responsibility of administrating those acts 

of the legislature relating to agriculture and, in general, promoting and encouraging the development of 

agricultural interests in Saskatchewan. 

 

This government has introduced, or substantially modified many agriculture programs and policies since 

1971. Most of these programs have been designed to modify the worst effects of the boom and bust cycles by 

stabilizing our agricultural industry, and to enable the family farm to survive by anticipating changing social 

economic conditions while providing young people with the opportunity to start a family farm. Certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly will be familiar with many of the legislative enactments designed to 

attain these goals such as The Land Bank Act, The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, The Agricultural 

Implements Act and The Livestock Loans Guarantee Act, to name but a few. There are many of these acts. 

However, one of the basic mechanisms for delivering much needed programs and services to rural 

Saskatchewan remains The Department of Agriculture Act. 

 

Without belaboring the point, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Agriculture Act is used for many extension 

and rural development programs including regional services which provides information and educational 

services to farmers through agricultural representatives, farm management specialists, farm development 

specialists, field crop and sow specialists, livestock specialists, extension communication specialists and 

farm accounting technicians. It provides agricultural district fieldmen grants, which provide assistance in the 

hiring of agricultural fieldmen to supervise various agricultural improvement projects. It provides regional 

program development grants which provide money in each agricultural extension region to conduct a variety 

of agricultural projects related to program development or promotions, for conducting agricultural 

demonstrations, surveys or studies related to program development. And it supplies special agricultural 

services which provide management and administrative services for various Indian bands and individual 

farm projects relating to farm and commercial activities. It provides grants to 4-H councils to assist with 

leadership and program development. It provides regional extension courses which offer a wide variety of 

three and four day short courses in conjunction with the University of Saskatchewan at various centres 

throughout the province. These courses bring farmers up-to-date on the latest information on farm business 

and production management. It offers farm training which provides beginning farmers up to eight-week 

courses in farm business and production management as the need arises. 

 

Inexperienced people are provided with practical livestock production training on a modern livestock farm 

for a period from three to six months. It provides grants for farmer accounting recorder services to each 

farmer (for the first three years of service to local people and agencies) who wish to establish a farm 

accounting recording service. A grant is also available to assist recorders in advertising their services. 

 

The act is also used to provide grants to farmers’ markets and our agricultural organizations and exhibitors 

requiring economic assistance. 

 

Purely, Mr. Speaker, The Department of Agriculture Act is an essential piece of legislation necessary for the 

continued provision of effective programs to meet all the needs of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

While the proposed amendment may be regarded as housekeeping in nature, the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

801 

consequences will be to enhance the speed and extent to which we can respond to these genuine needs. 

 

Under existing legislation any grants exceeding $1,000 were subject to the approval of the Lieutenant-

Governor in Council. In order to remove the necessity for the minister to refer the large number of individual 

grant items to Cabinet, the amendment proposes that only those items which involve expenditures of over 

$10,000 are required to be referred to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 

 

It should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that while this provides more flexibility for the minister, all expenditures 

must stay within the appropriations made for the various subvotes in the estimates. So it doesn’t give the 

minister necessarily a free hand. 

 

Finally, it should be noted that this amendment was recommended by the Select Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts in its reports presented to this Assembly on May 12, 1978. Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of a bill to amend The Department of Agriculture Act. 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — The member for Rosthern has indicated that he has some reservations 

about this bill. I believe a similar clause relating to the $10,000 grants and under, came under The 

Department of Labour Act, of which he spoke at some length. He was concerned that this was a vehicle by 

which this government and the member opposite were going to finance a national farmers’ union. As a 

result, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate on this matter. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 45 — An Act to 

amend The Horned Cattle Purchases Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Horned Cattle Purchases Act was passed in the legislature in 1939. A brief review 

of the reasons for its introduction is appropriate in introducing this bill. 

 

A resolution by the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ Association, at its January, 1939 meeting, is quote as 

follows: 

 

Whereas all commercial cattle with horns are now being penalized $1 per head by the trade, and 

whereas this results in a diversion of many thousands of dollars, therefore be it resolved that this 

convention of the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ Association requests the Government of the 

province of Saskatchewan to pass an act taking the power to tax commercial horned cattle the $1 

now being taken by the trade, for such horned cattle, and that further be it resolved that these moneys 

as collected, be allocated to a trust fund to be used on the advice of this association for the 

furtherance and improvement of the cattle industry. 

 

The bruising of slaughter cattle results in a significant loss to the industry. There are several causes of 

bruising, one of which is injury, caused by animals with horns. Cattle without horns are easier and safer to 

handle. They require less space at feeders; there is less chance of injury to those who are handling them and 

the bloodying effect is reduced, thus resulting in a more docile environment amongst the animals themselves. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

802 

Passage of the original legislation indicated that producers agreed with the trade in recognizing that horned 

slaughter animals cause damage to other animals en route to slaughter. The Horned Cattle Purchases Act 

simply provided a vehicle to direct the penalty funds for livestock improvement to a trust fund, and to enable 

producers to have a direct say in selecting the improvement programs which should be funded. 

 

It is interesting to note some of the features of the act in the early years. For example, the original act stated 

that the funds could be used for the betterment of the livestock industry. Those funds were used in the early 

1940s for purchasing rams and ewes under the sheep expansion program, boars for use in the dominion — 

provincial boar policy, and even thoroughbred stallions. This would interest the member for Rosthern (Mr. 

R. Katzman). Expenses associated with these animals purchased, including freight, were also paid out of the 

fund. In a number of cases the horned cattle trust fund was reimbursed. Thus in effect, the fund was also 

being used as an advance account. 

 

During the early years of the act, the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ Association was the group most 

involved in shaping legislation and the programs funded by it. They were also instrumental in requesting a 

meeting which was held in mid 1951 to review expenditures of the horned cattle trust fund since 1939. The 

meeting was comprised of groups who represented organized cattle groups in the province as well as those 

who had a broad overall interest in the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. The immediate outcome of that 

meeting was an amendment to the act in 1952, establishing the Horned Cattle Purchases Act Advisory 

Committee in the format which exists to this day. Another significant amendment made the use of funds 

specific for the improvement of cattle, rather than for the broader use of livestock as was stated in the 

original bill. 

 

The funding of the bull purchase policies which was done under this program with modifications introduced 

over the years, continued to be a major expenditure of this project well into the 1960s. However, in the mid 

1960s a new program thrust had evolved for the Horned Cattle Purchases Act Advisory Committee. 

Programs comprised of premiums or incentives to individuals gradually gave way to the funding of broader 

based programs which would enable producers to improve their productive efficiency. Part of this new thrust 

was the earmarking of grants for capital construction of facilities for research and service. At the University 

of Saskatchewan’s animal and poultry science department, $100,000 was allocated towards the construction 

of a new dairy cattle facility. Mr. Speaker, $200,000 was allocated for the beef cattle research unit and ROP 

beef testing unit and $134,000 was allocated for the feed testing laboratory. At Regina, $400,000 was used to 

pay for nearly half the cost of the veterinary diagnostic laboratory, $135,000 was invested as shares in the 

construction of the Hereford centre and a performance testing centre for beef cattle, $100,000 was 

contributed to assist in the construction of the Agribition Building at the Regina Exhibition Grounds. Over 

the last nine or ten years a concerted funding effort has been directed in support of beef performance testing. 

The benefit of this program is that it raises the productive potential of breeding animals in Saskatchewan 

with a resulting improved performance of animals in the feedlot. 

 

During this period the trust fund provided about $29,000 a year for paying part-time field men to supervise 

the ROP beef home-test program of about $15,000 per year. It was used to help finance the ROP beef central 

test station at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. It is not the policy of the Horned Cattle 

Purchases Act Advisory Committee to fund on-going projects indefinitely, but rather that they try to identify 

a need and then help to develop a program to satisfy that need. In that light, support for paying part-time 

field men was terminated in 1978. A final $5,000 grant 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

803 

will be made to the central test station this year. Central test station services fees for those using it are being 

increased to cover the operating costs. The fee schedule for the home-test program is designed to recover 50 

per cent of the cost of that program, the balance being borne by the department. The rational for this policy is 

that the taxpayer benefits indirectly from improved production efficiency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Horned Cattle Purchases Act Advisory Committee has always been interested in programs 

to improve and promote livestock production. The committee has provided $250,000 in operating grants to 

the Canadian Western Agribition over the last eight years. They have placed special emphasis in promoting 

the feeder cattle part of the show as this event provides an opportunity to demonstrate the kind and quality of 

feeder cattle available in Saskatchewan. 

 

A research project of great interest is the Parkland Pasture Management Research Project in the Melfort area. 

This is a joint venture between Saskatchewan agriculture and the Melfort research station. In 1974 

approximately $69,000 was provided to purchase 270 breeding heifers for this project. Acreage in the 

Pathlow provincial pasture was assigned to the program on which a number of items will be researched. 

These include methods of Russian weed control, grass varieties, fertilizer treatment and grazing rotation. 

Money received from the sale of offspring or culls is returned to the trust fund, so to some extent the funding 

support is partly in an advance account. Results from this project will be beneficial to Saskatchewan 

producers, especially those in the black soil zone and also to the department in manning its provincial 

pasture program. 

 

I am especially pleased to point out that during this later period an increasing amount of money has been 

earmarked for research. There has been a project for mastitis control for dairy producers plus numerous 

projects which have a potential to improve the health status and nutritional aspects of cattle production. The 

Western College of Veterinary Medicine has done research with respect to pink eye, IBR, and diarrhea in 

calves, and recently $22,000 was allocated to the VITO organization to help fund a patent and to produce a 

vaccine for scour in new-born calves. 

 

In the nutrition area studies have been done on trace mineral needs, feed additives, growth promotants and 

other related items for the potential to improving cattle feeding efficiency. In the last ten years approximately 

$2 million has been collected in the Horned Cattle Trust Fund. That is money which has been collected from 

cattle producers. It has provided them with numerous opportunities to do things for themselves; $200,000 

per year is a modest sum, but on the other hand the accomplishments resulting from the Horned Cattle Trust 

Fund have been very significant to the Saskatchewan Cattle Producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the substance of this bill is of a housekeeping nature. In the last two years the Animal Industry 

Branch in my department has been reviewing legislation which it is required to administer and four bills 

have been passed as a result. This is basically the completion of their review. This bill will not impose any 

new requirements on the producers or the public. The changes are primarily needed to avoid 

misunderstanding, to facilitate present marketing practices and to make administration of the act compatible 

with existing procedures in other acts administered by the Animal Industry Branch. A new Section 6(1) is 

added at the request of the provincial auditor to establish authority for the Treasury Board to make 

regulations respecting the accounting of moneys from the fund. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

804 

Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to Amend The Horned Cattle Purchasers Act be read a second time. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, our agriculture critic, the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) has 

general agreement with what is trying to be done with this amendment. However, he has some reservation 

about section 6(1) and I think we went through this debate at some length during your amendments to the 

cattle checkoff fund last year. Since I haven’t studied it and our member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) has, I 

would ask leave to adjourn debate so he may comment on it when he returns. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 46 — An Act 

respecting the Funding of Agricultural Research Activities. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I rise on second reading of a bill to establish the 

Funding of Agricultural Research Activities Act which this government is proposing to this Assembly. 

 

Agricultural research has played a major role in the development of Saskatchewan. Indeed, I for one, would 

not care to speculate about where our province would be today were it not for some of the developments 

which have resulted directly from the efforts of agricultural research. I have often pointed out the importance 

of wheat breeding to our whole economy. The development of a long line of wheat varieties uniquely suited 

to our conditions have provided higher yields, or acquired new disease resistance or some other important 

and required characteristic and have had an impact on our provincial economy that must be conceded to be 

enormous. 

 

Indeed, without contributions from agricultural research such as plant breeding, development of suitable 

rotations and development of suitable equipment, our province’s farmers could not have successfully turned 

the largely empty prairies and parkland regions of this province into the productive farms we have today in 

the relatively short time frame of only seven decades. Without that agricultural development, Mr. Speaker, 

the province of Saskatchewan as we know it could not have evolved. 

 

There are many examples of the contribution of agricultural research to the economy of this province. The 

story of the Cinderella crop — rape seed — which was turned into a food oil crop of major significance to 

the prairie provinces in only a little more than a decade is a striking example. Research into that crop 

continues to improve the quality of both the oil and the meal. Farmers who are right now moving to the 

production of the new 00 rape seed varieties reap a portion of the benefit of that research. So do all of us as 

food consumers. Because of the value of the export earnings of crops such as rape seed to our total economy 

we can all benefit also from the opportunities created by agricultural research for further processing of our 

agriculture products right here in Canada and in our own province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government knows there are further opportunities for the development of our agriculture 

and our economy which will be made available through efforts in agricultural research. We firmly believe 

more research into new crops and their uses will pay the same kind of dividends that the research of rape 

seed is now paying. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

805 

We believe that the research of livestock production and livestock health is important. We believe we need 

to continue to research the effective management of that most basic of our resources, the soils of our 

agricultural area. We see the need in other areas of agriculture, horticulture and other areas. 

 

I must at this point, Mr. Speaker, comment on the role of the federal government in agricultural research. 

 

Historically, agriculture research was carried out by the federal government. Indeed, agriculture research 

required to make the prairie provinces a successful region might be termed one of the cornerstones of 

national policy. 

 

I, for one, am able to recognize the significance of the ongoing research program carried out by Agriculture 

Canada’s Research Branch, the prairie regional laboratory of the National Research Council and the protein, 

oil and starch corporation and other federal agencies to our agriculture. But I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I 

am very concerned about the present management by the federal government of that important research 

effort. 

 

We are aware of the federal policy of moving towards more research and development in the private sector. 

That may be fine, Mr. Speaker, on the surface. Few can argue that Canada should invest a larger share of its 

gross national product in research and development. It might be feasible in industries where a few large 

companies would be doing the research and development and could capitalize on the products developed in 

the future. But I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, that that is where the federal government’s thinking stops. 

Surely their friends, the large corporations, would be looked after, but let us consider what this policy does 

for farmers and food consumers. 

 

There are over 300,000 farmers in Canada. Is it realistic to expect those farmers to independently carry out 

the research and development needed in their industry? Of course, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. Many 

farmers have, in the past, worked with agricultural researchers and I am sure will continue to do so in the 

future, but they haven’t the resources to carry out research and development independently. 

 

Governments must recognize agricultural research is in the public’s interest, both because of the basic 

importance of agriculture to the total economy and because much of the impact of agricultural research is felt 

directly by food consumers, which really in the end includes everyone. 

 

Is it in the long run the interest of this nation to place more of the effort in agricultural research in the private 

sector, for only the agri-business sector of the industry can undertake it, because the basic industry is 

structured in individual farm units. The consequence can only be higher costs to farmers of the new products 

or methods developed by agri-business and an inevitable consequence can only be the concentration of the 

research effort into areas where agri-business can capture returns from the sale of products or services 

developed. 

 

I am very concerned that the research that could most benefit the farmer, for example research related to 

long-term soil management, won’t get done if the federal government continues to place low priority on 

research and development by the public sector. Farmers will lose, in the short run, and that can only mean 

food consumers will lose in the long run. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

806 

The introduction of this act represents this government’s firm conviction of the fact that a strong policy of 

public research and development in the agricultural sector is in the best interest of all Canadians. 

 

The federal government’s alternative is unacceptable because it leads directly to measures such as the 

proposed plant breeder’s rights legislation. There may be some advantages to breeder’s rights legislation in 

some segments of agriculture and in some regions of Canada, but in my view it is wrong for western Canada. 

What we need, instead, is renewed commitment from the federal government to strengthen the public effort 

in agricultural research. Mr. Speaker, lack of effective federal policy in agricultural research is only one of 

the reasons that this government has proposed this agricultural research funding act for the province of 

Saskatchewan. We recognize that we have unique problems in agriculture because we are a unique province. 

Even within our province, our geography, climate and soils vary greatly, so certainly, these factors vary from 

the conditions in other provinces. We recognize the responsibility of a provincial government to help provide 

solutions for these unique problems. As a government, we also recognize that the aspirations of our farming 

industry are unique in many respects. We want to support agricultural research that will assist in reaching the 

goals of our province’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have on previous occasions outlined in some detail the increased emphasis on my department 

in supporting research activities. I have pointed out our financial support, both through the universities’ 

global budget and directly from my department to research initiatives such as the crop development centre, 

the veterinary infectious diseases organization and others. We will have the opportunity to review that 

support when my department’s estimates are reviewed. I do, however, want to make it perfectly clear that 

this act represents a new initiative which will allow either for new research initiatives and projects or will 

serve to further augment those funds which we are already making available for agricultural research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me now examine with the legislature, what the new agricultural research act will do. This 

act will create a fund which will be used to financially support worthwhile agricultural research projects. My 

colleague, the Minister of Finance has already indicated that $3.25 million will be allocated to this project to 

establish this fund. In the first year, while administration mechanisms are being developed, we expect the 

interest earned from this lump sum will meet the demand for support of some worthy projects. As a 

government, we intend to review annually the funding required in the field of agricultural research and will 

augment the fund available as may be appropriate. 

 

The act also provides that in instances where the support from the fund leads to discovery of products from 

which earnings are derived that those earnings will be reinvested by the fund into future agricultural 

research, a much better approach in my view, than paying profits to multinational corporations in other 

countries from the fruits of agricultural research. The act also establishes a board which will be made up of 

no more than seven members, at least four of which will be practising farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it is important that farmers have a major role in establishing the research priorities in 

agriculture. I intend to seek the advice of farm organizations in selecting board members capable of 

representing concerns of all farmers of the province on this important question. As well as deciding on the 

allocations of money from this research fund, I expect this board will, over time, make a valuable and 

important contribution to establishing an overall policy on strategy for agricultural research in this 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

807 

province. In short, I see the establishment of this board as an important step in our expanded provincial role 

in agricultural research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the act provides powers to the board to appoint committees or advisers. I expect the board will 

use this power to develop a competent advisory committee made up of research scientists who will be able to 

give advice on overall policy as well as the particular merits or weaknesses of research proposals which will 

be received by the board. But in the final analysis farmers, through their representation on the board, will set 

the priorities. Let us examine who may be assisted in carrying out agricultural research by this fund. The act 

is very broad in this respect. It says persons may be assisted and defines persons in the broadest possible 

context. Initially, I believe that our universities will be in the best position to take advantage of the funds that 

will be made available. In the long run, however, I see a number of groups who will be able to utilize the 

funds. Assistance can be made available to farmers’ organizations or commodity groups, for example, if they 

are involved in or wish to be involved in agricultural research which, in the board’s view, merits assistance. 

The act also provides that assistance can be made available to corporations. I believe that it will on occasion 

be of benefit to Saskatchewan farmers to utilize the fund to assist corporations in their research and 

development projects. I will expect, however, that the board would enter into an agreement with any such 

corporation so that a fair proportion of the future earnings resulting from such developments are returned to 

the fund to provide for further research. In that way the legitimate interests of the corporation and the public 

will be served. 

 

The act also provides for co-operative research ventures with agencies of the federal government where 

search ventures are considered desirable by the board. In short, Mr. Speaker, the board will have 

considerable flexibility in pursuing its goals of providing the best possible agriculture research and 

development programs for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other provisions of the act relate to the technical matters of its administration. I will look 

forward to a more detailed examination of those sections during clause by clause study of the bill. But I 

would like to point out that this legislation, along with the legislation proposed by the Minister of Finance 

(Mr. Smishek) to provide for research in the field of health care, represents a commitment by this 

government to further development in two areas vital to the fabric of our province, health and agriculture. 

 

I am confident that The Funding of Agricultural Research Activities Act will make an important contribution 

to that fabric. The funds provided will be significant in that accomplishment. Equally important, the research 

board will serve a vital role in helping to establish our Saskatchewan agricultural research priorities and 

strategies. I look forward to evolution of a truly strong research and development policy for agriculture in 

Saskatchewan as a result of the creation of this fund and board. 

 

I take a great deal of pleasure, therefore, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of this bill. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF CUBS AND SCOUTS 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — I would like to introduce to you and through you some very special 

guests in the east gallery. They are special for a number of reasons. One, they are from my constituency. 

Two, most of them live in the same district of the city that I do and three, (I would like to have him stand up 

in a moment,) my son is in that group 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

808 

and I am very proud of him. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, there are 38 of them — cubs and scouts from Pack No. 4 and Scout Troop No. 4 

from the Ashley Park area of Swift Current. They bussed down this morning and had a visit with the RCMP 

barracks and a visit here today. I know it’s very entertaining and educational for them all. Would you please 

help welcome, not only the cubs and scouts of Swift Current, but my son. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate continues on Bill No. 46 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, the members on this side clearly support any area in the 

total field of research, virtually in any field and particularly in the field of agriculture coming from a 

province like Saskatchewan. The member for Rosthern( Mr. Katzman) again, unfortunately is not here today 

to speak on this matter and the problem that we would perhaps have with this bill is not in the nature of the 

bill or in the spirit of the bill as so much as perhaps in the administration of the bill. Number one, we would 

hope the research foundation to be developed will be as much as possible independent of political pressures 

and that researchers will be recognized on their abilities and not given any particular field of what their 

research is involved in. A second matter that I suggest and it relates to the concept of anything that is 

developed through this research foundation. I take it if it was patented or something like that, the moneys 

that would be gained from that would go back into the research fund and I think that’s only fair. I can relate 

to a constituent of mine who is employed by Sask Power Corporation and who, in fact, invented what Sask 

Power hoped to be a fairly significant invention and they’re attempting at this point in time to apply for a 

patent on it. The unfortunate thing is that as an employee of Sask Power, he is virtually compensated with 

nothing. I think that perhaps there has to be some vehicle with which to create incentive. In the whole field 

of research, there must be incentives, besides just the pure research. There must be some monetary incentive 

as well. Without saying anything further, the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) I’m sure will have much 

more to say on this and I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 47 — An Act to 

amend The Land Bank Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce an amendment to The Land Bank Act at this session of the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seven years have passed since this government came to grips with the problem of effecting land 

transfer in Saskatchewan. Contrary to the belief of the opposition (both sides), all the transfer methods in 

effect at that time were not and are still not in effect working to the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan or in the interests of consumers of food everywhere. Land was not allocated on the basis of 

need but rather on the basis of who could raise the largest number of bucks. That was the situation in 1971-

72 and those who had need for land today are clearly out of the market with present day land prices. Young 

people who had the ability and the desire were being kept out of farming. Wealthy landowners were getting 

larger and larger and non-agricultural corporations were outbidding the younger farmers trying to get a start. 

The trend was obvious to this government. The control of land was being taken 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

809 

away from those who actually did the farming. 

 

The Land Bank Program has been the salvation of those who have been able to become involved in it. 

Approximately 3.7 per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan will be involved in leasing land from the land 

bank in 1979, either with a full or a partial land base of leased land. To involve this number of people, the 

commission only controls approximately 1.4 per cent of the agricultural land in Saskatchewan. 

 

Much has been accomplished by the commission and its staff in this short period of time. People dedicated 

to the objective of the program has served the people of Saskatchewan well. With initiative and foresight 

these people have molded the land bank plan into a very workable system of land transfer that is the envy of 

many other provinces in Canada and, indeed, of the agricultural states of the United States. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — It might be noted, Mr. Speaker, that Senator McGovern has taken the initiative to try to 

get a very, very similar program through the House of Representatives in Washington. 

 

In October, 1975, Senator George McGovern, of South Dakota, introduced a bill into Congress, which was 

designed from and triggered by the Saskatchewan experience. Senator McGovern was backed by such 

distinguished senators as Senator Mansfield, Nelson, Humphrey, Abourezk Hart, Metcalf, Mondale and 

Clark. These are no lightweights, Mr. Speaker, in anyone’s government. They are people with foresight, men 

who have the best interest of those people who elected them as their number one objective. 

 

The Liberals, during the last two elections, vowed that they would eliminate the land bank if elected and, in 

so promising, they eliminated themselves as part of Saskatchewan. They used so many half-truths and non-

truths that the very intelligence of the voters of Saskatchewan was challenged. I warn the members opposite 

not to fall into a similar trap. 

 

They said that the earlier settlers fled from their homeland to get away from state-owned land. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan was settled before any of these countries had state-owned land; however, many of these 

countries, including Russia and Britain, had the majority of their land controlled by large land barons. 

 

If you care to refer to our history texts you will find that this was called, by most people, a feudal system. 

Those tenants did not have long-term secure leases that could be transferred to their children. They did not 

have a lease with an option to purchase; indeed they were fortunate if they received enough from their 

masters to keep body and soul together. 

 

Without a program such as land bank, Saskatchewan can become a province where all of the agricultural 

land is controlled by a few wealthy landlords. Much land is being purchased at prices which will allow only 

a minimum return on investment. It certainly will not provide enough to sustain some family farmers who 

may be trying to make a living on it. Mr. Speaker, those in opposition to the land bank have claimed that not 

one acre would be sold, yet the rules set up by the land bank are the same as those which have been used by 

the Lands Branch of the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

810 

for many years. 

 

Let us for a moment, have a look at the Crown lands and Crown land sales in Saskatchewan. In 1930, Crown 

lands were transferred to the provinces from the federal government. With the transfer came the homestead 

program that the federal government used to settle the West. The provincial governments of the day 

eliminated The Homestead Act in 1939. There were no more Crown lands sold until the veterans of World 

War II started returning home. Through an agreement with The Veterans’ Land Act, the Royal Canadian 

Legion and the CCF government of the province at that time, hundreds of veterans were established on 

Crown lands, with an option to buy after 10 years. Many stuck with it and did exercise that option and did 

purchase. 

 

In 1961, the NDP government again decided to sell arable lands to lessees who had leases for five years. 

Through regulations permitting the sale, it said the government may sell and many lessees took advantage of 

that option. 

 

We are still selling Crown lands under that very same option. There are some parcels of land that, in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan citizens, should never be alienated from the Crown. We’ve always known it, the 

opposition has always known it and the people of Saskatchewan have always known it. That is why the 

word, ‘may’ has always been used. That is why the Liberals, when in power from 1964 to 1971, continued in 

the use of the word, ‘may’, in taking care of that program. 

 

Those who wished to lease land were never scared off by these tactics. As many as 64 applicants have been 

in competition for one farm unit. They know that they can trust the government and the commission. 

 

The statistics in the Land Bank Commission’s annual reports indicate the demand for land bank land. Mr. 

Speaker, let’s have a look at what has happened in the area of selling land by the commission, even though it 

has been operated under the word, ‘may’. In 1978, there were some 350 lessees who had leased, since 1973, 

and who became eligible to purchase. Was there a rush of people to buy from the land bank? No, there was 

not. About 100 asked for a price and less than 50 people decided to go ahead and purchase. This was not 

surprising, Mr. Speaker, because land prices are high. Net returns are low and the lessee knows full well that 

his purchase option does not disappear, that he can exercise it any time between now and age 65. This is an 

option, Mr. Speaker, that not many people have in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government saw some advantage to a lessee owning his own quarter or some other part of 

his land base, so a homestead rebate program was introduced in 1978 to assist in the purchase of the home 

quarter, or any one other quarter if the lessee did not live on the leased land. This rebate is 20 per cent of the 

sale price, to a maximum of $5,000. 

 

In 1979, a further 450 lessees became eligible to purchase. If one adds the 300 lessees who did not purchase 

in 1973, this equals 750 lessees now eligible to purchase at this time. So far, only 95 lessees have asked for a 

price in order that they may decide whether to buy or to continue to lease. There are those who say that the 

five-year lease period prior to purchase should be removed. Mr. Speaker, this waiting period was placed 

there for a purpose. Under the land bank program, this government is committed to giving a chance to 

unproven, beginning farmers. Young men and young women who have no financial commitment to farming 

and young people who want to give it a try. These people appreciate this five-year waiting period. To them it 

is a 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

811 

trial period, a period where they can test themselves and a period in which they can determine once and for 

all whether farming is the way of life that they want. Is that not better, Mr. Speaker, than committing 

themselves to a huge lifetime mortgage only to find out that the rosy glow of a farming career is not the one 

that they want? 

 

When Senator McGovern visited Saskatchewan, he asked a land bank lessee if he intended to buy after five 

years. (He asked this question wherever he went.) The answer he received from the lessee was that he didn’t 

know, that he was keeping accurate accounts and records and that at the end of five years, he would know 

whether it was in his best interest to buy or to continue to lease, or to give up the lease. In the meantime, the 

lessee was appreciative of the five-year waiting period. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the lessees themselves (and this 

is important) have never raised the issue as being a problem — the five year waiting period. 

 

The commission has been accused of paying exorbitant prices for land. The act states that the commission 

must offer fair and just prices for land. The commission does just that and the appraisal process is set out in 

regulations. In short, the commission uses the average market price of what local farmers have already seen 

fit to pay for similar land in a similar area. The commission offers prices that are not the lowest nor the 

highest available, but a fair price and an average price. Now, Mr. Speaker, does this claim of paying 

exorbitant prices stand up in the light of statistics? Let’s look at the facts. 

 

In 1972, in a period when the land market was depressed and few buyers were on the market, 66 per cent of 

the commission’s offers were accepted. In 1973, 46 per cent of the offers were accepted. In 1974, 53 per cent 

were accepted; in ‘75, 48 per cent; in ‘76, 34 per cent were accepted and ‘77, 48 per cent. That’s an average 

acceptance rate of less than 50 per cent. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the land bank had been leading 

in their offer prices, a far greater acceptance rate would have been achieved. 

 

The allocation of Crown land has always been a contentious issue. In any system where there is only one 

winner and a large number of runners-up, there are bound to be some dissatisfied people. This government 

recognizes the negative effect that this may have. However, these deterrent factors were weighed against the 

high benefits that the program could provide for the people of Saskatchewan, and the decision was made to 

proceed with the program. The commission and its staff are continually working on the allocation process in 

order to refine it to the point where the error factor is minimal. The whole intent is to see that the land goes 

to the young fellow most qualified and most in need. No longer is the allocation of land based solely upon 

who can put up the most dollars in the marketplace, regardless of their needs. 

 

The allocation of commissioned land falls into two main categories: (1) the lease-back or direct descendant 

without competition, and (2) winners of open competitions where no direct descendants are involved. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased that one of the proposed amendments to the act broadens the definition of direct 

descendants in the act. Many requests have been made to this government to give consideration to brothers, 

sisters, nieces and nephews under this section. It is normal for farmers who do not have children of their own 

to take over the farm, to want that land to stay in the family by having it go to a brother, a sister, a niece or a 

nephew. It is this government’s intention to satisfy this desire in amending the act. 

 

In the spring of 1978 I announced that rent would be based on production and the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

812 

price of the product. In order to remain sensitive to the needs of the family farms, it was necessary to move 

away from a rent that was based on a percentage of land values. Land values do not always relate to net 

returns to farmers and rent continues to go up sometimes when net returns go down. The new rental formula 

will see the rent fluctuate up or down but it will fluctuate in sequence to the lessee’s net returns to farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the transfer of the Matador Co-op farm from one generation to the next was a highlight in the 

1974-75 operation of the land bank. An amendment is to be introduced which will make such transfers easier 

and which will also simplify transfers of land between partnerships and corporations. I am referring here to 

family farm corporations. This government established a program whereby grazing land acquired by land 

bank would be transferred to the Lands Branch for administration. At the same time, agricultural land held 

by the Lands Branch is transferred to the land bank when the lease is terminated. In many cases the lessee 

who had been with Lands Branch is also transferred to land bank. One of the amendments will permit the 

lessee to carry his seniority forward for such things as determining his eligibility to purchase. If he has had 

five years of experience under the Lands Branch, is transferred to land bank, he immediately becomes 

eligible to purchase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the amendments proposed is to increase the commission’s borrowing power from $100 

million to $300 million for the purchase of land and improvements. Some $90 million has already been spent 

since 1971, thus this amendment is necessary to permit the 1979 purchase program to go forward. This 

amendment has no impact upon the commission’s purchase policy. Expenditures are still controlled by this 

legislature because the amount to be spent in each year is a budgetary appropriation. 

 

The proposed amendment to the Appeal Board section permits the appointment of more than three board 

members. The Appeal Board operates independently of the commission. All members of the board are active 

farmers, thus they have other heavy demands on their time. The change in adding more members will 

provide more freedom for personal affairs and yet ensures that the workload of the board is not impeded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Land Bank Act which are being put forward at this time do not change 

the direction of the program. The majority of the amendments are of a housekeeping nature which will 

permit the commission to keep abreast of the changing times in agriculture. Amendments such as these will 

ensure that the program will continue to be sensitive and dynamic, serving the best interests of our young 

farmers and potential young farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will no doubt be questions to which members of this Assembly will want answers. We 

will be pleased to answer those questions when we enter into clause by clause consideration of these 

amendments. It is with great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, that I move second reading of the amendments to an act 

to facilitate the acquisition and disposition of farm land in Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) 

that many of the amendments in this particular bill are in fact housekeeping. We do not intend to unduly 

delay this House in the passing of those particular amendments. However, the one amendment which does 

concern members 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

813 

on this side is the request to increase the borrowing from $100 million as it presently stands, to $300 million 

as proposed by the minister. 

 

One of the policies of the Progressive Conservative Party, both provincially and federally, has been to 

develop some sunset laws which basically says that a bill which has been brought in three, four, five or six 

years past, should be brought to the floor of the Chamber again and perhaps debated to a certain degree. 

From that I suggest that perhaps the reality of the situation is that you are 44 and we are 17 and clearly you 

are going to get this particular thing through. 

 

I will have more to say with regard to that sum and perhaps it could be modified to simply another $100 

million, so that three or four years down the road after you spend that money, perhaps that matter can be 

debated again. I will say, just briefly responding to the minister, that the members on this side of the House 

are in favor of helping the small farm and are in favour of maintaining rural Saskatchewan. We don’t want to 

see, any more than you do, large corporate farms, etc., etc. 

 

The question is just exactly how do you deliver that program? As I mentioned the other night, I believe the 

average size of farms in the province of Alberta is decreasing, whereas the average size of farms in the 

province of Saskatchewan is increasing. We have larger per acre farms than they do in either the province of 

Manitoba or the province of Alberta. 

 

Another area that has given me some concern in this total field, and a matter that just came to my attention 

recently, is the whole question of appeals. A young farmer applied for and was granted land bank land and, 

of course, he then received notification that it was subject to appeal. This appeal is always behind closed 

doors. He does not have the right to be present and to cross-examine and things like this, resulting in, 

suddenly another person from his given area being in fact awarded the land against him. Some of these 

things I believe we would like to comment on. In 1972, if you read the debates, this was a hotly contested 

issue as it went through this particular legislature. The bills presently before this House, some 52 or 53 in 

number, are for the most part not controversial at all. So, I will assure you that many members of this House 

do wish to speak on this particular bill and, for that, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 49 — An Act to 

amend The Conservation and Development Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Conservation and Development Act was designed to provide for establishment of 

local government bodies known as conservation and development area authorities. Each area authority 

consists of at least three members, who are owners or occupants of land within the area. The act gives the 

area authority the powers to construct, operate, maintain and administer flood control projects. 

 

For some time, the Conservation and Development Association, which is made up of approximately 100 

active conservation and development area authorities, has been asking my department to approve major 

amendments to The Conservation and Development Act. The amendments were perceived by the 

conservation and development area authorities as being necessary to deal with the flooding problems 

experienced at the farm level, and minimize a number of the problems presently being experienced with 

flood control and drainage throughout the agricultural area of the 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

814 

province. 

 

A flood control and drainage study, implemented in 1976, Mr. Speaker, is being actively pursued by our 

government. Even with the generally dry moisture conditions experienced during the last few years, concerns 

and complaints dealing with drainage are still prevalent. The concerns, problems and solutions to flood 

control and drainage in the province of Saskatchewan have had considerable discussion by agencies such as 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Association, 

Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the Conservation and Development Associations, the National 

Farmers’ Union and the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 

 

These groups have made some very valuable contributions to possible solutions to these problems, such as 

road construction, creating flooding and drainage problems, the damaging effect on neighboring properties 

and roads as a result of private ditching, downstream flood plain damages, time required to resolve quickly 

and satisfactorily the individual drainage complaints, as well as drainage activity conflicts with other 

interests such as preservation of wet lands. 

 

There is little question that pressures for establishment of a means of resolving water related conflicts have 

increased substantially in the last few years, primarily because of problems created by individual unco-

ordinated ditching. At the present time other than the judicial system, The Conservation and Development 

Act provides the only alternative for local groups of farmers to cope with the excessive water problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reviewing all of the recommended amendments proposed by the Conservation and 

Development Association most of which were supported by the public advisory committee to the flood 

control and drainage study, extra care and caution were exercised to ensure that the amendments proposed in 

The Conservation and Development Act would not, in any way, conflict with future legislation expected to 

be forthcoming as a result of the flood control and drainage study now under review. 

 

In keeping with the recommendations made by my department, to my department by the farm organizations 

and to ensure proper operation of the conservation and development area authorities, I am proposing the 

following amendments to The Conservation and Development Act. 

 

Under section 2 it has been found necessary to define, or redefine, a number of terms referred to in the act. 

The term ‘area authority’ has been redefined to allow members to hold office by appointment as is currently 

provided for in the act. The term, ‘owner’ is expanded to include co-operatives, corporations and religious 

organizations, while the term ‘maintenance’ is being defined for the first time. 

 

Section 6 of the act provides the minister with the power to disestablish an area or to add or withdraw lands 

from an area prior to the appointment of a returning officer required in conjunction with election of the first 

area authority. 

 

At present the act provides an opportunity for some land owners to pressure the minister to withdraw their 

lands from a newly established conservation area rather than having that request dealt with directly by the 

area authority under section 9 of the act. 

 

It is felt that the act provides sufficient safeguards for private individuals to have their concerns brought to 

the attention of the local governing bodies rather than having the minister become involved in those local 

affairs. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

815 

Because water released by an individual farmer can travel great distances down natural streams until it 

reaches a point causing damage to other individuals, area authorities are often faced with the difficult task of 

including, in the area, the lands of such landowners who were either directly or indirectly expected to benefit 

from works to be constructed. 

 

Under existing legislation, an individual whose land is proposed to be included in the area has the option of 

appealing the proposed inclusion to the area authority and, subsequently, to the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Commission. In reviewing cases of this nature, the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission has agreed with 

the assessment of lands within a drainage basin. However, they have been unable to rule in favor of the 

conservation area authorities where it involved the proposed inclusion of lands, because of the wording in 

the act. It is therefore proposed to allow for inclusion into the conservation areas, all lands which are situated 

within a drainage basin and which may benefit from works constructed, or proposed to be constructed, to 

resolve drainage problems within the basin. This will give area authorities the power to assess property 

owners for construction of such works as may be considered necessary to rectify problems in the drainage 

basin caused by adjacent landowners contributing to the initial problem. The landowners affected will 

continue to have the opportunity to voice their objections to the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission. 

 

Under current legislation, Mr. Speaker, the act provides an opportunity for a rural municipality to become a 

conservation and development area authority. Approximately 30 years ago, in order to expedite formation of 

an organized body to deal with flooding problems, municipal councils became area authorities by resolution. 

Areas so established have not proven to be satisfactory, primarily because they do not receive the required 

local support. Consequently, a number of area authorities so formed have become disbanded and inactive in 

recent years. It is therefore proposed to remove the provision to have municipal councils appointed as area 

authorities in the future. Municipal councils which are currently acting as area authorities will be allowed to 

continue under existing legislation. However, upon receipt of a resolution from that municipality, a new area 

authority may be elected to handle the water-related problems. 

 

Upon receipt of a petition from a group of farmers requesting an investigation of a possible flood control and 

drainage project, a lengthy and complicated process is initiated for project evaluation, engineering 

reconnaissance, surveys and designs, all of which include a number of contacts with individual farmers in 

the project area. Once designs and cost estimates are prepared, they are returned to the farm group 

petitioning a project, following which a decision is made to either abandon the proposal or proceed with the 

project. The time involved in getting a project to this stage is approximately two years. If the decision is to 

proceed, a petition to organize a conservation area is then circulated among all farmers concerned with a 

drainage problem, as prescribed by the act and the regulations. If all requirements associated with circulation 

of the petition are met, the minister appoints a returning officer for the purpose of an election of the members 

of the area authority. Since a considerable amount of interest is generated by this time, the farmers concerned 

are most anxious to proceed with development of the project. 

 

Assuming that the process of organizing the area proceeds without any complication, the minimum amount 

of time required to organize and elect a conservation area 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

816 

authority is four months. Consequently, the Conservation and Development Association, as well as officials 

from my department, have been identifying areas where the organizational process could be shortened. One 

such area is in section 18 which requires a waiting period of 30 days after the publication in a Saskatchewan 

Gazette of the order establishing the area before a returning officer can conduct the first elections and before 

the returning officer may be appointed. It is proposed that the 30 day waiting period be reduced to 14 days. 

 

Another area of concern involved the legal responsibility of the deputy returning officer during a vote 

process involving debenture bylaws. At present, there are no provisions in the act, outlining the criteria under 

which a deputy returning officer may issue a certificate indicating that an individual who is otherwise 

entitled to vote, has not been entered on the voters’ list. By issuing this certificate himself, the deputy 

returning officer and not the voter is presently responsible if it is found out during a recount that a particular 

individual was not entitled to vote. An amendment to section 50 of the act will remove the provision to issue 

a certificate thus placing the responsibility of attesting to his eligibility on the voter and not on the deputy 

returning officer. 

 

Responsibility for collection of taxes levied by the Conservation and Development Area Authority rests with 

municipalities affected by the boundaries of a conservation area. Under the present legislation, the area 

authority is the assessing and taxing agency while the council is merely the collection agency. However, the 

present act requires that any cancellation, reduction, or refunded taxes imposed by the area authority require 

the consent of the council of the municipality or the Minister of Municipal Affairs. It has been generally 

agreed amongst all parties concerned that there is no justification for requiring the consent of the councils or 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs, if, in the opinion of the taxing authority, the cancellation, reduction or 

refund of an area authority tax is justified. Section 73 is therefore amended by deleting the requirements to 

obtain the consent of the council or the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Section 87 of the act, which imposes a penalty on persons who interfere with, molest or hinder any person 

lawfully engaged in the construction or maintenance of works or who carelessly or willfully or without 

authority tamper with any of the works in an area has become outdated. An amendment is proposed to 

update the offences and the penalties provision in this section to bring it in line with other current legislation. 

The maximum fine for persons found guilty of interfering or molesting personnel is increased from $25 to 

$500 while those responsible for carelessly or willfully causing damage to works would now be subject to a 

fine of up to $5,000 rather than the present $2,000 as it now exists. Conservation and Development Area 

Authorities, as you know, Mr. Speaker, serve a very useful function as an agency assuming responsibility to 

drainage problems in the agricultural community. They have been of considerable assistance to my 

department in providing valuable suggestions and recommendations which could result in effective program 

changes. The amendments proposed at this time are considerably less than those requested by the 

conservation and development associations, however, it was felt that the changes which are proposed will be 

effective in dealing with a number of the problems identified. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving this bill and move that it be read a second time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I notice there are a number of 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

817 

changes that the minister wants to bring into this act, I am also aware of the fact that conservation is very 

important to our society, especially in rural Saskatchewan. However, drainage problems and the draining of 

land and water draining on to another person’s property has been an age-old problem in our province. I 

notice you are giving a considerable number of changes. One thing that did strike me in your reading, Mr. 

Minister, was the increase in the fines. Now there may be real justifiable reason for this but they certainly are 

healthy increases. I think my colleagues here would like to study this bill in further detail. As I say there are a 

lot of changes so I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MR. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The 

Watershed Associations Act. 

 

He said Mr. Speaker, this is a companion piece to the last amendment. The Watershed Association Act is 

designed to provide for the establishment of local governments known as watershed associations. These 

associations may be comprised of rural or urban municipalities, conservation and development area 

authorities or other duly constituted organizations which have a common interest in the development of a 

project to provide for improvement, development, utilization or control of water or land resources. 

Watershed associations are established when multipurpose water developments are proposed thus projects 

provide benefits to urban centres, wildlife, recreation etc., besides agriculture. Water association boards 

consist of directors appointed by the agencies constituting the members of the association. The watershed 

association boards have the power to construct, operate and maintain and administer water development 

projects and assess the member agencies for its cost. 

 

During the last 18 years, Mr. Speaker, watershed association boards have been involved in the construction 

and operation of works to control lake levels such as Jackfish Lake and Nut Lake and the improvement of 

main channels which serve as outlets for major drainage bases such as the Lanigan Creek. Other examples of 

an extensive multipurpose project now under development is the Yorkton Creek project. That project 

consists of channel improvements to the main outlet and its tributaries and the construction of a series of 

controlled structures to maintain water levels in the various lakes and marshes between the cities of Yorkton 

and Melville. To ensure a proper operation of the watershed association, Mr. Speaker, the proposed 

amendments could be summarized as follows: 

 

When works proposed by a watershed association board cross railroads, pipe lines, etc., considerable 

additional expenditures are involved in meeting the standards set those agencies, such as the railroads. It is 

proposed to give the watershed boards the necessary power to charge these public utilities for the extra cost 

involved in crossing their works. Similar powers to charge those public utilities were granted to the 

Conservation and Development Area Authorities many years ago. 

 

The proposed legislation empowering watershed association boards to charge public utilities, is similar to the 

provision under The Conservation and Development Act. Provisions are made in the legislation for appeal 

procedures to the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission in the event that no agreement can be reached 

between the public utility and the board, with respect to the amount payable by the public utility. 

 

When The Watershed Association Act was drafted, the rural municipal act made 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

818 

provision for maximum allowable rates for remuneration, payable to the municipal councillors. The 

Watershed Association Act stipulated that the remuneration paid to the board of directors would not exceed 

the rates specified in the rural municipal act. Since The Rural Municipality Act no longer specifies 

maximum rates, amendments are proposed to The Watershed Association Act to update the provisions for 

remuneration of the board members. 

 

The proposed amendments are similar to the current provisions under the rural municipal act and The 

Conservation and Development Act. In the same amendment it is more clearly spelled out that the 

Department of Agriculture will pay the first year’s administration costs, such as the remuneration of the 

directors, the secretary’s salary, and so on. That provision is made because a newly established watershed 

association lacks the required funds to operate in the first year. Under the present wording of the act, it is 

necessary to refer to provisions under The Municipal Expropriations Act to determine the required 

procedures to be followed when a board receives a claim for damages. 

 

Since the proposed amendment incorporates those procedures outlined in The Municipal Expropriations Act, 

into The Watershed Associations Act, there will be no actual changes in the procedures. The proposed 

amendment will only facilitate the consultation in the applicable legislation. 

 

As outlined previously, Mr. Speaker, a Watershed Association Board obtains its required funds by levying its 

member agencies. Levies imposed by Watershed Association Boards are due before the end of the year in 

which the levy is made. The act provides for a penalty at the rate of 5 per cent per annum for any sums 

unpaid after December 31. 

 

In view of the current high interest rates, the 5 per cent penalty does not provide the required incentive for a 

member agency to pay their assessments when due. The proposed amendment will provide for a sufficient 

penalty rate to be set by regulation in view of the current fluctuating interest rates. 

 

Under The Watershed Associations Act, municipalities may raise the moneys levied by the Water 

Association Board by including it in their general levy, or by special levy over the entire municipality. There 

are no provisions for a council to impose a special levy on a portion of their municipality if the watershed 

does not affect the entire municipality. The proposed amendment will allow a municipal council to propose a 

special levy on a portion of their municipality, if, in their opinion, only the ratepayers with land in a specific 

watershed area should pay those costs. This proposed amendment could particularly apply where a 

municipality is a member of two watershed associations. In order to accomplish all of these necessary 

changes, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, we still have not received answers back from 

various sources and therefore, I would like to leave it to a little later date. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

819 

40 — An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I’m proposing that this bill be given second reading and that we keep in mind two 

purposes for the introduction of this bill. 

 

1. The bill provides for certain amendments to The Mineral Taxation Act to assist in bringing about 

metrication in the mineral industries. We have had some discussion in this legislature earlier today in regard 

to those needs. 

 

2. It provides for amendments to implement a property tax on the owners of freehold coal rights in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, want to first deal with the coal tax. Saskatchewan’s coal policy, Mr. Speaker, was announced 

in September 1978 and I’m sure that most members of the Legislative Assembly are now fully informed as 

to the implications of that announced policy. The policy consists of various elements which are structured 

under five broad objectives. Those objectives are, Mr. Speaker: 

 

1. Security of energy supply first to the province of Saskatchewan; secondly, we hope that it will have some 

contribution to energy supply and security for Canada as well; 

2. Economic benefits to Saskatchewan and to Canada; 

3. Environmental protection; 

4. Social benefits; 

5. Research and development benefits. 

 

The section of the policy dealing with economic benefits outlines five different means of ensuring that 

residents of Saskatchewan receive adequate benefits from the disposition of the resource. Those five benefits 

are: 

 

1. The maximization to the extent possible of processing or upgrading of coal prior to export in whatever 

form; 

 

2. The utilization by coal mining companies of Saskatchewan-based goods and services in their operations; 

 

3. The minimization of difficulties associated with coal transportation; 

 

4. The participation by the public sector via Saskatchewan Power Corporation in the development of the 

resource; 

 

5. The collection of appropriate public revenues from the development and extraction of that resource. With 

regard to the public revenues, the coal policy announced that a new royalty of 15 per cent of the mine head 

value of coal would be levied on coal produced from Crown mineral rights. The royalty was announced and, 

in fact, implemented November 1, 1978. Again I am certain that all members of this Assembly are aware of 

that. The coal policy also announced that a property tax would be levied on owners of freehold coal rights. 

That the system for the collection of public revenues from coal has been in need of revision is obvious. Until 

November of last year the Crown royalty had only been five cents, a nickel per ton, the same royalty which 

had been in effect as long ago as 1930. Now that charge may have been appropriate, Mr. Speaker, in 1930 

but it is certainly not appropriate or acceptable today. 

 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

820 

In recent years the advent of the unit train and advances in strip mining have meant that coal has become 

more competitive in the Canadian energy market. At the same time, the value of coal has increased very 

substantially, in large measure, due to the recognition that coal represents one avenue for gradually reducing 

our dependence on our less abundant and more costly oil and natural gas resources. The people of 

Saskatchewan we therefore believe are entitled to much more than five cents a ton from the depletion of that 

now valuable resource. While the government does not believe that the coal industry has typically 

experienced windfall profits as has been the case in certain other resource industries, it does believe a royalty 

of 15 per cent of the minehead value is a reasonable price to ask. This change should not unduly affect the 

viability of coal firms operating in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government understood early on in its deliberations on the new tax 

and royalty systems to discuss extensively with the members of the industry their particular circumstances 

and their views on the then alternative systems that were being proposed to them. I believe that those 

discussions proceeded properly and that they were most productive. I believe that while no one in a resource 

industry is happy with the increase, be it tax or otherwise, the coal industry understands our position and that 

it will find these new systems acceptable and workable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government faced serious constraints in developing these new royalty and tax systems. 

Though the British North America Act gives the provinces control over natural resources, in the case of coal, 

a significant portion of the coal reserves in the province are not owned by the Crown in the legal sense. They 

are owned by, generally speaking, large companies such as the CPR, and to a lesser degree, by individuals. 

Because a good portion of the coal reserves in this province are owned therefore, by free holders, the task of 

designing an appropriate tax system has been more difficult than we would have desired or would have been 

the case if most of the coal was Crown. Why? Mr. Speaker, members will recall that in November of 1977, 

the Supreme Court ruled that certain provisions in Saskatchewan’s Bill No. 42, the Oil and Gas 

Conservation Stabilization and Development Act, were unconstitutional. I see some members smiling. I take 

it that we all recall the significant implications of such a decision. The Supreme Court ruled that the mineral 

income tax and the royalty surcharge were not, Mr. Speaker, direct taxes as we had understood them to be, 

but indirect taxes which under our constitution may be levied only by the federal government. This decision, 

Mr. Speaker, imposed serious limitations on the provincial government’s ability to design appropriate tax 

structures for resource industries, not only for the province of Saskatchewan, but for other provinces. They 

had the same concern and the same problem with this decision. 

 

Specifically for Saskatchewan, in cases where the province is not the owner of the resource in a legal sense, 

we are restricted to direct taxation only and there are primarily only two forms of direct taxation open to us. 

The province can impose a tax on income or net profits of a company or it can impose a tax on mineral 

reserves by income or net profits of a company or it can impose a tax on mineral reserves by providing for an 

assessment of the value of the mineral and then levying a charge on that assessed value. Members will know 

that in the case of oil, we recently enacted the Oil Well Income Tax Act which provides for an income tax on 

the proceeds from oil produced in the province of Saskatchewan. In the case of coal we are proposing the 

alternative course, the property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to now turn to some of the specifics of the proposed tax. The mineral coal would 

be liable to assessment in taxation in accordance with the proposed 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

821 

section 32 sub 1 and the regulations. The assessment and tax process would be essentially a three-stage 

process. First, before the first day of June in each year the assessor would assess the fair value of the mineral 

coal within each free-hole track. In preparing his assessment role the assessor would be given sufficient 

powers to obtain the information necessary for his purposes. The second stage would be the posting of the 

assessment role and the making of appeals to the assessed values, as provided in sections 12 to 24 of the 

existing act. Appeals would be made to the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission. The commission having 

heard the appeals would confirm, alter or amend the assessment role according to its decision. The third 

stage would be the prescribing of a rate by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council by regulation, which would 

be applied to the assessed value of the mineral coal and which would determine the tax payable by each 

freehold owner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this system is not unlike the system that was introduced in the province of Alberta but has not 

been put into place. I want to conclude my remarks about this portion of the amendments contained in this 

bill in saying that the discussion not only between the officials of government and the corporations has been 

worthwhile, I think there is a clear understanding as to the intent and the implications of the proposed 

legislation. I might also say that the discussion between the ministerial level and the coal industry has also 

been beneficial and has been one which the parties have agreed is, given the circumstances that we find 

ourselves working under, likely the most acceptable means of being able to at this time properly adjust the 

income that Saskatchewan people should enjoy from the development of our coal resource. 

 

I might also say that at this time, with the results of this proposed legislation being in effect, the coal industry 

is very optimistic about the level of activity which is now taking place in Saskatchewan and which will be 

taking place in Saskatchewan in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier in my remarks, the second portion of the bill involves metrication and we 

have, I think, on other instances in this legislature, particularly earlier today, recognized the need for the 

change in the metric requirements of industries such as coal. I would, therefore, conclude my remarks in 

asking all members of the Legislative Assembly to support the amendment to Bill No. 40 and I so move 

second reading of this bill. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I think probably in talking on this bill that you have proven once again that 

it is possible to negotiate with companies and arrive at a proper tax level. It is for this reason I can’t 

understand why you would have trouble with free holder’s oil or free holder’s potash. We are talking about 

coal now and you are able to arrive at a tax structure that is absolutely satisfactory to you and, as you have 

said, is satisfactory to the coal companies. 

 

I cannot see why this approach isn’t taken in all industry. I understand the place where we get into our 

problems in all cases is where it is free holders. 

 

There are still some unanswered questions that I have on this bill before I would like to see it passed, so, Mr. 

Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan) moved second reading of Bill No. 35 — An 

Act to amend The Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

822 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I have but a few brief remarks in respect to this bill as I move second reading. 

 

The proposed changes to sections 3 and 3(a) are essentially of a housekeeping nature. The provisions more 

clearly outline the duties and the responsibilities of the deputy minister and the officers of the department 

and the administration of legislation which is the responsibility of the department within its jurisdictional 

area. 

 

Section 5 is of more importance and accordingly, may be of more interest to the members of this House. The 

proposed amendment clarify the authority of the department to enter into contractual agreements with 

federal, municipal, provincial and other agencies. The amendments also formalize the mechanics of the 

public tender process with respect to public improvements undertaken by the department. 

 

The contents of this bill may not necessarily remove all the operating problems experienced by the officials 

of the department since it has been established as a new department, but will, I think, quite clearly go a long 

way to reduce or minimize these. 

 

I believe these amendments will improve the administration of the department consistent with and on a 

parallel basis to the existing provisions of legislation administered by southern departments. Some members 

may ask if the department needs these powers written into legislation now, then has the department 

previously been acting without legal authority? I want to assure the members of the House that the 

department has had full legal warrant for all acts that it has undertaken in its area of jurisdiction. 

 

The original act gave very broad and comprehensive powers to the department and to the minister. These 

amendments which I have introduced will not alter the powers of the department in any way. They are 

concerned with increasing the clarity of the department’s legal mandate. What we’re doing is to say that we 

feel the department’s powers and duties need to be more specifically spelled out than in the original act. We 

are, if you like, placing the department inside a tighter legal framework comparable to that of other 

government departments. 

 

The section dealing with public tender process, for instance, are drawn from the Highways Act, and we feel 

it is appropriate for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan too, to have an authoritative statement of its 

tendering procedures written into legislation where it can be a subject of public knowledge. 

 

With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, which I think fairly and fully describe the intent of the provisions 

introduced, I take great pleasure in moving second reading of the bill to amend The Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan Act and ask all members for their support. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, while I’m aware of the large area involved and the 

need to expedite the workings of a province inside of a province, which we have in that department, certain 

acts with the proposed section 3.1, where it says it will give rather sweeping powers to the officers, as 

they’re called in this amendment, the officers of the department, I’d like to study those ramifications a little 

bit further. 



 

March 19, 1979 

 

 

823 

On the surface, just in looking at it very quickly, two things could happen here: First of all, could this 

possibly be a hideaway or a place for the Gordon McNeils of the future? And there are going to be several of 

them. Giving the unwillingness of several of your colleagues, Mr. Minister, to accept ministerial 

responsibility in this session, even in the short period of time we’ve been here now, could you be isolating 

your position as Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, or whoever succeeds you, or whatever, by setting up 

the scapegoats of the future for any future question of ministerial responsibility in that department? 

 

Also, in this proposed section 5(2), I can see the way opening for some dangerous precedents if the 

department is allowed to bypass normal tendering practices without having more stringent guidelines than 

what are provided here anyway. I will have more to say on this bill after I have had more opportunity to 

study the ramifications, Mr. Speaker. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58. 


