






















































Hansard: November 30, 1979


11 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 30, 1979 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 
The Clerk advised the Assembly that Mr. Speaker would not be present to open the sitting. Thereupon the 
Deputy Speaker took the Chair. 
 

MOTION 
 

Selecting Standing Committees 
 
MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — I would like to move, seconded by the member for Moosomin 
(Mr. Birkbeck): 
 

That the first report of the select special committee appointed to prepare a list of members to 
compose the select standing committees of the Assembly be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SGEA STRIKE 
 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of 
Labour (Mr. Snyder). 
 
Allegations have been made as to the legality or illegality of the current SGEA (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees Association) strike. Larry Brown has been quoted in the Leader-Post as saying that the Minister 
of Labour would agree that it is, in fact, a legal strike. Would the minister confirm or deny the statements of 
Larry Brown that it is a legal strike? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, it’s not my position in the legislature or 
elsewhere to confirm or deny what other people are saying. What I have said on numerous occasions and I 
repeat today, is that a legal strike is one in which the employees vote by their own democratic process to 
determine whether a majority of those eligible to vote shall vote in the affirmative. Then under those 
circumstances, the strike is legal. 
 
An illegal strike is a strike where employees have taken strike action when written into the collective 
agreement there is a provision that there shall not be, during the life of the contract, a strike or a lockout by 
either employer or employees. Another instance where a strike could be illegal is an instance where an 
injunction has been applied for and was granted, and not observed. In that case the strike would be illegal. In 
other circumstances the strike would be legal. I’m not casting any judgment or making any judgment with 
respect to the present strike. I understand that will be decided in another tribunal other than the 
Saskatchewan Legislature, or any judgment being made on my part. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

12 

MR. BERNTSON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister satisfied that this is, in fact, a legal 
strike? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I make no judgment as to whether this is a legal strike. There will be another tribunal 
that will make that judgment and I think you will understand that that is being tested, or is intended to be 
tested with, I believe, an application being made today, either before the courts of the land or the labour 
relations board. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A supplementary to the Minster of Labour. Do you not feel that it is the 
height of irresponsibility for you to sand before this Assembly and say you don’t know whether this strike 
that is affecting thousands of workers and the public of Saskatchewan is legal or not? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — It is not my prerogative to judge whether it is legal or not. I do not know what the count 
was. I have no way of knowing nor is there a provision in The Trade Union Act to provide me with the 
information as to the number of people who voted or the number of people who voted in the affirmative. We 
do not stand over the shoulder of the trade union movement, nor do we stand over the shoulder of the 
employer to determine the decisions of their board of directors, nor the membership of that trade union 
movement. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary to the Minister of Labour. Do you not feel that you have an obligation to 
the people of this province to decide, or have an opinion as to whether that is legal or not, get an answer, and 
if it is in fact, illegal, to take appropriate action on behalf of the people of this province? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I believe that the wheels, at this moment, are turning, and if the member would like to 
express his opinion, I’m sure the House would be glad to hear the opinion of the learned member for 
Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane), with respect to this very vexing subject. We would like to hear from you, whether 
you regard this as a legal strike. The courts of the land or the labour relations board will be the ones who will 
make this judgment, with all of the advice they can find, and will be offered to them. I understand it will be 
as early as today. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of Labour. Is the minister prepared to interview 
in this situation, or is the political alliance between the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) and the 
NDP the reason that this government is afraid to intervene and act on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan? 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

13 

MR. SNYDER: — I’m not at all sure what the hon. member is asking. I’m not sure what the question of the 
member is, intervening in what way? If the member is suggesting that the legislature should be legislating 
workers back to work, then I wish he would state his case and state it clearly. I don’t think the member is 
saying that. I hope he is not saying that. 
 
The Department of Labour, as an agency of this government has, standing by, a conciliation officer who will 
be with the parties in a matter of moments, in terms of providing whatever conciliation services can be 
provided in the event that a movement is imminent. As far as the government intervening in a legislative 
way, I would like to think we would discount that suggestion. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of 
continuing Education. In view of the fact, Mr. Minister, that as many as 8,000 students in the technical 
institutes and community colleges of this province are being forced to lose valuable class hours and shop 
hours due to the current strike. In view of the fact that a group of these students from the Wascana Institute 
have asked me to intercede on their behalf, what is the minister going to do to help these students whose 
futures are being put in jeopardy because of the current strike activity? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, the situation of the students at the 
technical institutes is under constant review. We are making plans to take into account some of the problems 
that may arise as a result of the work stoppage. We have already developed plans for a compression of some 
of the programs in order to speed up the rate at which those programs can be completed. We are making 
plans whereby the students can be attending courses during some of the breaks that would be upcoming and 
if necessary we will extend those programs beyond the normal completion date in order to allow the students 
to complete their programs. I also met with the students from the technical institute. They indicated to me the 
other side of the problem which is that the Canada Manpower is cutting of financial assistance and I 
currently have that under review and will have a meeting of the student loans committee this afternoon to 
take action on that problem. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. In view of the fact that the loans from manpower are being cut off, what 
action are you going to take? Are you considering a bursary program for these students if they are going to 
have to be taking their classes throughout the summer and missing out on their summer work? Are those 
some of the things you are looking at? Will you consider bursaries? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Canada Manpower training allowances, I have had 
my department making representations to the federal government; I have sent a telex to the minister asking 
him to change his decision to cut off that assistance as of today. The indications are that he will not accede to 
that request. Therefore, this afternoon I will be convening a meeting of our Student Loans and Bursaries 
Committee and I will be placing before them a proposal whereby we can provide emergency financial 
assistance to the students who are facing hardships. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the minister of manpower created this situation in 
Saskatchewan at all and I think the responsibility is yours. You are telling me that you are going to come 
forward today with a program. Is that correct? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — An announcement will be made in due course after the committee has reviewed this 
matter and given me their advice. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

14 

POTASH CORPORATION 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister responsible for the potash 
corporation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am sorry to wake the hon. member for Saskatoon whatever. I 
mean his contribution to the debate to date matches what it did last session and I thank him for his comment. 
 
Will the minister responsible for the potash corporation — you’ve announced a ten-year expansion program 
at a cost estimated, I believe of $2.5 billion. That figure is over double, I believe, the total borrowings of the 
province of Saskatchewan in the last year’s public accounts. Would the minister now indicate — the press 
release was strangely silent — the sources of the borrowing of that astronomical sum and would you give the 
assurance that none of those moneys will come from the heritage fund and none will in fact be at subsidized 
interest rates. Secondly, will you give the assurance that none will be borrowed internationally in the present 
international money markets? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I would give the member no such 
assurance. We have 10 years in order to raise the sums of money that will be required for the expansion 
plans. Certainly in the initial years the cash flow of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will provide for 
that initial expansion within its own revenues. Certainly there will be some borrowings that take place but 
the member attempts to exaggerate by the use of such words as astronomical sums of money. Tens and 
hundreds of millions of dollars in the province now, even though they are large sums of money, are 
commonplace. Commonplace expenditures not only by public corporations but private corporations as well. 
The member should take the time to review the economic activity in the province of Saskatchewan to see 
that it is not only the PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) that is ecstatic but a great many other 
institutions as well. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’m going to review for the hon. minister some of the economic activity in the industrial 
strategy of the government office that is articulated by the Premier. When he indicates back in 1972, setting 
out the industrial strategy of his government, that in fact the resources will be attractive enough that we can 
develop them without massive public subsidy, and then he says we don’t believe that it is necessary to pour 
millions of dollars of the taxpayers money every year into the development of our resources. Now the 
minister has just indicated that we are seeing before us the failure of the industrial strategy as laid out by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan back in 1972 and has in fact indicated that there will be massive borrowings for 
this expansion. Will you again give the assurance that there will be no subsidies, as you have already done 
with the potash corporation, and that there will be no borrowings from the heritage fund for this expansion? 
Because I think what the sum of money indicates to the people of Saskatchewan is that we in fact have a 
second mortgage on the heritage and the future resource revenues for the people of this province. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the member obviously needs a lesson in basic economics. Let me tell the 
member that there will, yes, be borrowing but there should be no reason to believe that with those borrowing 
will go subsidization to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan or to any other public corporation. The 
member attempts to make the case that if there is an equity participation by the government in one of its 
corporations there’s something wrong with that. I would ask the member to take the time to read the last 
annual report of probably the second largest potash company 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

15 

operating in the province of Saskatchewan. IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation), and he 
will see that the equity invested in that company is larger than the government’s equity invested in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER: — And I do not criticize that corporation for doing so, but I say that it should be a 
comparison that one should keep in mind when he attempts to criticize the equity participation that this 
government has in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Equity participation, I say Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which will prove to be most beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan in the long haul. One only has to look 
at the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in its short lifetime to this point to see the success that it has 
attained, not only in generating net profits which will be beneficial to Saskatchewan people; but the 
competent fashion that it’s able to operate that potash company to bring about in the market place potash that 
is in short supply and would not be there had it not been for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
expanding, at a time when no other private sector company would expand in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order please! May I speak — and I’m speaking to all hon. members — this is a 
question period. I would appreciate if they’d keep their questions as brief as possible and the answers 
likewise. 
 
MR. LANE: — Final Supplementary to the minister. You have begged the question twice now as to 
subsidizing and moneys from the heritage fund for this potash expansion. Now it may not be a big sum to 
you, but to some of us it is. Would you now give the assurance that in fact no moneys form the heritage fund 
will be used for this $2.5 billion expansion of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? Will you give that 
assurance? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, Mr. Speaker. I will not. As I have conveyed to the member we’re talking about a 
ten-year development plan. We make no apologies for proper expenditures of money that are in the heritage 
fund and it may be that it will be deemed in the best interest of this government and the people of 
Saskatchewan to in fact direct some of those moneys towards the potash expansion; but I might say that at 
this particular point in time it is not intended to be done. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — A question, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan why, just a short time ago in the last session, you indicated that you wanted to own or control 
up to 50 per cent of the potash production in Saskatchewan and now, with your increase from 4 million to 13 
million as projected in the next 10 years, you will control between 60 per cent and 75 per cent of the potash 
business. Is this now the aim of the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. MESSER: Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the member for Estevan has misconstrued the figures 
and his ultimate calculations as to what level of production we may attain at the end of our 10-year 
expansion plan. Certainly our target is to attain a level of 50 per cent or plus of potash production in 
Saskatchewan and that is not new to the members of this Legislative Assembly: it is not new to the people of 
Saskatchewan; it’s not new to the potash industry both private and public. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

16 

The member I think, when he look at what our expansion plans will attain over a 10-year period of time, as 
to what percentage we will actually produce, excludes any private sector expansion. The member should be 
informed that there are already applications before the Department of Mineral Resources requesting 
expansion of a ‘debottlenecking’ nature in order to increase their production as well. It is not assumed that in 
a 10-year period of time with the expansion of the PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) is planning, 
and the expansion that may likely take place in the private sector, that we will be anywhere near the 70 per 
cent level of production of all potash in Saskatchewan. 
 

The Societies Act 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). I am certain that 
you are aware that The Societies Act affects The Trade Union Act as far as fines are concerned for 
contravening the by-laws of a union. Is it not true that a member cannot be fined in excess of $5 for violation 
of any part of the contract as it is defined by The Societies Act? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Once again, the hon. member would like me to practise 
law from this Chamber and not carrying a degree in law, I don’t propose to do that. Primarily, there are two 
things to be considered and this won’t come by way of a short answer, Mr. Speaker. There are two 
considerations involved here: (1) the fact that initially, the Saskatchewan Government Employees 
Association was incorporated under The Societies Act, and (2) they were also certified by the labour 
relations board back in 1944 or 1945, whenever that took place. There is some difference of opinion among 
lawyers and I expect two learned lawyers could argue the point with respect to this, but I am under the 
impression — I only offer the opinion — that there are a number of lawyers who would judge that not fines 
but assessments could be levied by the trade union in this particular case. I don’t propose to enter into legal 
arguments with the member for Rosthern with respect to that matter. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary question. You said that they could assess special assessments. Is it not 
true, Mr. Minister, on your statement that you just made, all special assessments must be against the total 
union membership, not individual members? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — No, I prefer not to make a judgment with respect to that. I don’t think it’s within my 
competence. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary question. Mr. Minister of Labour, today you have totally shirked your 
duty as minister and have left the public . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What’s the question? 
 

SGEA Strike 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a question to the Premier (Mr. Blakeney). 
Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that you have recently boasted in the 1979 Saskatchewan Economic Review 
that the economy is so strong and unemployment so low; in view of the fact that the current SGEA 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees Association) strike has directly created unemployment for over 
11,0000 people (workers in SGEA) and has indirectly affected many thousands of others, will the Premier 
tell the House how much the strike has cost the Saskatchewan economy so far, 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

17 

what the cost of lost revenue and sales will be for each successive day that the strike endures and how long 
your government plans to watch the economy of this province erode along with the individual livelihoods of 
most of our citizens? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I regret to say I do not have that calculation 
with me here. It is, shall we say, somewhat unusual for a member to suggest that a minister of the Crown 
would have at his disposal a detailed calculation as to the likely loss of the economy of any particular strike, 
nobody can give that; nobody can make an accurate assessment and accordingly no one will be able to give a 
figure which could be defended. My understanding is that there are payments to some of the person who 
have withdrawn their services. The amounts of those payments are not known to me. Accordingly, I don’t 
know the amount which they are spending and whether or not they are curtailing their retail sales. 
Accordingly, it is not possible to make the calculation requested by the hon. member. However, due to the 
generous allowances made by the legislature for the research staffs to both sides of the House, I know that 
the hon. members opposite will have their several research people working on this and will come up with an 
appropriate figure. 
 

Uranium 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — My question is, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. In view of your 
government’s endorsement of an all-out development in Saskatchewan with uranium development, and in 
view of the recent mishap at Mississauga, Ontario, will the Premier assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
the financial burden for any environmental clean-up or resulting compensation will be borne by the Amoks 
of this world and not by the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne yesterday announced changes to The 
Department of the Environment Act which will deal with the matter of spills or releases of dangerous 
chemicals and will deal with the provisions and the liabilities of the person who may be involved and whose 
actions may have resulted in those spills or releases. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier be prepared at this time to support 
legislation requiring the various companies, the Amoks, to in fact carry insurance by private insurance 
companies so that the cost will not be borne by the people of Saskatchewan, but will be covered by 
insurance, so that we do have that assurance that it will be covered? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would want to understand the specific proposal of the hon. 
member. I wouldn’t want to direct the company operating in this province to carry insurance with any 
particular insurer; they may wish to select an insurer other than the one I would select. Accordingly I would 
want to see the specific proposal. However, as for the thrust of the hon. member’s question, I think that we 
are prepared to say that we would expect that persons operating in the province will take steps to see that 
they honor their obligations. I would not want to acknowledge to the hon. member that the movement of 
uranium ore which has gone on in this province for 25 years, presents anything like the hazards that the 
movement . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Uranium ore or uranium per se is not produced in this province. 
U308, Yellow cake, uranium rock, these are the things which are produced in this province. They have been 
produced for 25 years; we have not had any particular hazards and I do not think that any situation of the 
category of Mississauga is possible with yellow cake. However, there may be other compounds used; there 
may be other acids used which will require careful attention. They are used in many, many industries. I am 
not aware of any of them 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

18 

being particularly hazardous over the last 25 years in uranium but we certainly hope that all of these will be 
covered by the upcoming legislation which will be before you in this session. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the premier aware of the recent hearings of the 
Legislative Committee on Ontario Hydro who are hearing briefs on this same subject and the question 
related to Elliott Lake? The various insurance companies range in estimated costs of between $0.5 billion 
and $18 billion in insurance coverage required to look after the potential problem of uranium contamination 
at Elliott Lake, and in fact, the insurance companies were unprepared, Mr. Premier, to even insure that. Now 
I ask you, if the multinational or the great insurance companies of the world are unprepared to take that type 
of risk, can we be asking the people of Saskatchewan to assume that financial risk? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is quoting, he assures me, from a report prepared by a 
legislative committee of the Ontario legislature. I am not familiar with the report. I have noted that in this 
particular area people always want to bring in information from outside of Saskatchewan, notwithstanding 
the fact that in uranium mining we probably have much more experience than almost any place in the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We have mined uranium in this province a good deal longer than they have in 
Ontario. One would have hoped that in order to illustrate the hazards associated with this that one would 
point to something over the 25 year history of the operation in this province. I am not aware of the point that 
the hon. member raises. I say this, if there is something in the history of uranium mining in this province 
which leads him to believe that there is a very large liability for possible clean-up, it would be of great help 
to all of us if he were to bring the information to the House so that we could consider it. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a series of motions which have 
become traditional in this House and we use this opportunity to pay our respects for those members who 
have died since we last met. I would like to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Berntson (Leader 
of the Opposition): 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of two former members of this 
Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions they made to their community, 
their constituency and to this province. 
 
James Andrew Darling, who died on October 18, 1979, was a member of this legislature for the 
constituency of Watrous from 1944 to 1950. He was born in Scotland in 1891 and emigrated to 
Canada in 1908. He worked on a farm in Manitoba for three years prior to establishing a farm new 
Colonsay, Saskatchewan where he farmed for many years. During his years as a member he was a 
cabinet minister from 1948 to 1956 and served as Minister of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, 
Minister of Public Works and Minister of Telephones and Telegraphs. He served as Speaker of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, from 1957 to 1960. In his community he was 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

19 

elected to the council of the rural municipality of Colonsay for six years, and served on the local 
school board for 15 years. He was also active in the wheat pool and belonged to the Elstow 
Agricultural Society. 

 
Clifford Benjamin Peterson, who died on July 5, 1979, was a member of this legislature for the 
constituency of Kelvington from 1960 to 1964. He was born in 1905 at Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario and 
moved to Robsart, Saskatchewan with his family in 1910. He began farming in the Kuroki district in 
1932, and later also worked as an insurance agent. He was active in the formation of the Kuroki co-
operative and also worked with the Wadena Co-operative Association. For many years he belonged 
to the wheat pool, served on a local school board and was on the regional board of health. He 
participated musically and in numerous other ways in the work of the Baptist Church and was a 
member of the Christian Businessmen’s Association. In 1978 he became an honorary life member of 
Gideon International. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly expresses is most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, following the formal motion of condolence I would like to add a few words of my own. 
 
I knew both Cliff Peterson and Jim Darling. I did not serve in the legislature with Jim but I had many 
dealings with him when I worked for the Government of Saskatchewan from 1950 until 1958 and Jim 
Darling was a cabinet minister during this period from 1950 until 1956. 
 
I principally came to know Jim Darling when he was the chairman of the board of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and I was secretary to that board. 
 
He was a popular cabinet minister; he worked hard; he was a valuable and effective team member. He was a 
practical man respected by government and opposition alike for his businesslike manner in the Assembly, for 
his very quiet manner. He was a man with kind words for many and harsh words for few. I think that he was 
not one of the more combative politicians in the Assembly, rather a more quiet person. 
 
He was a strong family man, an active member of his community. He and his wife Annie raised a family of 
two daughters and a son. He was active in his own community and I know that it was a great source of 
satisfaction to his wife and to Jim that he always commanded the respect of the people in the Colonsay area. 
 
He got a good deal of support at the polls from people in Colonsay who did not ordinarily support the party, 
but knew Jim Darling and supported him. I think it is a credit to any member of this Assembly when he can 
gain that reputation in his own community. 
 
He will be remembered as one of the persons who adds stature to this Assembly by the quiet, competent and 
dignified manner in which he conducted himself here and adds stature to himself as an administrator by the 
able manner in which he carried on his governmental duties — I think particularly of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation during a very active period of its growth, during the period when rural electrification was 
spreading across this province at a very rapid pace. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

20 

I knew Cliff Peterson as well. Cliff and I sat in this Assembly for four years together from 1960 to 1964 and 
since he was active in the party following his term of service in the legislature I came to know him in the 
party as well. 
 
He was also a man of gentle ways, strongly committed to his ideals. He was a farmer, an insurance agent, a 
devout Christian and this reflected in his way of life. He contributed generously to his church, both of his 
time and his substance. It has already been indicated that he was a member of the Christian Businessmen’s 
Association and an honorary life member of Gideon International. This reflected the life he led which was 
characterized by quiet dignity. 
 
He was an active co-operator and made a substantial contribution to the district in which he lived through 
organizing and supporting co-operative movements. He was active in a number of other community 
endeavours. He assisted in establishing the Kuroki rural telephone company, the rural mail service, a 
member of the McKinley School Board, the Margo School Board, the local wheat pool committee, 
representative of the rural municipality of Sasman and of the Region No. 11 Board of Health — the sort of 
things you would expect of a man of his commitment. I can only say that each of these men was a person 
whom one is glad to see in the legislature. They perhaps do not add particularly to the sparkle of the debate 
but they most assuredly add to its substance and when either of these men spoke, they were very much 
listened to. I know that in each case their contributions to their community, to their church and to their party 
will be long remember. 
 
I, accordingly, want to add my word to those of the formal motion of condolence to the bereaved family. I 
had an opportunity, a few weeks ago, to visit Mrs. Jim Darling who is in a senior citizens’ home in 
Saskatoon. She is still very fit and very lively and looks back on her years as companion of Jim in the 
political arena with satisfaction, feeling that they, over the years, contributed a good bit to their community. 
It’s a pleasure to see a widow in this case look back upon the years as ones which were well spent, in which, 
so far as I could detect, she had no regrets for the many sacrifices which she was called upon to make. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, although I didn’t know either Mr. 
Darling or Mr. Peterson personally, the records show that they served their communities, constituencies, and 
their province well. They will be sadly missed by all who knew them. On behalf of our caucus, I would like 
to express our sympathy to the bereaved family. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — I suppose that it may seem a bit 
strange to some that I’m the only member here in this House that sat with both of the late gentlemen — and 
when I say gentlemen, I mean just that. James Darling was just the epitome of a Scots-Canadian gentleman. 
The Premier said he was a man of few words, carried himself with dignity and was very kind even in his 
approach to his enemies. It was not always that Jim was as quiet and as gentle. There were times, once in a 
while, when that quiet, dour Scot gave a little bit of insight into the humor and the dryness that is inherent in 
his ancestry. I can remember being in meetings when Jim was chairman of the power corporation. You will 
remember that at that time there were a lot of doom-sayers abut this terrible, expensive thing Saskatchewan 
power was doing — to even dream of taking power to all parts of Saskatchewan, to all the rural areas, was 
going to break the province undoubtedly. Those in opposition, and some of them sat on that side of the 
House for a different party, were continually complaining on the one hand about it costing the farmers too 
much, and the government not paying 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

21 

enough. Of course when there were country meetings, they were beset by questioners at times, and 
sometimes by inane remarks, as is the wont of those people who know very little whereof they speak. The 
tremendous feat of the Jim Darlings and the Joe Phelps in their imagination of building a Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, and building the power lines across this province is now history. But, the funny little 
anecdotes that come out of that — I remember probably one effort was made at a meeting in the Melville 
country that I happened to be at when they were having a farmers’ meeting to decide whether or not they 
were going to establish a power grid through that country and there was a mass meeting. One gentleman got 
up, and I use the term gentleman lightly, and said something very rude to Mr. Darling. Mr. Darling said, 
‘Well, I have often noticed that if there is a fool in the congregation, he is no longer making himself heard.’ 
That would probably be the extent of some of the late James Darling’s remarks to his enemies. 
 
There was another and one of the great oppositions and speakers against power development in 
Saskatchewan was the late the hon. James Gardiner speaking from Ottawa and, at times, speaking in his own 
constituency. He said, this is a wasteful thing — terrible, I’ve got a wind charger on my farm and that’s 
ample; it’s the most economic way to get power and provide power. So, again one questioner said, Jimmy 
Gardiner says it’s better to have wind chargers. Jim Darling rose up again and he said, “Aye, possibly there 
may be for some but you’ll have to remember that Jimmy Gardiner is not going to be around forever to 
supply the wind.’ There was a bit more color in James Darling than you found on the surface in the dignity 
of this legislature. I say that he was, as the Premier said, a very dignified and very refined gentleman and I 
am proud to have bee associated with him. 
 
My friend Cliff Peterson was another gentleman whom I am proud to have been associated with and to have 
known and I would like to extend to his people as well as the Darling family the condolences of myself and 
my family and certainly all members in this House. Cliff Peterson was an untiring worker in all those things 
that are good in his community, his province and his country. I am sure that those people who knew him well 
will remember Cliff again as an untiring worker in those pursuits that he felt were for the good of all 
mankind. With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say once again that it’s with regret that we 
must recognize the passing of friends. But to their families, I am sure they can always be very, very proud of 
the contributions that were made by both the late James Darling and Cliff Peterson. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I did not have the opportunity to sit 
in this House with the two members whose memory we are paying tribute to today as I am a more recent 
addition to this legislature but I would like to join the Premier and other members in extending my 
sympathies to the families of both of these former members and in particular to the late Jimmy Darling and 
to pay a tribute to his memory and to his accomplishments. Although I never knew Mr. Darling, I currently 
represent much of his former constituency of Watrous and I’m sure that particularly those people who knew 
and very much respected this gentleman would want me to extend sympathies on their behalf as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in talking to the many people who were acquainted with Mr. Darling in my constituency, I 
think there is one terms which best describes his life’s work and that term is pioneering. Jimmy Darling, as 
has been indicated, emigrated to Canada in 1908. He homesteaded and broke new land in the Colonsay 
district. He was a community organizer who worked with his neighbors to encourage the growth of co-
operative enterprise and collective political action. Soon after the formation of the CCF he joined 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

22 

the fledgling new movement. Not content to only contemplate needed reforms in society, Mr. Speaker, 
Jimmy Darling took a lead through political action in seeing that those reforms were implemented. He 
successfully carried the CCF banner in Watrous in the 1944 election and became a part of the first 
democratic socialist government in North America. Mr. Darling distinguished himself as a spokesman for 
farm security and improved educational opportunities and in 1948 was included in the Douglas cabinet as 
Minister of Public Works. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those of us who cherished the accomplishments of the first CCF government tend to 
dwell on the realm of social reform such as hospitalization and medicare for example. In those early years 
however great strides were taken to improve the economic well-being of the citizens of this province as well. 
I refer particularly, as have speakers before me, to the expansion of the Saskatchewan Government 
Telephone service and the extensive program of rural electrification both spearheaded under Mr. Darling’s 
ministry. Mr. Darling’s life and political career is proof that people working together could bring about 
needed changes and reforms and effect a better standard of living, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
On a personal note, Mr. Darling was often described as a reserved and friendly Scot, a man usually shrouded 
in the smoke of his pipe tobacco, a man who enjoyed golf. Mr. Speaker, as was well stated in a contemporary 
newspaper account of Mr. Darling and I quote: 
 

His primary interest was serving the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I join with other members in extending to the family and friends of Mr. 
Darling my own and my family’s sincere sympathies and pay tribute to his very important accomplishments 
in this province. 
 
MR. N.E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join members of this Assembly in 
paying tribute to the former members who have passed away since this Assembly last met. Cliff Peterson 
represented the constituency of Kelvington in this legislature from 1960 to 1964. His family and his church 
and his community were the focal points in his life. As has been stated, in 1910 he accompanied his parents 
as pioneers from Ontario to the Robsart, Saskatchewan district. In 1932 he joined the great trek who fled the 
drought stricken South West to establish a new home and farm in the peaceful parklands and he continued to 
live on his farm until his sudden passing in July of 1979. 
 
Cliff and Mabel Peterson raised five daughters, all of whom were at his bedside at their farm home when he 
passed on. 
 
Cliff Peterson can be described as a pioneer who designed and developed many of the institutions that are 
today the main fabric of rural Saskatchewan. He found and took the time to develop services which he and 
others knew could only be achieved in rural Saskatchewan through community action and his 
accomplishments were many. As has been indicated, he was instrumental in forming the Kuroki Rural 
Telephone Company, the Kuroki co-op as well as the rural mail service in the Kuroki district. He served on 
many boards including the school board and the health region board. He was an active member, and a very 
active member, of numerous farm organizations such as the wheat pool, the farmers union, the Kuroki and 
the Wadena co-ops. In addition to his farming operations he was the local insurance agent for some 14 years. 
With this outstanding record of public service to his credit he was elected to the legislature for the 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

23 

constituency of Kelvington an served as the MLA for the 1960 to 1964 term. After his retirement from 
provincial politics he continued to serve his community in many ways. He was president of the Wadena co-
op from 1968 until 1974 and he was a delegate to federated co-ops from 1968 to 1978. Our society owes a 
debt of gratitude to this man who so generously devoted his full life span to public service 
 
Those of us who knew Cliff well knew that he was in a sense a very quiet man. He was very deeply and 
highly respected by all who worked with him, and he had an innate ability to motivate and to energize people 
in the community for the betterment of all. In addition, he was most active in the work of his church, the 
Baptist church. As a young man he committed his life to God, and throughout his lifetime endeavoured to 
serve him in his home, his church, and in his community. He was a charter member of the Kuroki Baptist 
Church founded in 1951. He served as deacon and treasurer for over 25 years. He was a great lover of music. 
He liked playing the violin, singing in the choir, in quartets, and directing the choir. As is indicated, he was a 
member of the Christian Businessmen’s Association, and he was a member of the Gideons for 25 years. On 
behalf of the people of the Kelvington-Wadena constituency I extend sincere sympathy to Mrs. Peterson and 
the family, and out thanks for the sacrifices that Cliff and his family made on our behalf. 
 
I did not know Jim Darling well. I met him for a brief time in 1956 where I was the campaign manager for 
the CCF candidate in the Moosomin constituency and Jim Darling came to speak at three or four meetings in 
that constituency during the campaign. Some of the issues he could deal with very able were those referred to 
by the hon. member for the Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) — the question of financing the extension of power to 
the rural areas and the cost thereof. Jim Darling was, in every sense of the word, a self-made man. He was 
one who was capable of standing on a platform in a country hall without a microphone and speaking to a 
crowd for one and one-half hours or two hours without a note, and he could give a different and a good 
speech and maintain interest every night. He spent very little of that campaign in his own constituency. I 
think that it reflects on the man that on election night I recall listening to the returns and he was among the 
first members in the province to be declared elected, which I think attests to the respect which his 
constituents held for him. I extend sympathy, in addition, to the Darling family. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t know Jim Darling but I can 
recall listening to the election results down through those Tommy Douglas years and hearing Jim Darling 
from Watrous elected. From the comments that have been forwarded here in the legislature with respect to 
Mr. Darling one can understand why he was so repeatedly re-elected in that Watrous constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did not know Cliff Peterson very well. I got to know Cliff Peterson in the early ’60s when I 
went up tow hat was then called western Canada’s last, largest fastball tournament to call balls and strikes up 
at Fishing Lake Beach which is just outside of Kuroki. Cliff Peterson was one of the organizers of that 
tournament along with a fellow by the name of Simmons who had a brother at Semans well known in the 
CCF movement. Somehow they managed to persuade me, these two fellows, to go and umpire fastball. For a 
baseball umpire to lower himself to umpire fastball takes some fairly hefty persuasion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was glad I went because there was some pretty good fastball at that time. Teams were 
attracted from not just Saskatchewan, but from Winnipeg and 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

24 

Brandon and Calgary and Edmonton. I was pleased to go too, because I got to know Cliff Peterson. 
 
During the 1969 by-election in the Kelvington constituency which elected our member, Mr. Byers, the 
member for Rosemont (Mr. Allen) and I got stopping at Cliff Peterson’s fairly often. I stopped for coffee, but 
I think the member for Rosemont, who was then a single man, stopped for other reasons; as you have noted 
the Peterson family has five daughters. The coffee was wonderful, but the fellowship was also wonderful 
with the Petersons. I know we talked about politics and we talked about that campaign, but we also talked 
about other things. 
 
I just found Cliff Peterson a prince of a man and that showed up in his community. But more importantly, it 
showed up with his family relationships. The hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena (Mr. Byers) talked about 
his five daughters being at his bedside when he died in his home. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that those 
daughters, when Cliff Peterson took ill, came home to take care of him until he died. It’s what Cliff Peterson 
wanted. It was my pleasure and honor to know Cliff Peterson really well. 
 
MR. C.O. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I too wish to support the motion placed before the 
Assembly by the Premier and hon. member opposite and extend my sympathy to the families involved. 
 
I can’t speak of Mr. Peterson having never known him, but James Darling was an excellent, conscientious 
public servant, a very knowledgeable person and an extremely pleasant individual with whom to converse. I 
got to know him and know him, I think quite well through studies of his activities in this Chamber and 
outside, through correspondence with him and through lengthy discussions with him at his home in 
Saskatoon after his retirement from public life. 
 
As has already been mentioned, Mr. Darling was minister in charge of the power corporation and chairman 
of its board of directors from the time it was established in 1949 until July of 1956 when he was succeeded 
by the Hon. Russ Brown, who also is now deceased. Those were extremely important years for the power 
corporation and they were extremely important years for the province as a whole because of decisions being 
made and put into effect by Darling and his colleagues in the power corporation. 
 
Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to recite just a few of these to illustrate the scope of his accomplishments. The 
years 1949 to 1956 were the years when the A. L. Cole Generating Station at Saskatoon and the Estevan 
Generating Station at Estevan were expanded to their present capacities and increasing amounts of lower and 
lower cost electricity made available to the people of Saskatchewan, to business and industry. 
 
Preliminary plans were also drawn up at that time for the Boundary Dam station, the Queen Elizabeth 
station, the Squaw Rapids station and the Coteau Creek station (the core of present day generating facilities). 
 
During these years, too, the high voltage transmission system of the province was planned and largely built. 
The early ’50s were, as has been mentioned, years of experimentation in the field of rural electrification 
which led to the area coverage method of expansion, and the adoption of plans to electrify every village and 
hamlet in Saskatchewan and place electricity within economic reach of virtually every farmer. 
 
Charles Smith, Rural Electrification Superintendent for the SPC (Saskatchewan Power 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

25 

Corporation), another devoted public servant and another one also deceased at this time, had this to say 
about the decision on rural electrification and I want to quote him: 
 

The farm electrification program as laid out is tremendous — almost beyond belief — a relatively 
more ambitious program than has ever been carried out on this continent or perhaps in the entire 
work; a program calling for detailed planning and a ruthless determination to carry it out. 

 
It was carried out, Mr. Speaker. It was carried out with greater speed and better results than Darling and his 
colleagues would have dared hope for. 
 
One of the monumental achievements of the government of which Mr. Darling was a part was the 
electrification of Saskatchewan and no member of that government was more responsible for that 
accomplishment than he. That wasn’t all, Mr. Speaker. It was during these years that key decisions were 
made concerning the distribution of natural gas in Saskatchewan by the SPC. I don’t propose to go into 
them, but suffice it to say that those decision led to about the best gas system on the continent. 
 
The advances made by the power corporation during these years weren’t easily won. They’re doubly 
noteworthy to my mind when we consider that at the time the financing of the power corporation had to be 
reorganized and improved. The old scheme of selling power at cost to certain municipalities had to be ended. 
Very little profit from the sale of electricity (profit which was being made possible by the increasing 
economies in generation and in distribution brought about by power corporation planning) was available to 
the power corporation for expansion. Throughout negotiations leading to a change in these arrangements, 
Mr. Darling demonstrate that he was a patient resolute man who, though often subject to criticism, would do 
what had to be done for the benefit of the province at large. 
 
In closing I just want to repeat something that’s common knowledge, I think, to all members of this House 
and the majority of Saskatchewan citizens. The people of our province enjoy the second lowest power and 
gas rates in the country; that they do so, I think, is owing very much to the foresight and activities of the 
Hon. James Darling 20 years ago. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson): 
 

That the resolution just passed together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the member of the 
deceased members be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson): 
 

That this Assembly unites in paying tribute to the memory of the Right Honourable John George 
Diefenbaker, who died on August 16, 1979, after a long career of tireless service to the people of 
Canada. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

26 

He was born in 1895 in Ontario and moved to Saskatchewan with his family at the age of eight years. 
His father taught school near For Carlton and then homesteaded in the Borden area until the family 
moved to Saskatoon in 1909. He attended Saskatoon Collegiate Institute and the University of 
Saskatchewan where he received Master of Arts and Bachelor of Laws degrees. 

 
During the First World War he served with the 196th Western University Battalion in France. 

 
Beginning in 1991 he practised law in Wakaw and later in Prince Albert and became an 
accomplished criminal lawyer. He was a candidate in two federal elections and two provincial 
elections and was leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan for four years prior 
to winning his first seat in the House of Commons in 1940. Subsequently, he was successfully re-
elected in twelve general elections representing the riding of Lake Centre from 1940 to 1953 and the 
riding of Prince Albert from 1953 to 1979. He served as Prime Minister of Canada from 1957 to 
1963 and was Leader of the Opposition from 1963 to 1967. During his lifetime he received many 
honors and awards in Canada and abroad, including 36 honorary degrees. 

 
He was created King’s Counsel in 1929 and Queen’s Counsel in 1953. He was appointed Companion 
of Honour by the Queen in 1976, one of the select group of 65 distinguished commonwealth citizens. 
He served as Chancellor of the University of Saskatchewan from 1969 until his death. 

 
Recently a library, a museum and lecture centre (called the Diefenbaker Centre) has been established 
on the University of Saskatchewan campus in his honour. 

 
He will be remembered by the people of Saskatchewan and all Canadians for his belief in the worth 
of the ordinary man, for his contribution to individual freedoms in the Bill of Rights, his vision of the 
North and his love for parliament, his country and his Queen. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many tributes have been paid to John George Diefenbaker. On other occasions I have 
tried to express some thoughts on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. It is fitting that this legislature 
records its regret at the passing of Mr. Diefenbaker and its respect for Mr. Diefenbaker, for he was regarded 
by many thousands in this province as our first citizen and our favourite son. He was the only prime minister 
from Saskatchewan. He became, in many way, our legend. But he was also a passionate Canadian, a man 
who could in no way be contained within the boundaries of a single province. 
 
In paying tribute to him today, we celebrate his life — a life, which for drama, for inspiration, for effort to 
accomplish, for controversy, for sheet scope and magnitude stands alone. Whether we unquestionably 
admired him as many did, or whether we sometimes opposed him, as some of us have done, I think it is no 
exaggeration to say that the death of John George Diefenbaker marks the end of an era in Canadian history. 
We are closing a chapter of the political life of our country. 
 
About Mr. Diefenbaker, as about few others, we can say with certainty, we will not soon see his likes again. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

27 

John Diefenbaker once said, ‘They criticize me sometimes for being too much concerned with the average 
Canadians. I can’t help that, I am just one of them’. That’s a typical Diefenbaker statement. Well all I can say 
is, average he was not. But he understood and articulated many of the concerns of the average citizens. As 
politicians must be he was always aware of the public trust placed in him by his constituents, particularly by 
those in Prince Albert who returned him to parliament in his last 10 campaigns. He cherished their support 
and they gave it to him overwhelmingly. 
 
Perhaps his greatest role was as defence-counsel in the broader sense, as Leader of the Opposition, as watch 
dog of the pubic weal, as the man who with power and passion punctured the arrogance of office and the 
pomposity of position. 
 
We recall also his days as Canada’s Prime Minister. We certainly do in Saskatchewan. We are grateful to 
him as a province for the actions of his government in supporting national hospital insurance, (and we recall 
that that did not become a shared-cost program until John Diefenbaker became Prime Minister), in his 
moving forward with the South Saskatchewan River Project, if I may name only two projects. But he will be 
remembered longest as the Prime Minister who established the Bill of Rights for Canadians. He fought to 
bring an end to discrimination, a fight which he described as his life’s work. 
 
When the history of the Diefenbaker era is written I think one other accomplishment will be recognized as 
particularly significant. Perhaps without being completely aware of it, John Diefenbaker led a revolution in 
Canadians politics. In overwhelming numbers Canadians responded to him in the late 1950s because he 
represented a new force. He was the first Prime Minister whose lineage was not wholly British or wholly 
French. He was the first Primer Minister whose roots were in the soil of western Canada. As such he 
symbolized for countless Canadian citizens a new Canada, a Canada of varied regions, a Canada with a 
northern frontier beckoning its people. As he proudly said, he was an unhyphenated Canadian. He was also a 
Canadian with a new vision of his country’s potential. We, here today, unite in honouring his life and his 
achievements. In the words of William Butler Yeats: 
 

He does not need our pity. 
He did not go out of life. 
Life fell away from him. 

 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on August 16, 1979, the people of 
Canada and Saskatchewan, were saddened by the passing of the Right Honorable John George Diefenbaker, 
Privy Council Companion of Honor, Queen’s Counsel, Member of Parliament for Prince Albert, a 
distinguished citizen of our province, a person many of us had the pleasure and honor to know. 
 
I should like to take this opportunity to extend our condolences to the family of the deceased. In recording its 
own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with the 
members of the bereaved family and friends. 
 
May I add, Mr. Speaker, that at a time when we are all seriously concerned abut national unity, we recall 
some of the qualities of the man, and that almost mystic Canadianism he always seemed to invoke. In a 
broadcast tribute to John Diefenbaker, 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

28 

John Fisher, of the CBC radio show, ‘Fresh Air’, stated the following: 
 

To understand John Diefenbaker, one should go to Regina. In Wascana park, they have his 
homestead house he lived in as a boy. In 1967, it was moved here from Borden. It looks more like a 
shack than a house. It has three rooms, no kitchen sink, no toilets, no running water, no electricity. 

 
As a young boy, he helped his father break the sod of the virgin prairie. The strict religious 
upbringing is very apparent. On a little table, there is the Holy Bible open and ready for family 
reading. On the homemade shelves are a few of the great English classics. John Diefenbaker grew up 
with the Bible and Shakespeare. He was taught the credo that freedom is the right to be wrong, but 
not the right to do wrong. He was taught that thrift, honor, dignity and loyalty were virtues. 

 
Throughout his life he never forgot. He never forgot the hardships of homesteading on the raw 
prairies and the privations his mother faced in keeping the home together. This helps explain why he 
always championed the cause of the underdog, and seem suspicious of the affluent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, John Diefenbaker made Saskatchewan proud and his epitaph might well be his closing words 
on the Canadian Bill of Rights: 
 

I am a Canadian — a free Canadian, free to speak without fear, free to worship God in my own way, 
free to stand for what I think right, free to oppose what I believe wrong, free to choose those who 
shall govern my country. This heritage of freedom I pledge to uphold for myself, and all mankind. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would like therefore, to take this opportunity to extend my condolences to his stepdaughter, 
Mrs. Caroline Weir, and to express the sympathy of this Assembly. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to join the other members of this 
Legislative Assembly, paying tribute to the late Right Honorable John George Diefenbaker, I am sure, sir, 
that there are literally thousands of people in Saskatchewan who shared a personal part of the life of the man 
affectionately known as The Chief. To each and every one, he was not a statesman or a politician, but a 
friend — a friend who inspired a belief in Canada and Saskatchewan. In mourning the loss of such a 
distinguished citizen of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is very fitting that we are doing so in a 
democratically-elected parliamentary body, because above all else, John Diefenbaker was a champion of 
parliament and freedom. Throughout his distinguished and spectacular career, the Right Honourable John 
Diefenbaker was a passionate advocate of freedom for the individual, of parliamentary democracy, of the 
importance of the monarchy as a historical and symbolic base for parliamentary government and of true 
Canadian nationalism. His words ‘one Canada, one nation’ will live as long as there is a Canada. For him 
these four principles were indivisible and no one will every forget the positive and vigorous way that John 
Diefenbaker defended these principles. 
 
John Diefenbaker once said: ‘parliament is a place honored by tradition and hallowed by the greatness of its 
history.’ In paying tribute to him, Mr. Speaker, I feel that all of us in this Chamber would do well to have the 
same respect for parliamentary tradition. Parliament and all legislative bodies, including this Legislative 
Assembly, are places 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

29 

where your freedom and mine is maintained and preserved. The lives of men like John Diefenbaker are a 
source of inspiration to all parliamentarians to continue those traditions. In speaking to the 1967 convention 
of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada, John Diefenbaker said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

My dedication is simple, that whatever remains to me of life, be it long or short, whatever remains to 
me of life — Almighty God has been bountiful to me — I will give to the service of my country. I 
will continue to fight for those things I have fought for throughout life. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those words were said 12 years ago, when John Diefenbaker was in his seventy-second year, 
and this man continued to inspire Canadians for 12 years. 
 
In expressing my personal sadness at the loss of this man, I would like to conclude with a story that the chief 
once told, which would serve as an example to all of us in public life. Mr. Diefenbaker had been asked about 
what to expect out or public life and he said: 
 

This party has given me everything. To those who have given me their loyalty and support, there are 
no words to express my feelings. We weren’t always right. 

 
One time an interior leader came to Sir. John A. Macdonald and he said, ‘you know Sir John, I’m always 
with you when you are right.’ Sir John told him where to go. ‘What I need is people who are with me when 
I’m wrong,’ said Sir John. Mr. Diefenbaker continued: 
 

In democracy you can’t always be right, but you can be honest. I am asked — and I’m speaking to 
young Canada now — are there rewards in public life? There are — not monetary but there is a 
tremendous satisfaction in being able to say I tried, I stood. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in remember John Diefenbaker we will always have his memory as part of this 
province. Mr. Speaker, the chief is now home in Saskatchewan and we will always miss him. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — During my time as Minister of Education, I had the 
opportunity to spend a fair bit of time with Mr. Diefenbaker in his role as Chancellor of the University of 
Saskatchewan. In this motion I don’t want to address my remarks to those times, but rather to address my 
remarks to the fact that Mr. Diefenbaker represented the constituency of Lake Centre from 1940 to 1953. 
And as many of the hon. members will know, a good portion of the Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency 
was part of that old Lake Centre constituency. I think that it’s only fair to say that from the period 1940 to 
1953 the MacMurchys out of Siemens were battling against Mr. Diefenbaker. The battles were always hard 
fought and they were always clean. Out of the battles grew a great deal of respect for the member of 
parliament for Lake Centre, Mr. Diefenbaker, as the respect grew during this time representing the 
constituency of Prince Albert. Many of the supporters and friends of Mr. Diefenbaker from Lake Centre 
often say they got him started on the right path, take credit for his life in parliament and his life in this 
country. I thought I should just indicate that to this Assembly. That’s where he started and many people there 
feel the got him off to a good start, and I think they are right. Regret Mr. Speaker, at his passing? I don’t 
think so. I think appreciation for a long and generous life well lived. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

30 

MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to pay condolences to John 
Diefenbaker. I had the opportunity to meet him from time to time over my lifetime and came to respect him 
greatly as a true Canadian, a strong Canadian, a man who lived for this country. On the last Sunday before he 
died, John Diefenbaker sat in his accustomed pew in the First Baptist Church in Ottawa and he was sharing 
with the congregation of that church in the worship of God. I mention that because since his death on August 
16 many people have sought to find the thoughts and words with which to justify to a great and distinguished 
Canadian, an unusual human being, and yet many have overlooked that it was the Christian beliefs of John 
Diefenbaker which made him truly a great man. John Diefenbaker once said that it wash is mother who gave 
him the following advice: 
 

John, the Lord has given you a wonderful talent and a great mind and I hope that you will use them 
in the right way. I want you to do all that you can to help your country and to help the poor who work 
so hard and get so little. 

 
These words had a profound influence on John, above all else, Mr. Diefenbaker knew the Lord and followed 
his way. Once when speaking with the Rev. Ralph Cummings, Mr. Diefenbaker contemplated on his life and 
spoke of the goodness of God. In subsequent conversations on his life, Mr. Diefenbaker always returned to 
the phrase, the goodness of God. John Diefenbaker had a deep and confident trust in God who had been his 
refuge and his strength. In many ways, it has been pointed out, that Mr. Diefenbaker was like the Quaker, 
John Greenleaf Whittier. Whittier wrote the poem, ‘The Eternal Goodness’, and early in this poem is a 
stanza which summed up Mr. Diefenbaker’s faith, and I quote: 
 

Yet in the maddening maze of things, 
And tossed by storm and flood, 
To one fixed trust my spirit clings, 
I know that God is good. 

 
Such was Mr. Diefenbaker’s faith. So, Mr. Speaker, as I join others in expressing the sense of loss at the 
death of John Diefenbaker. I also wonder how he might be remembered. Certainly for many John 
Diefenbaker will be remembers as a great Canadian, a man of integrity, honesty and honor, an intensely good 
person. But most of all I believe he will be remembered as a person of sincere religious faith, a man who 
worked at the development of that faith in the Christian tradition. 
 
Too, he will be remembered as a strong supporter of the British Commonwealth, a man who held the 
parliamentary system of government in high regard and throughout his life maintained the dignity that is an 
essential part of our system of government. He has been honored on numerous occasions, and as a member 
of Gideons International I was pleased when he was selected as the one who would receive the award of the 
16 millionth Bible distributed by Gideons in Canada. John accepted that Bible in his true tradition, and in 
turn was given Bible number sixteen million and one, and he presented that Bible to a young boy from 
Prince Albert, a young ten year old boy by the name of Cordell Knudsen. These are the words that he used 
when he presented that Bible. He said, ‘Son, these are the living oracles of God, a challenge for a young boy 
to read and to study and to prepare himself for life.’ And so, Mr. Speaker, that was the faith of John George 
Diefenbaker, citizen of the world, a distinguished Canadian, a remarkable human being, a man with a deep 
and abiding trust in the goodness of God. I would like to extend to his family and friends our sincere 
condolences. 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

31 

MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, we have heard many tributes today about our greatest 
native son, John Diefenbaker, and I too would like to voice my feelings about a man that perhaps so few 
really understand and appreciate. As a grade schooler I was attracted to the Conservative Party by the 
magnetism of John Diefenbaker in 1958, as were so many other Canadians. That magnetism continued 
throughout his lifetime for me and I suppose, as the Premier says, only time will tell how history is going to 
treat John Diefenbaker. Should I be so bold to anticipate what I think history will say about this man. 
 
First, John Diefenbaker loved the institution of parliament. He understood it as a student. He dominated it as 
a participant, but in the end, as an elder statesman. He feared the erosion of its power and its very being. We 
as legislators will pay but mock tribute to the man unless his vision of parliament is truly looked at and we 
truly look at what he said. ‘Parliament is a vehicle by which the executive branch of government is held 
accountable to the people.’ Now that is simple to say, Mr. Speaker, and yet so very difficult to effect. So 
often governments, in their quest to retain power, disregard that very fact and thereby, dilute the system that 
provides the form for their power. I challenge all of us as legislators to truly seek the solution that will 
strengthen our institution and to resist the fear of short term disadvantage by the granting of concessions for 
the betterment of the system. 
 
Second, John Diefenbaker stood for civil rights and civil liberties. He attempted, through the Canadian Bill 
of Rights to enshrine certain rights in our constitution and I believe probably failed. At least in the short term 
he failed, because our court systems have not seen fit to, in fact attach that degree of importance that Mr. 
Diefenbaker so wanted of the Bill of Rights into our political process. But perhaps someday that might 
change as we drift on in history. 
 
Finally, John Diefenbaker changed the fibres of the Conservative Party in a way that few students of politics 
really understand. John Diefenbaker literally kicked open the doors of our party to all Canadians, not only 
the people of Bay Street, but the Chinese and the Natives and the Slavs and the Poles and the poor and the 
simple as well as the educated and those of means. He proved to the other parties, I believe, that they did not 
have the patent on the support of the ordinary Canadian. 
 
In closing, I indeed am honored to have known, to have studied and to have followed a great Canadian 
parliamentarian of our century. 
 
MR. C.O. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the 
motion and extend my sympathies to the family and tell the House a small story about John Diefenbaker 
which is written in very few places. It speaks much of him and tells us something about him as the champion 
of the underdog. The motion pays tribute to the Hon. John Diefenbaker for among other things, his concern 
for civil liberties and his government’s enactment of the Canadian Bill of Rights. Mr. Diefenbaker prided 
himself on his contributions to individual freedom and passage of the bill, and well he might. His 
contributions to the Canadian people were significant where they were concerned. More than that, they were 
nothing short of outstanding when one considers certain events which sparked his deep and continuing 
interest in them. 
 
One of the most important, perhaps the most important event, was the persecution of a small religious 
minority, a minority unpopular in certain sections of the country during 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

32 

and immediately following World War I. I refer to the Jehovah’s Witnesses. During the war, Canada among 
the nations of the Commonwealth, had the unsavory distinction of being the only nation to outlaw a religion. 
Under the Defence of Canada Regulations the Jehovah’s Witnesses were declared members of an illegal 
organization. That meant that members of the group could not claim conscientious objector status as 
members of other pacifist religious groups could, nor could a member choose to do alternative instead of 
military service. In order to volunteer to do so you had to be able to establish yourself as a legal 
conscientious objector. And to make matters worse, Jehovah’s Witnesses were singled out by authorities for 
particularly harsh treatment, not only during the war but for a time thereafter. 
 
I don’t want to go into all the events which aroused Mr. Diefenbaker’s ire and his determination to do 
something abut the situation and try to prevent its recurrence in the future. I will just list a half dozen or so of 
them. We tend to forget how tenuously at times civil liberties can be held. Parents deprived of their children 
and at time jailed for instructing their children in an illegal religion. Children expelled from schools and 
placed under arrest and in homes for delinquents because of non-attendance at schools. People convicted of 
the importation of illegal literature 10 years after that literature was brought into the country. A woman jailed 
for distributing tracts which contained nothing more than quotations from a Bible upon which certain 
members of the federal cabinet had sworn their oath of allegiance. A religious service interrupted by the 
police, and members of the congregation required to produce registration cards on the spot. A Jehovah’s 
Witness minister arrested at the gate of a cemetery immediately after conducting a funeral service and other 
members of the funeral party pursued with the intent of arresting them as well. A police informer obtaining 
baptism as a Jehovah’s Witness in order to spy on members of the congregations and later give evidence in a 
court of law, and continued detention of men in internment camps almost a full year after the end of 
hostilities. 
 
These and similar things occurred long after 1942 when a federal government committee concluded the ban 
on the Jehovah’s Witnesses should be lifted and a member of the Commons remarked that there was not 
enough evidence against them to warrant shooting a dog. It was fortunate that General Eisenhower’s mother 
was not a resident in Canada at this time, she might well have wound up in jail for being a Jehovah’s 
Witness. 
 
On numerous occasions Mr. Diefenbaker rose in the House of Commons to protest what he viewed as a clear 
and widespread misuse of federal war-time powers. When in 1947 the Jehovah’s Witnesses brought to the 
House of Commons a petition including over 500,000 signatures calling for a Canadian Bill of Rights, John 
Diefenbaker accepted their arguments of the need for it and made the crusade for it his own. 
 
In view of the membership of this House at this time, Progressive Conservatives on the one side and New 
Democrats on the other, I think it is especially suitable to recall these events, the ones I have just mentioned. 
 
Members of our party or parties are uniting today to pay tribute to a very important Progressive Conservative 
leader. In a struggle for personal liberties and a Bill of Rights we were often also united. Among the people 
standing shoulder to shoulder with Mr. Diefenbaker during these years were two other Saskatchewan people 
— two of our former leaders, M.J. Coldwell and Tommy Douglas. 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in remembering the Right 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

33 

Honourable John George Diefenbaker, I do so with an added sense of personal loss because he was a friend 
of mine, a dear friend whom we all will miss. I recall, at the age of 19 when I first met the Chief, and in 
subsequent years, his wisdom, vision and encouragement were a source of inspiration to me to become 
involved in the Progressive Conservative Party and subsequently public life. 
 
In our years of friendship there are many things I remember about Mr. Diefenbaker: his amazing memory, 
the ability to recall peoples’ names, a trail which never ceased to amaze me. That gift made thousands of 
people in Saskatchewan and throughout Canada feel they were a special part of John Diefenbaker’s life and a 
special Canadian. 
 
Then, as a Shriner, I can proudly say that John Diefenbaker, too, was a long-time Shriner, an Honorary 
Potentate of Wa-Wa Temple as well as a charter Honorary Potentate of Tunis Temple in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, John Diefenbaker will be remembered for many things and achievements: his 39 years 
of continuous service in the House of Commons and the Canadian Bill of Rights; his relentless and fierce 
determination to do battle with any opponent of a cause or goal he considered important or necessary; his 
unchanging purpose in pursuit of things he believed. His defeats were as spectacular as his triumphs. This 
was a man I could proudly call my friend, the Chief. 
 
This morning I recall the words of Sir Wilfred Laurier, that are in many ways, applicable to John 
Diefenbaker. They are, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

When my end comes, if my eyes close on a united people, if I can look at all of the people who have 
been brought here by me or my policy as true Canadians, all preserving a pride of their race but all 
having in their hearts greater pride in the Canadian nationality, then I shall feel that my life has not 
been in vain and I shall die happy. 

 
I am sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, John Diefenbaker died happy. 
 
In expressing my sorrow at his passing, I am proud to have been a friend of John George Diefenbaker. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, may I join members in just a 
few words of tribute to the Right Honourable John Diefenbaker and I do so in the same way as the member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy) in that Mr. Diefenbaker did represent a portion of my 
present constituency, when he was a member for Lake Centre from 1940 to 1953. The people who remember 
him as their member of parliament in the constituency which I represent, have indicated to me on a number 
of occasions that even though many of them did not necessarily agree with him politically everyone 
respected him as their member. I have had occasion, as I know other colleagues of mine on this side have to 
campaign against Mr. Diefenbaker, and I know that that sentiment extends itself to each and every one of us 
as well. 
 
During those years he spent a lot of time in the communities and with the people who he represented and I 
know that was appreciated. 
 
Mr. Diefenbaker’s career in public life was a long one. It included achieving the highest elected position in 
this country, that of Prime Minister. The many honors and awards which he received over the years, I think, 
speak well of the recognition which Canadians 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

34 

and people abroad gave to this man for his many years of service to public life. I think he will be long 
remembered as a Canadian who not only cared much for his country but who, in his own way, dedicated 
most of his life in providing service to this country as well. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to share a few things which happened, 
in memory of Mr. Diefenbaker. 
 
I first met Mr. Diefenbaker in 1949. I had breakfast with him in the hotel at Kenaston, Saskatchewan. I was a 
John Deere blockman at the time. He joined me for breakfast in the hotel and the impression he left with me 
helped me later in community life and I am sure it affected me in some way. I got to know Mr. Diefenbaker 
better when I was also travelling for John Deere Tractors out of Prince Albert and I was fortunate to belong 
to the same masonic lodge, Kinistino Lodge number one in prince Albert. At the time I took my degrees, on 
two occasions Mr. Diefenbaker was the guest speaker at the coffee hour afterwards. The brother masons who 
had known John all of his life enjoyed the talks he gave at these coffee hours and they were just as 
spellbound as I was as a new young mason. I noticed even later on in life as I met him, in the house of 
parliament in Ottawa, that even if you were speaking to him on a one-to-one basis, he was almost giving a 
speech and he intrigued a person just to sit and listen to him. 
 
I would like to say that certainly he touched my life and my family’s life and that I would certainly like to 
join with the members in supporting the motion. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the members in supporting this 
motion and talk about a man who I consider a great friend. Mr. Diefenbaker’s association with my family 
goes back before I was even born. His association (and many morning walks) with my father in the city of 
Prince Albert — he always constantly reminded me of them after I got to know him personally and spent 
some time in politics. 
 
In fact, in 1976 in Waldheim, he told a story that I had never heard before. He informed me that one day as 
he was walking with my father, and I was still in the diaper stage, that I did as all young lads do in diapers, 
and he assisted in the change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the death of Mr. Diefenbaker, I have missed those six o’clock in the morning phone calls, 
concerned about a constituent that we both shared. I miss the trips between Prince Albert and Saskatoon as 
I’d drive him back and forth to visit his constituents. I am honored to say that because of my family 
friendship with him, he broke what seemed to be a rule of his — to not get involved in provincial politics — 
by sponsoring a coffee party in my constituency during the ’78 election. I think the greatest tribute that can 
be paid to a man, be he in politics or any other field, is (when we all leave this earth we get the same amount 
of dirt) if somebody can stand beside and say, our province, our country and the world is better because he 
was here. I wish to thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speaker’s Leave of Absence 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney 
(Premier): 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

35 

That leave of absence be granted the hon. member for Saskatoon-Westmount (Hon. J.E. Brockelbank) on 
and from Thursday, November 29, 1979, to Monday, December 3, 1979, to attend on behalf of this 
Assembly the twenty-fifth Commonwealth parliamentary conference in New Zealand. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Radio Time 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek 
(Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): 
 

That the matter of division of radio time arranged for the current session be referred to the select standing 
committee on radio broadcasting of selected proceedings, the said committee to report its 
recommendations thereon, with all convenient speed. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Public Accounts 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Robins 
(Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): 
 

By leave of the Assembly, that the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for the fiscal year 
ended March 31, 1979 be referred as tabled to the select standing committee on public accounts and 
printing. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Crown Corporations 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. R.J. 
Gross (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): 
 

By leave of the Assembly, that the annual reports and financial statements of the various Crown 
corporations and related agencies be referred as tabled to the select standing committee on Crown 
corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Provincial Auditor 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. G. 
MacMurchy, (Minister of Agriculture): 
 

By leave of the Assembly that the report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1979 
be referred as tabled to the select standing committee on public accounts and printing. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Retention and Disposal Schedules 



 
November 30, 1979 

 

36 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. E.E. Kaeding 
(Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural)): 
 

By leave of the Assembly that the retention and disposal schedules approved by the Public Documents 
Committee be referred as tabled to the select standing committee on library. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:04 p.m. 
 


