



















































Hansard: April 19, 1979


1795 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 

Thursday, April 19, 1979. 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Limitations of Wascana Centre Authority 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (QU’APPELLE): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question either to the Attorney 

General whose department was involved in the matter or to the minister responsible for the Wascana Centre 

Authority. 

 

Concerns have been expressed to me about the limited authority of the Wascana Centre police and the 

potential civil liability that the Wascana centre police incur because of their inability, for example, to pursue 

a criminal code offender. The offence takes place in Wascana Centre Authority but if they go beyond the 

boundaries of the Wascana Centre Authority they at that point become civilian and run a potential civil 

liability. Now this matter has been discussed between the authority and the Department of the Attorney 

General for (by the indications I have) at least three years, and the concerns are becoming greater. I’m 

wonder if the Attorney General or the minister can tell me why no action has been taken to amend The 

Wascana Centre Authority Act. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I’ll take notice. 

 

MR. LANE: — A new question to the minister responsible for the Wascana Centre Authority. The Wascana 

Centre Authority police are now trained at the police college and in fact have the same criteria required for 

them to become police officers. Can you tell me why this ability of the Wascana Centre police has not been 

recognized by your government? 

 

Also not recognized by your government has been the practice, which is only an occasional one, of the 

Regina city police asking for the assistance of the Wascana Centre police beyond the authority (or 

boundaries) of the Wascana Centre Authority. They have responded and again they face a potential civil 

liability. That problem has, for at least three years, been brought to your attention. Can you tell me why you 

failed to take action and recognize the increased professionalism of the Wascana Centre police? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I said that I would take notice with respect to the first question and I 

will do so with respect to this one as well. May I say that the question of the jurisdictions is not something 

which is necessarily unique to Wascana Centre Authority. When a Regina police officer is involved in an 

investigation, for example, the pursuit of a suspected person involved in confrontation of the law, outside the 

municipal boundaries of Regina, there is a working relationship that takes place with respect to the RCM 

Police. What I want to do is to get myself acquainted as to the full police powers which Wascana Centre 

police have or don’t have vis a vis the Regina or the other policemen, before I can base the answers to the 

questions that the hon. member raises, and accordingly, I want to take time to examine the full propositions 

of 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1796 
 

the law in this regard. 

 

MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister. Would you also, then, take notice for example, of a memo 

from that time, of the director of policy, planning, criminal justice within your department to the Wascana 

Centre Authority, and also Regina city police to the Wascana Centre Authority as to the changes that should 

be made. Both those letters are 1975. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, perhaps the hon. member could give me copies of what letters he apparently 

has, so that I can easily reference it in my pursuit of the facts. 

 

Flood Protection along Wascana Creek 

 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of the Environment 

(Mr. Bowerman) I would have to consider directing this question to the Premier (Mr. Blakeney). Mr. 

Premier, I am told that we can expect a very serious flood of the Wascana Creek within the next two or three 

days. I am also told that there is no diking on the south side of the creek on Regina Avenue west of Albert 

Street. There are nine homes in that area that are in serious jeopardy at the present time. Have you made 

plans to protect these homes, and if not, will you immediately following this question period or this 

afternoon, be in touch with His Worship, Mayor Baker of Regina, to make plans to sandbag that area to 

protect these homes? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the question. I don’t 

acknowledge the facts outlined by the hon. member. There have been floods that have been very, very high 

in the past and which have flooded very seriously on the north side of Wascana Creek, which have not 

caused significant damage to the houses on the south side of Wascana Creek, immediately west of Albert 

Street, and I point that out to the hon. member. There has, of course, been some sandbagging in the past 

there, but it certainly depends upon the likely level of water flow, and I know the Department of 

Environment and the Emergency Measures Organization will have that in hand. The city of Regina 

Emergency Measures Organization is, I am sure, apprised, of the situation. They had the same information 

that the hon. member has and that we have, and if they feel that there is any danger of flooding I know that 

they will be sandbagging. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You say you don’t accept the facts that I’ve given you. 

We received already this morning two telephone calls from very seriously concerned residents of that street, 

who are concerned about the fact that they will be flooded this weekend. From your answer, I take it that 

there have been no discussions or plans taken immediately, and my question to you again is, will you 

immediately make plans, today, to sandbag that area to protect the homes that are on that street? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I recommend that the hon. member get in touch with the alderman for 

that division. The sandbagging along that creek is, at least primarily, a responsibility of the city of Regina 

and not of the Government of Saskatchewan. I am sure that the hon. member will have been in touch with 

the alderman for that division and the matter will be proceeded with on that basis, I am sure. I invite the hon. 

member to do so. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — One final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you telling me, Mr. Premier, the Wascana 

Creek being part of the Wascana development is not part of the provincial government’s responsibility, 

which is what is causing the flooding? 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1797 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am saying two or three things in answer to that. You just said west of Albert and 

south of the creek and that is not in Wascana Centre. That’s point number one. That is in the city of Regina 

and not in Wascana Centre. 

 

Point number two is that Wascana Centre is partly government, partly university and partly city and not a 

responsibility of the Government of Saskatchewan for the purpose of reporting to this legislature. 

 

Flooding of Wascana Creek 

 

MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. The 

Premier will be aware I am sure (the staff made him aware) of the calls from a Mrs. Priest who used to work 

in this very building and Mr. Macala, who called this morning to outline the very severity of the problem in 

this particular area. The Premier will also be aware that it was the senior governments which recommended 

that the dike on the south side of the creek not be built because it was going to cost something like $400,000 

to protect such few houses. We are not disagreeing with that. The residents are concerned, however. My 

question to the Premier is this. Would the Premier not agree that most of the houses in the province of 

Saskatchewan are insured by SGIO (Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office) and that the cost to the 

Government of Saskatchewan may be considerably higher than the cost of sandbagging? By sandbagging 

right away you would overcome the fears of these people and the hassle and the clean-up that is going to 

have to take place. I, too, would ask you, would you not consider leaving this Assembly immediately to go 

out to try to figure out whether or not your government can get that area sandbagged to prevent a disaster, 

rather than wait for it to happen? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the point raised by the hon. member is unquestionably a matter for the 

city of Regina. The suggestion that we, on the basis of phone calls, of real concern (and no one is denying 

the concern) should take over the clear responsibility of the city of Regina in this regard is ill-founded. I am 

sure that there are sandbags about. I know that the Emergency Measures Organization has them and if, in the 

judgment of the city of Regina, they should be put in place I am sure they will be put in place. 

 

They have the same information as you. If the hon. member can assure us there is going to be a flood, fine. If 

he is not, his proper course of action, I suggest, is to call the city of Regina and ask them to take the action 

that he suggests. 

 

I am sure that they will do so if they feel it is prudent. They are elected to make these decisions and I am sure 

they are making them. I, for one, am not prepared to say that the city of Regina or the alderman for that area, 

Mr. Embury, I believe, is not discharging his responsibilities. 

 

Negotiations with Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier in absence of the 

Minister of Education (Mr. Shillington). 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Among others. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Let the records show that I didn’t make that comment, Mr. Speaker. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1798 
 

Mr. Premier, in an article in the Leader Post today, the president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

is quoted (if I could very briefly quote, Mr. Speaker): 

 

Six months from the opening of negotiations, the problem is still unresolved and there is no 

speedy resolution in sight in reference to the salary negotiations which are now proceeding. 

 

My question to the minister was going to be, and to you, Mr. Premier, is, do you agree with that assessment 

of the situation, and is it true that there is no speedy resolution in sight of this very weighty problem. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Basically, the answer is yes, I agree that the teachers’ negotiations have not been 

appropriately resolved. They involve salary questions; they involve questions of superannuation and very 

possibly, other matters. There are a number of things which are on the bargaining table. I am not personally 

familiar with all of the items on the bargaining table. I know that it does include salary and superannuation. 

The issues are still outstanding and so far as I am aware, no resolution is immediately in sight. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is unquestionably aware that 

local school boards had to finalize their budgets by March 30. The Premier, I am sure, is also aware that the 

bulk of the school units in Saskatchewan have had to go for roughly, a five to six mill increase. The Premier 

is aware that these increases, or the increase in government grants, do not even cover the normal increments 

from previous negotiations. My question to the Premier is this: since two thirds of a total school budget is 

basically based on payments to teachers in one form or another, would the Premier tell this Assembly how a 

school board can possibly run its business without knowing the final figure on two thirds of its budget at this 

point in time? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, I can indeed. We are in the same position with respect to the government and 

we hope to be writing our budget. The facts are, to everybody’s knowledge, I think, the degree of variation 

would be 2 or 3 per cent of the salary bill. It is highly unlikely that it will be less than X or more than X plus 

3 per cent. The trustees well know what that range would be — that 3 per cent of 70 per cent is about 2 per 

cent of their total income. Therefore, 98 per cent is clear and they are in doubt as to 2 per cent. That is a very, 

very common thing with respect to many, many governmental organizations. They don’t know what the 

price of oil is going to be next September and therefore, they are going to have to make some adjustments on 

that basis. I have no doubt whatever that because the area of likely difference is relatively small and the 

difference therefore in the school budget, depending upon one settlement or the other is likely not more than 

2 or 2 per cent, the boards will have no difficulty in coping with that level of uncertainty in setting their 

budgets. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Was the Premier serious in saying that it is 

normal and completely hunky-dory for a 3 per cent variation in a budget, that an efficient operation can be 

run by any level of government whether it be school or whatever with a 3 per cent variation? Is the Premier 

suggesting to school boards that there may indeed be a 3 per cent variation, as much as a 3 per cent variation 

in a budget that they set last March 30? Is the Premier serious in suggesting that in a variation like that which 

could conceivably mean as much as 3 to 4 mills in some area that they can run an efficient ship with a 

variation like that? Would the Premier briefly mind 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1799 
 

expounding on that particular point? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m sorry that I failed to make my position clear to the hon. member. I said 3 per cent 

of the salary bill or I thought I said that. On his own calculation, salary is 70 per cent of the total bill, so, 3 

per cent of 70 per cent equals 2.1 per cent. So we reduce the level of difficulty to 2.1 per cent and that is, I 

say, a relative maximum. I know many, many organizations which do their budgeting on the basis of 

expenses which may well vary as much as 2.1 per cent from the beginning of the year to the end of the year 

and if the hon. member doesn’t know any, if the hon. member is only associated with organizations which an 

estimate their expenses with certainty to a 2.1 per cent variance, he is indeed, very fortunate because we in 

the Government of Saskatchewan have been faced with very much wider variances than that and we have 

managed to budget with some degree of regularity. I would think that (and I’m sure the hon. member would 

agree) that the school boards of Saskatchewan are every bit as competent as budgeters as is the Government 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They are more so! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — There we are. So, even if indeed, they are more competent they will be better 

equipped to deal with this relatively modest variation than we are. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m sure they will deal with that very, very effectively as they have in the past. 

 

A Limit to Wage Increase for Teachers 

 

MR. R. L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — My question is to the Premier. Any trade union or 

other organization will be aware of the difficulties that have been had by the Government of Saskatchewan 

with the medical profession. Since the requests or demands, if you want, by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation and the offers, if you like, by the school boards are significantly at variance from 3 per cent, is the 

Premier attempting to tell the people of Saskatchewan and this Assembly today that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is going to limit any difference that is applied to 3 per cent, is that the increase that you’re 

talking about? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — No, what I said was that any school board which is getting its information from the 

bargaining team will in my judgment, be able to estimate what the increase in the salary bill will be within 3 

per cent. I think that many of them would be able to estimate closer than that but let’s leave it at that. I invite 

the hon. member to consult with the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) and if he can’t tell him 

within 3 per cent what the final settlement is then I think the member for Rosetown-Elrose has lost the touch 

which he used to have. That is all I can say. 

 

Land Acquired by Miss Argue 

 

MR. R. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Is 

the minister now in a position to inform this Assembly whether or not Miss Argue is able to farm all the land 

she has acquired over the past few years? 

 

HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am advised that Miss Argue has 

leased out a portion of land which is 40 miles from home which is not easily 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1800 
 

accessible to her. I think that that is not particularly germane to the argument which we have at hand. 

 

Gentleman Farming Land Bank Land from Jail 

 

MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Has the minister been able to 

determine whether the gentleman farming land bank land from jail was factual, and what steps his 

department has taken regarding this situation? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I have been able to check that situation. It is one of the situations which 

we run into from time to time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — All right. We have here, Mr. Speaker, a situation which is possibly a little unfortunate 

but nevertheless . . . I recall the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) talking about the insensitivity of land 

bank. We have here a situation where there is a grandfather-to-to grandson lease where the grandfather was 

very anxious to have the farm stay in the family. He sold the land to the land bank hoping that is grandson 

would operate the farm effectively The lessee . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would like to hear the minister’s answer. Order, order! The member for 

Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane), I wonder if he could restrain himself at least while I’m on my feet in respect for the 

office of Speaker if not for me. I know that many members in the Chamber are interested in hearing the 

answer to this, what I assumed was an important question. I’m sure that the answer is going to be equally as 

important as the question. I’m having trouble hearing the member of Agriculture’s answer. I didn’t have any 

problem hearing the question. I’m having problems hearing the answer and I would like to hear the answer. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated earlier, the lessee may have been somewhat 

less than ideal. However, we attempted through our counsellors to work with this family to try to get the 

lessee to do a proper job of farming. He, for the first number of years, did a reasonable job of farming. In 

1977 he became involved with the law and was, in fact, incarcerated. However, the father in that period did 

run the farm and did keep it in operation. We are now in a position where we have to say to that lessee that if 

he doesn’t shape up this year we’re going to have to cancel the lease. But that does not mean that we should 

not have given him an opportunity to shape up and become a legitimate farmer. It seems to me that if we are 

going to be sensitive in the area of maintaining family farms we have to address some of these situations. I 

think it would be unfair for us to say that we would throw him out the minute he was in trouble with the law. 

 

MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, this gentleman who was in jail, does he have a FarmStart loan too? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell you that. I don’t know that information at this time. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Supplementary question to the minister. Would the minister in light of 

today’s information and the obvious statement by the minister that the allegations made by the Conservatives 

were in fact true, and he was wrong, tell us 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1801 
 

whether in fact he is working with the Department of Social Services to integrate the work farms into the 

land bank program to perhaps train a whole bunch of new farmers to work with the program that you’ve 

developed? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I regret the kind of slurs which are being cast by the members opposite. I 

think this was a legitimate case where we tried to maintain a family farm. We may not have succeeded but 

we have at least tried. He is now at the point of no return. If he is not going to shape up this year we will 

have to cancel his contract. But in the meantime, his lease has been paid up all the while. The land bank has 

not lost money on this proposition. 

 

Apology to the House 

 

MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Will the minister now retract 

his remarks which relate to the unsubstantiated allegations of the opposition and apologize to the House? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly would not admit to that. Again, I point out to you that this 

individual did not get in trouble with the law until late in 1977. And it was in 1978 for a short period of time 

that he was incarcerated and there was a chance to rehabilitate him. I think that is a fair proposition. 

 

Safety Standards for School Buses 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — My question is to the Premier, in the absence of the 

Minister of Education. In view of the recent information presented on the W5 television show concerning 

school bus safety in other jurisdictions and the standards which school buses have in other jurisdictions, will 

you institute an investigation into such areas as seat belts, high-back padded seats, extra sun visors, 

emergency exists, and just general safety factors of our school buses in Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that question involves not only the Minister of Education (Mr. 

Shillington), but the minister in charge of the Highway Traffic Board (Mr. MacMurchy), which does some of 

the administration of school bus safety. I will take notice and ask one or other of the ministers to reply. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — One more supplementary here. The TV show also indicated a resistance by at least one 

company to these safety changes. Will you not agree that such resistance should require the government to 

move immediately to review these problems? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with the television show, but the brief viewing of it I 

had indicated that the company in question was in Ontario. I saw no evidence on the show that that company 

supplied any buses in Saskatchewan, so I’m not sure how germane the question is. But I will pass on the 

information to one or other of the ministers and see whether or not it is relevant in the preparation of their 

reply. 

 

Increase of Salmonellosis 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the Minister of Health 

(Mr. Tchorzewski). Mr. Minister, in light of a sharp increase during 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1802 
 

the last two years of reported cases of an infectious disease called salmonellosis, caused by a bacteria which 

scientists say is carried by 35 per cent to 50 per cent of all poultry sold in Canada, would the minister inform 

this House whether his department is monitoring the situation in Saskatchewan, and, if not, would he 

undertake to do so? 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, our public health officers monitor all 

situations where there is a need to. In this specific case, I will have to take notice and make an inquiry and 

reply to the member later. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since the minister is taking notice, I wonder, would you 

consider also developing a program that might lower the incidence of contaminated poultry, thereby not 

further jeopardizing what is presently a billion dollar business? If that isn’t acceptable, Mr. Minister, then 

you could also take notice and possibly make recommendation to the federal government to finance a 

program to achieve the same end. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m taking notice. 

Answer to Question Re SPC Loan 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday the member for Thunder 

Creek (Mr. Thatcher) asked the question with regard to the loan that SPC (Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation) has with the Chemical Bank. Mr. Speaker, the repayment of the loan was taken into 

consideration in determining the capital requirements of SPC for 1979. No decision has been made at this 

point in time as to the specific method that will be used to finance this requirement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member also made reference to the date of April 4, with respect to the loan. I am 

advised, Mr. Speaker, that the loan was rolled over at that date, as provided for under the terms of the loan 

agreement. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Minister. The decision must be made very shortly on 

that note, on that thing — I believe by the end of September. The minister is aware that there are many 

millions of dollars that are riding on that, including the current currency situation. Would the minister not 

agree that it is rather unusual that a course of action has not already been determined at this point in time by 

his departmental people? If I am not mistaken we are talking very close to $50 million. We still face a 14 or 

15 point spread in terms of currency alone. September is not that far away. Is it not unusual that your people 

have not yet made a decision? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, it is not unusual. For the information of the hon. member the amount is 

$48,500,000. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Make a liar out of me for $1.5 million. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I’m not quarrelling with . . . the loan is due by September 29 and as I have indicated, in 

planning for our capital requirements for the coming year we have taken that into consideration. So we are 

mindful. At this stage we have not arranged for a particular loan for the payment of the $48.5 million. The 

hon. member is probably aware that the differential in the exchange rate is narrowing. I think, as of today, it 

is 87.5 cents. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1803 
 

Provincial Disaster Fund 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office, as administrator of the Provincial Disaster Fund, is carefully planning and taking every 

precaution to prepare to prepare for compensation of flood victims. The disaster fund is the only permanent 

agency in western Canada with responsibility for a flood disaster program. 

 

I have just discussed the program with our Claims Executive Officer, Cliff Nevins, who is seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, in the second row. 

 

SGIO (Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office) is prepared to deal with a crisis if the situation arises. 

We have alerted our adjusters and they are ready for immediate deployment in order that assessments can be 

handled expediently. We have alerted our managers at the claims service centres, particularly in the danger 

areas of Regina, Moose Jaw, Weyburn, and Estevan. They are ready to provide information and assistance at 

any time and ask that their phones numbers be noted for immediate contact: Regina — 527-0621; Moose 

Jaw — 692-7891; Weyburn — 842-6511; Estevan — 634-3648. 

 

All the municipalities, including R.M’s, cities, towns, and villages have received information from my office 

on the 1977 revised disaster fund policies. However, I feel it is necessary to briefly outline the basic 

regulations. 

 

Claims for damage to private property are limited to $5,000 and there is a $50 deductible. 

Private property within a municipality may be designated as a disaster area. 

No payment will be made if the damages are of a nature that could be otherwise insured. 

Special emphasis should be made that only damage assessments by SGIO adjusters will be considered valid 

for the program. Municipalities can be declared disaster areas when damages exceed vie mills or $1 million, 

whichever is less. Damages between five and 12 mills are shared equally by the province and the 

municipality. The province bears the entire cost of damages in excess of 12 mills. It is because of our 

concern that we are urging everyone to take all precautions, if they fear their area is indeed a compensation 

or in immediate danger. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to make a couple of comments. The Assembly will be aware 

that this is an annual message from SGIO, and an annual message from the minister responsible. I don’t 

know why the minister takes the time of this Assembly to outline the policy of SGIO, which he should be 

presenting to all of the agents and adjusters in the province at any rate, and should be advertising to the 

people. But I think that this particular statement at this particular moment in time, given the question period 

of today, Mr. Speaker, outlines in complete detail the attitude of the government members opposite. Let’s 

outline for the people how wonderful is the NDP government. Let’s outline for the people all of these 

wonderful policies, but let’s not take one ounce of prevention. Let’s not try to instruct one organization. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Ministerial statements are allowed to be responded to. The 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1804 
 

response must be brief, a strictly relevant comment. A debate cannot take place. I want to take this 

opportunity to warn the member of that. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I’m pleased that you warned me on that. This is not a debate. The policy of the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan would be to take the ounce of prevention to prevent the 

pound of cure that the minister responsible for SGIO is presenting to the people of Saskatchewan today. The 

purpose, I think, of these statement periods is to present what our policy would be, and to tell where we think 

the government is wrong. Of course the statement that the minister made is welcome. It’s welcome to anyone 

that’s hit by a disaster, but we believe, as opposed to the government members opposite, that if the 

government were to take steps now the savings to the people of Saskatchewan, not only in money but in 

time, effort, energy, hassle, mess, clean-up time, and so on would far outweigh any statements the minister 

might make in this regard today. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 69 — An Act to 

provide for Community Health Units 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to take a few minutes in second reading to explain the provisions 

of the community health unit act. This bill will allow autonomous community health units to develop around 

our two major urban centres. The cities of Saskatoon and Regina may request to be designated as health units 

and neighboring municipalities will be allowed to decide whether they wish to join with the cities or whether 

they would prefer to remain part of the Department of Health’s health region structure. 

 

Before going into what this bill will accomplish, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take some time to explain why 

it was developed. 

 

The cities of Saskatoon and Regina, which are not included within any health region, operate their own 

independent city health departments. The municipalities surrounding them, however, are included in health 

regions administered by health region boards. For several years, there has been considerable interest, in 

Saskatoon in particular, in creating a unified community board that could be responsible for public health 

and other health related programs in Saskatoon and the surrounding rural area. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, a task force studying senior citizens’ services in the Saskatoon area, whose report my 

colleague, the Hon. Herman Rolfes, and I recently made public, has recommended the creation of just such a 

board for Saskatoon and its neighboring communities. 

 

A few years ago, the city of Saskatoon presented my department with a proposal that a community health 

board be developed to serve both the city and the outlying rural area. It was clear that, although the proposal 

had merit, extensive discussion would have to take place between local authorities and my department before 

the proposal could be refined. 

 

It was necessary to determine the range of services for which a unified board could be responsible. It was 

necessary to determine how participation by interested municipalities could be allowed, while preserving the 

right of other municipalities to remain in the health region system if they chose. It was clear, as well, that 

enabling 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1805 
 

legislation would be required to provide a legal basis for the creation of a unified board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill is a result of lengthy negotiations and consultations between the city of Saskatoon, 

representatives of neighboring municipalities, and the Department of Health. I am confident that this bill will 

provide a basis for bringing together, under one administrative structure, a range of health and health-related 

services and programs. 

 

I’m equally confident that this bill will do much to allow service and program arrangements to be worked 

out at the local level between participating municipalities according to local wishes. Although this bill was 

developed with particular needs of the Saskatoon area in mind, it is drafted in general terms and can be 

applied to Regina as well. 

 

I would like to emphasize that this bill will not disturb any existing provincial health legislation and that it 

will not change the way by which my department gives assistance to the two city health departments. The 

Community Health Unit Act would apply only to Regina and Saskatoon and only upon the expressed wishes 

of either of those cities would it be applied. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to explain the bill’s major features. 

Any city of over 100,000 in population may request the Lieutenant-Governor in Council to designate it as a 

health unit. A health unit will be an autonomous body separate from my department’s health region 

structure, and after a city has been designated as a health unit, any municipality that borders on it may choose 

to join the unit or to remain within its original health region. 

 

The bill established three basic requirements, Mr. Speaker, for municipalities wishing to join the health unit. 

(1) A municipality itself must initiate a request to join the health unit. 

(2) The municipality must physically border on the health unit. 

(3) The terms and conditions for the union must be approved by the units, by the health region board and by 

the Minister of Health. 

 

A health unit board will be established as the administrative authority for the unit, and the urban-rural 

representation on the board will be determined by the urban-rural composition of the unit. 

 

A health unit board will possess powers defined by the act and by other provincial legislation. It will be 

responsible for public health services, but it will have a broader mandate and scope of authority than city 

boards of health now possess. 

 

In addition, this bill provides for a health unit board to administer other health-related programs that are not 

traditional public health programs. The extent of board involvement in these programs, Mr. Speaker, will be 

determined by agreements worked out at the local level by participating municipalities and confirmed by the 

government. This bill gives the board and participating municipalities the authority to enter into the 

necessary program and program funding agreements. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1806 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have explained many times before how deeply this government is committed to high 

standards of health care and to new health initiatives and programs. Everyone knows that we will be not only 

sustaining our health programs but expanding them while other governments across Canada are chopping 

theirs. Mr. Speaker, this government’s commitment to health care includes preventative and community 

health programs just as much as it does hospitals and other treatment oriented programs. 

 

I have said earlier that Regina and Saskatoon have their own city health departments; they are not part of my 

department’s regional system. This government believes in helping the cities to strengthen their community 

health programs and in helping them to keep their programs strong. For this reason, the Department of 

Health pays an annual community health grant to Regina and Saskatoon that is calculated on a per capita 

basis and that is equally applied to both cities. I have already announced that this year’s budget will see the 

amount of this per capita grant increase from $1.75 to $2.50. In 1979-80, Mr. Speaker, this increase per 

capita grant will make over three-quarters-of-a-million-dollars — $768,500 to be exact — available to 

Regina and Saskatoon to help support their local health departments and community health programs. And 

bearing this in mind, I would like to say a few words about how a health unit will be funded. 

 

A health unit board will finance its operations out of revenues received from the city, other participating 

municipalities and the Department of Health. By increasing the level of the per capita grant the government 

pays to the cities, Mr. Speaker, we will be establishing a financial basis for the implementation of this bill. 

The important provision in this bill for rural areas is that no municipality that is now part of a health region 

will necessarily have to pay more for public health services if it joins a health unit than it does now. This bill 

will allow the board and municipalities to reach agreements about the provision of extra services and new 

programs. The level of municipal contribution for these extra services and new programs, however, will be 

set by mutual agreement reached between the board and its constituent municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary, it is obvious that this bill gives maximum latitude to cities and local 

municipalities to determine the direction they want to follow. The act would apply to cities only upon their 

specific request. Local municipalities will have a free option to decide to join a health unit or to remain 

within a health region. Funding and program arrangements will be worked out on a local level and municipal 

contributions will be determined in accordance with agreements reached with the health unit board. A further 

provision, Mr. Speaker, will allow a municipality that changes its mind after joining a health unit to be 

deleted from the unit after an initial three-year period has elapsed. 

 

I’m confident that this bill will establish a basis for the administrative co-ordination and integration of an 

important range of related services around our province’s two major urban centres. I’m convinced that the 

bill will encourage local participation in arranging for the delivery of services and I am satisfied that the 

interests of individual municipalities are both protected and preserved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore am pleased to move that this bill be given second reading at this time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1807 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, as the minister is probably aware, the negotiations that 

have led up to a community health unit around Saskatoon have been going on for several years. I suggest to 

the minister there are several questions that need answering which he did not answer in his seconding 

speech. 

 

First of all, the services provided in the rural areas presently are, in my opinion, superior and there are more 

of them (different services) than are supplied to the residents of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Secondly, there is a problem for the people who work for both the city and the government now being moved 

into a third type of unit which basically the city will not be responsible for and neither will the government 

and neither will be the R.M. (rural municipality.) A council made up of the three will sort of run the 

function. There is concern among the people now who are working for one or the other area re pensions. 

Will the city staff be required and forced to go rural which they have never had to do before? Will rural staff 

be forced to work within the city? These are some of the concerns that the minister may be aware of which 

have delayed, I think, the agreement between the R.M’s and the city of Saskatoon over many years. I would 

calculate the first time I was aware of this would be about 1974 when the negotiations were first started and I 

was on the city of Saskatoon bargaining team. The information came to us about this concern. I have talked 

to many of the people who serve the R.M. rural areas (the nurses and so forth) and they’re all concerned 

whether they are going to be represented by SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees Association) or if 

they are going to have to move to CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) and so forth. 

 

I would suggest that the minister, in his closing remarks on the seconding of the speech of this bill, indicate 

some of the tentative agreements that may be available to the individuals who are going to be affected. I refer 

to the employees. Secondly, the rural service provided presently — the health inspectors do many services 

that the city health inspectors do not do. Will those services be continued or because the weight of the board 

is in the city of Saskatoon’s favor, will they be changed so that the rural will get a less service? 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a few other comments I would like to check before I make them and therefore, I beg 

leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 73 — An Act to 

amend The Osteopathic Practice Act 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a very few words in commenting on the reasons for amending 

The Osteopathic Practice Act and what the amendments are intended to do. 

 

I think it is far to say that this is not one of the major bills that is before us today, but nevertheless, people 

involved in the profession of osteopathy and people involved as patients of osteopaths, will find these 

amendments of particular importance to them. In our consultations with those involved, they have given their 

full approval for these amendments. 

 

The first amendment is a very practical amendment to deal with unusual circumstances in our province with 

respect to the registration of osteopaths. Under the current act, 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1808 
 

authority to register osteopaths in Saskatchewan rests with the Board of Osteopathic Physicians. This board 

is required to have a minimum of three persons who are members of Saskatchewan Society of Osteopathic 

Physicians. At present, there is only one osteopath registered in Saskatchewan and she is also the boards’ 

only member. The board is therefore prevented from fulfilling its responsibilities under the act, one of these 

responsibilities being the registration of the osteopaths. If the present sole osteopath were unable to perform 

her duties, it would become totally impossible to administer the act, if indeed it can be legally administered 

now. 

 

Our amendment will authorize the Minister of Health to appoint persons to the Board of Osteopathic 

Physicians when it lacks the minimum number of three members. Individuals appointed by the minister 

would remain on the board only until registered osteopaths became available to replace them. In the 

meantime however, the board could function. 

 

The proposed amendments to section 5 of the act are intended to make the introduction, amendment or 

repeal of regulations, subject to the approval of the Minister of Health first, followed by review of the House 

Committee on Regulations. At present the regulations are subject to legislative approval only. 

 

Since the first amendment will allow non-osteopaths to sit on the board, this means that new regulations or 

amendments regulating the profession could be made by persons who are not members of the osteopathic 

profession. This situation is virtually unique in this province, and the minister’s approval for any new 

regulations or amendments made by this reconstituted board is proposed for the purpose of giving some 

assurance to the osteopathic profession that the interests of osteopaths will not be adversely affected by 

persons who are not members of the profession. 

 

Ministerial approval also provides an immediate basis for protecting the public interest. It should be noted 

however, Mr. Speaker, that regulations and amendments to regulations, will eventually come before this 

House for final ratification. It might also be useful to point out that similar sections are to be found in several 

other recent acts, namely The Denturist Act, The Opthalmic Dispensers Act, The Psychiatric Nurses Act, and 

The Dental Profession Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many years now, persons receiving and promoting osteopathic services in our province 

have been interested in attracting additional osteopaths to Saskatchewan. Our last amendment is in response 

to this concern. 

 

At present, a person may take examinations under the act for the purpose of registration, only after he has 

obtained a degree in osteopathy. The amendment will remove this restriction and will allow an individual to 

take examinations in stages under The Saskatchewan Osteopathic Practice Act. Therefore, when a student 

osteopath has completed certain course requirements in detail, like the basic sciences, he may then get to 

write these examinations under The Osteopathic Practice Act while the knowledge is still fresh in his mind. 

The student osteopath will not have to wait to write all his exams under the act until he has completed his 

entire course of study. Regardless of how the examinations are staged, individuals will continue to be 

eligible for registration only after a degree in osteopathy has been obtained and all registration examinations 

in Saskatchewan passed. Mr. Speaker, I, therefore, move that this bill be given second reading at this time. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, this is one of the heaviest 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1809 
 

pieces of legislation to come before the House this year. I have no particularly strong feeling about this bill. 

Since I haven’t been in contact with all the osteopathic professionals in Saskatchewan . . . I’ll wait until 

Committee of the Whole to do this. I’ll let it go through now. I want to have some consultation with the 

osteopathic professionals in the province and any of the concerns that you may have misinterpreted I will 

bring to your attention during Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 84 — An Act to 

establish the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to introduce a cancer foundation act and explain its 

provisions. This act will make it possible to implement the major recommendations of a report by Dr. T.A. 

Watson of the Ontario Cancer Foundation. Dr. Watson was commissioned in 1978 to undertake a review of 

the organization of the cancer program administered by the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. 

 

Before I get into the details of this act, Mr. Speaker, I want to provide some background for the members of 

the House. The history of our cancer program is one the people of Saskatchewan can be proud of. Its roots go 

back as far as 1930 when through the mutual co-operation of government, the medical profession and the 

public an act was passed in this legislature to establish the first cancer program in the Commonwealth. 

 

The Cancer Commission Act of 1930 was initiated in response to recommendations by the Saskatchewan 

College of Physicians and Surgeons for improvements in the provision of cancer treatment. The College of 

Physicians and Surgeons at that time recognized the need to develop specialized clinics to consolidate the 

use of new techniques being developed for the treatment of cancer, when radiotherapy involving the use of a 

substance called radium was becoming an important mode of treatment. Prior to the formation of the cancer 

commission, individual physicians had to purchase their own supplies of this radioactive substance. 

Increasingly, concerns were being raised about the procurement, availability and the use of radium. The 

commission appointed under the terms of the 1930 act was given responsibility for establishment of 

diagnostic clinics and facilities for radiation therapy. 

 

In 1932 two cancer clinics were opened, one in Regina at what was then the Grey Nuns’ Hospital and one in 

Saskatoon at the City Hospital. The people of Saskatchewan will remember that the ‘30s were times of great 

economic depression in this province and developments in the cancer program slowed and patients had to 

pay nominal fees for the diagnostic and radiotherapy services provided by the commission. 

 

We didn’t have medicare or hospital insurance plans in those days, either. So patients had to pay for all these 

other services as well. 

 

In April 1944, Mr. Speaker, The Cancer Control Act was passed and Saskatchewan became the first area in 

the world to provide a comprehensive cancer program without direct charges to patients. When the CCF was 

elected later that year the new cancer program was actually implemented and cancer patients no longer 

needed to fear the very high costs of medical and hospital care. 1944 was also the year that Dr. Allan W. 

Blair was appointed director of cancer services for Saskatchewan, beginning a period of rapid innovation and 

improvement in our cancer program. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1810 
 

Shortly after the death of Dr. Blair, the Regina Cancer Clinic was renamed the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic 

in tribute to the contributions he made to the people of our province. 

 

1949 saw the introduction of new technology, a betatron unit, which allowed treatment by super voltage 

radiation to kill cancer cells that had been impossible to reach with earlier radiation therapy. This unit, one of 

the first of its kind, was installed at the University of Saskatchewan and was available for treatment of 

patients from across the province until 1966. 

 

Saskatchewan was often among the first areas of the world to adopt new treatment methods, but we were 

also leaders in development of new technology. In 1951, the staff of the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic, especially 

Dr. Watson and physicists at the University of Saskatchewan, designed what was known then as the cobalt 

bomb. This was the first cobalt 60 unit in the world as well. 

 

Although not as dramatic as these new technologies, we have made contributions in other areas as well. 

Since the 1930s the cancer commission has maintained a policy of insuring that patients receive regular 

follow-up examinations to determine whether cancer has reappeared and whether additional treatment is 

required. Such a practice is essential to the well-being of cancer patients and it has further potential benefits 

for all of us in the control of cancer. Detailed clinical records have been maintained by the cancer 

commission since the program began and as a result Saskatchewan is one of the few areas of the world 

today, for which reliable information on the incidence of cancer and the results of treatment can be obtained. 

 

This type of cancer registry is essential for the evaluation of treatment programs and for the detection of 

trends in the occurrence of cancer. The cancer commission has been working to computerize these records, 

making them more accessible for cancer research. 

 

Over the years, The Cancer Control Act and its regulations have been modified and policies have been 

adjusted to improve the operation of the program. 

 

In 1970, the Minister of Public Health at that time established a committee to examine all aspects of the 

cancer program in Saskatchewan. The committee, which was chaired by Justice F.W. Johnson, presented its 

report to government in 1972. And of the 71 recommendations of the Johnson report, 50 were acted upon. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Watson, director of the London Clinic of the Ontario Cancer Foundation 

was commissioned to undertake a further review of the organization of the cancer program administered by 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. I mentioned Dr. Watson’s work in Saskatchewan on cobalt 60 unit a 

little earlier. Dr. Watson came to Saskatchewan in 1946 as director of the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic and 

became director of cancer services for Saskatchewan in 1949. He continued in that position until 1963, and 

was highly regarded by both the medical profession and the public generally for is contribution to the 

development of the program. 

 

During the course of his 1978 inquiry into the cancer program, Dr. Watson determined that our program had 

maintained a quality service to cancer patients in this province. Nevertheless, Dr. Watson concluded that it 

would be advantageous to replace the 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1811 
 

cancer commission by a body with more autonomy. The creation of a foundation with members appointed 

from consumer and professional groups was suggested. Dr. Watson also recommended that the foundation 

be outside the civil service sphere. 

 

Under the present arrangement, all staff of the cancer commission are employed by the Department of Health 

and are subject to regulations of the Public Service Commission. 

 

Another major recommendation was the creation of a medical advisory committee to the foundation. This 

mechanism would facilitate greater liaison and access of medical staff to the policy-making body of the 

foundation. The provision of lodge facilities for patients who must travel to the cancer clinics in Regina and 

Saskatoon was also recommended. Some accommodation of this type is now provided in Saskatoon for 

patients who do not require hospitalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these recommendations of Dr. Watson have been thoroughly reviewed and I believe they have 

a good deal of merit. Provision has been made in this act for all of these major recommendations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to outline some of the specific provisions of The Cancer Foundation Act. This act 

will authorize the establishment of a cancer foundation to replace the present Saskatchewan Cancer 

Commission. The foundation will be separate from government and will operate autonomously similar to a 

Crown hospital. Members of the foundation will be appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 

Membership will include, among others, one physician representing the College of Physicians and Surgeons, 

one full-time member of the faculty of the College of Medicine of the University of Saskatchewan and one 

representative of the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Cancer Society. These appointments will e 

made by mutual agreement of the body represented and the Minister of Health. The chairman of the 

foundation will be designated by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. The foundation will be empowered to 

carry out functions required to conduct a program for the diagnosis, prevention and the treatment of cancer. 

All personnel required for the operation of the program will be employed by the foundation, rather than the 

Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the foundation will be financed by moneys appropriated by the legislature and by moneys 

received from other sources, such as, bequests, donations, research grants, and the like. The foundation will 

be empowered to expend these funds in the manner the foundation considers appropriate. 

 

Another important provision of the act is the establishment of a medical advisory committee appointed by 

the foundation. The membership of the committee will include one physician from each of the cancer clinics, 

three physicians in private practice specializing in some area of cancer treatment or diagnosis and two 

general practitioners and a member of the College of Medicine. The Medical Advisory Committee will 

advise the foundation on technical medical matters. Moreover, this committee will ensure a high degree of 

contact between the governing body and physicians involved in the provision of service to cancer patients. I 

believe the establishment of this committee will contribute to an even higher level of service to cancer 

patients than we have seen in the past. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of the hon. members a provision which will authorize 

the foundation to establish and operate hostels and to assist another organization in the operation of a hostel. 

The development of hostels will be of 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1812 
 

considerable benefit to patients who must travel long distances for specialized cancer services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that The Cancer Foundation Act will establish a firm basis for the continued 

development of the Saskatchewan cancer program. I, therefore, move that this bill be given second reading at 

this time. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, just briefly, we on this side of the House 

support fully the recommendations of Dr. Watson. I haven’t had a chance to review the bill in any great 

detail and I am not sure that this bill is the vehicle for the proper implementation of those recommendations. 

I would, therefore, like to have time to review the bill and the minister’s remarks. I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 60 — An Act to establish the 

Department of Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 60, a bill to establish a 

department of intergovernmental affairs. I would like to explain the background for the bill and then some of 

the provisions of the bill. 

 

One of the activities in which the new department will be deeply involved is the matter of constitutional 

review. In that area there are issues of profound importance to Saskatchewan. Canada now faces a serious 

threat to its continued existence as a nation and in the course of resolving these difficulties the institutions of 

our federal system may undergo some profound transformations. 

 

Those of us living outside Quebec have been aware for some time of distinct nationalist movements within 

that province but since November, 1976 we have been faced with a government which is committed to 

political independence for Quebec. I am sure that hon. members will agree that this situation warrants 

resolute and effective action on the part of all concerned Canadians. Mr. Speaker, I am not about to deliver 

an exhaustive argument in response to the proposals of the Parti Quebecois. I have spoken on this subject 

many times in the past and shall continue to do so on other occasions in the future. My views on the subject 

are well known. It is enough for me to say that we, in Saskatchewan, also have a unique way of life and a 

rich multicultural heritage. All parts of Canada are unique in some respects and yet they have a number of 

things in common. Like Quebec, Saskatchewan has experienced frustrations from time to time, in this blend 

of diverse regions and diverse cultures which makes up Canada. I’m certain that people in each province 

have similar concerns. We must all recognize that there are genuine grievances, not only in Quebec but 

elsewhere in Canada. Canada is not a country of two groups, as is sometimes asserted by Premier Levesque. 

It is a country of many groups, and several distinctive cultures. We want to insure that Canada remains 

united and that the distinctive Quebec culture remains in Canada. I am convinced that it’s possible to 

accommodate Quebec in Canada. This, however, will not be done easily. It will require a firm commitment 

from each of us, and some hard work and some hard bargaining by governments as well. 

 

I want to re-emphasize that this government is gravely concerned about the threat to national unity. We’re 

determined to do what we can to alleviate the threat. There are several constitutional areas, Mr. Speaker, 

which are of more specific concern to Saskatchewan. In the field of resources, for example, our government 

has always acted 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1813 
 

on the assumption that the provinces have the power to control and derive the benefit from the resources 

within their boundaries. That’s, in our understanding, the letter and the spirit of the British North America 

Act. In our view it constitutes one of the fundamental tenets of our federal system. Indeed, in the perception 

of the Fathers of Confederations, provinces were likely to be financed by direct taxation and by resource 

revenues, and this is reinforced again in the resource transfer agreement of 1930 when Saskatchewan and 

Alberta obtained the right to have full control of their natural resources. 

 

Now this principle which I’ve just enunciated has been challenged a number of times by means of court 

actions and by other means — other means such as the federal income tax disallowance of royalties as a 

deduction from corporate income tax, Mr. Speaker. I could list many other examples of similar difficulties. 

Many of these have been reported in documents such as the Report of the Western Premiers Task Force on 

Constitutional Trends. If one wishes to get some idea of some of the areas of friction between the federal 

government and the provincial governments in Canada set out in a relatively dispassionate way, you can look 

at the two or three annual reports of the Western Premiers Task Force on Constitutional Trends. I won’t deal 

with them here. It simply indicates the areas which need to be dealt with in federal-provincial relations. 

 

We have in the past year or two certainly not been idle in the area of constitutional negotiations. Hon. 

members will no doubt be familiar with the recent round of conferences in which the so-called, short list, of 

14 items were debated by all 11 governments in Canada. These talks have resumed the constitutional review 

process which broke off in 1971, with failure to secure a unanimous agreement on the Victoria Charter. The 

members will recall that there were a series of negotiations leading up to the Victoria Charter of 1971, which 

charter did not receive the unanimous agreement of the provinces, primarily because the Government of 

Quebec was unable to agree with it. Following that, there was a period during which there wasn’t much done 

in the field of constitutional negotiation. But in 1976, the Prime Minister indicated to the premiers that he 

would like to commence the process again by patriating the British North American Act. The premiers, in 

their response, expressed the view that patriation should not proceed without a consensus on a number of 

important substantive issues as well. And since that time, events have moved rapidly. 

 

Last August, in Regina, at their annual conference, the premiers again affirmed their 1976 consensus on 

areas of concern and added a couple more. They also responded to certain elements contained in Bill C-60, 

the federal proposal for constitutional negotiation introduced about last July. Constitutional amendment is 

perhaps a better way to put it. The federal government constitutional amendment bill, Bill C-60, was 

introduced last July. The premiers concluded that all the constitutional issues would require careful and 

detailed discussion with the federal government. 

 

A First Ministers Conference followed in October of last year and as a result, the Continuing Committee of 

Ministers on the Constitution was struck and these ministers together with their officials, conducted an 

exhaustive series of meetings involving extensive negotiations which were preliminary to the 

federal-provincial conference a couple of months ago — last February. I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, 

that good progress has been made in several of the 14 subject areas which were under discussion. We’re 

close to an agreement on an amendment which would deal with the issues of resource taxation. There is a 

substantial measure of agreement with respect to communications, particularly cable television. In most of 

the other areas, we managed to each varying degrees of consensus and in some pretty close to agreement. In 

fact, 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1814 
 

we had some areas of agreement provided the whole package was agreed to. We intend to continue the 

negotiations in these areas and to begin discussions on some entirely new subjects. The federal government 

has put forward a number of new subjects which they wish to have considered. 

 

The process of constitutional review so far, has required considerable background work, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’ve barely progressed past the initial stages. If we’re to make a worthwhile contribution to strengthening 

our country and if we’re to ensure that Saskatchewan’s case is put with all of the force that we can, then we 

must recognize that much needs to be done and we need to improve our capacity as a province to mount 

these arguments and to ensure the issues involved. This will mean, in our judgment, appropriate legislative 

authority and facilities and that’s why we’re proceeding today. It’s a clear requirement that we develop and 

articulate the Saskatchewan position. These are complex issues, the complexities and the implications are 

profound and the process warrants more resources than we have been putting into it up to date. As I say, 

nothing much happened between 1971 and 1976 and it has rapidly escalated since that time. 

 

This is a period of fundamental change in Canada’s federal system. The respect of responsibilities of the two 

orders of government are being reviewed more intensively than at any time since confederation. There will 

be profound political and economic consequences for Saskatchewan if even some of these changes are 

proceeded with and we want to ensure that the changes, if made, are suitable to us, to the extent that we can. 

Obviously we can’t have everything we want; that’s not the nature of negotiations, but we certainly wish to 

arm ourselves with all the material we can. 

 

There are, Mr. Speaker, besides the constitution, other important areas of government which have become 

the subject of intergovernmental negotiations during recent years. There has been an increase in the number 

of cost-sharing agreements, of federal-provincial overlap in environmental policy, in urban affairs and 

science policy. Of considerable long-term impact are the proposals for increased federal-provincial 

co-operation in economic policy making. There are also increasingly important developments in the 

international arena. Negotiations like the GATT negotiations, the general agreement on trade and tariffs, 

while certainly they are a federal responsibility, require some attention by provincial governments to put 

forward our points of view to see that they at least get to the bargaining table. 

 

This has all meant a greatly increased workload. Until now, we relied upon a small staff of six or seven 

persons. They’ve been helping us to articulate the provincial position on constitutional matters, assisting in 

the formulation of provincial policy in areas of overlap and interface with the federal government, and 

co-ordinating the provincial contributions for major intergovernmental conferences and meetings, which I 

may say are becoming very, very numerous. Practically another major industry in Canada is interprovincial 

meetings. 

 

And there have been a number of other matters, particularly arising out of the operations of the Department 

of Regional Economic Expansion. There are a good number of DREE agreements which involve relatively 

complicated federal-provincial agreements. 

 

We also need to maintain a bit of an overview on international matters which might affect Saskatchewan, 

particularly tariff and trade matters which might affect our ability 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1815 
 

to market our products. The difficulty, Mr. Speaker, is that we have not been able to do all of that with six or 

seven people and we need to expand our capacity. 

 

Turning to specifics. I think it’s worthwhile to compare our proposal with the situation in other provinces. 

The province of Newfoundland as an intergovernmental affairs office with 24 people on staff and a budget of 

just over $600,000. In Ontario they have 56 persons on staff and a budget of $2.5 million. Alberta has 60 

people and $2.7 million. Quebec’s department, and of course it’s another thing there, has 288 people and $36 

million. 

 

We are proposing 18 people up from our 7, and we’ll build up to that, (we don’t necessarily hire them all at 

once) and a budget of about $600,000. But I think in the circumstances that is not unreasonable. We need to 

equip ourselves at last as well as Newfoundland in the negotiations which are emerging. 

 

I know that members opposite do not dispute the basic proposition which I put forward. Indeed the member 

for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher), speaking in the Assembly in 1978, asked if we were in fact going to set 

up a department of intergovernmental affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been addressing my remarks to the reasons for bringing forward the legislation. I now 

turn to the provisions of the bill and I will go through a few of the details. 

 

In broad terms the bill provides for a minister of intergovernmental affairs who will have authority to 

co-ordinate and review policies and programs concerning governments outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who will that be? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Who will the minister be? We haven’t made a choice there. It’s unlikely to be the 

Premier on a long-term basis. One of the purposes of the bill quite frankly is to make it a little easier to have 

a person other than the Premier. 

 

The department will also be permitted to take necessary action to establish and monitor intergovernmental 

contracts. It will be largely a co-ordinating role. It’s not intended to be a department which involves itself in 

all the substantive areas of policy development. The line departments will still have their primary 

responsibility. It’s not intended to be a super-ministry and not particularly a watchdog agency, but in fact, we 

do have a good number of areas where we simply need a co-ordinating force and it could be 

intergovernmental. 

 

On the details of the legislation, section 3 and 4 establish the new department and provide for its minister, 

etc. Section 5 provides for the acts to be administered by the minister of intergovernmental affairs and these 

sections follow the normal form for acts establishing departments. Section 6 sets out the powers and duties 

of the minister of intergovernmental affairs. First under clause (a) the minister is responsible for the 

co-ordination of governmental policy programs and activities of an intergovernmental nature, to make 

recommendations to cabinet; second, clause (b) empowers the minister to conduct a continuing review of 

intergovernmental agreements; third, the minister may be a party to the negotiation of intergovernmental 

agreements. 

 

Intergovernmental agreements is defined and includes not only agreements between 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1816 
 

Saskatchewan and the federal government, but agreements between Saskatchewan and other provincial 

governments in Canada and elsewhere. 

 

The minister is empowered to take steps to initiate and maintain intergovernmental co-operation and to 

establish and maintain offices outside of Saskatchewan. We have in mind really that he would take over the 

office of the Agent General in London. If that office is maintained (and we now propose to maintain it), 

that’s our current thinking. 

 

The hon. member suggests it should be re-assessed and I acknowledge that that office is marginal in some 

ways. We have reduced its staff complement a bit. I think it still probably has a valuable role to play. But I 

admit that that’s not free from debate. At one point, we had decided we would like one in the far east in 

Japan but the costs of operating anything in Japan are so very large that we drew back and said we can 

probably do it cheaper by having a few trips over there and using the Canadian embassy basically. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Have you looked at China? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, we have not thought of putting any office in China since one deals with the 

Chinese government and not a wide range of people like one does in Japan or Korea or Hong Kong. 

 

There are a good number of other obvious powers that the department will have similar to other departments. 

I would mention just as an example, one of the things which needs to be done, something like the 

Qu’Appelle Implementation Agreement. It involves perhaps two federal departments and four or five 

provincial departments and they are all negotiating this way and that way and someone has to ride herd over 

it. It can be, let’s say, the budget bureau but intergovernmental works just as well. 

 

Section 8 provides for grants. 

 

Section 9 permits the minister to engage advisers. One the latter point, there may be times that when we will 

want to hire constitutional lawyers or the like. 

 

Section 10 gives the authority for entry into agreements for the purposes of the act and the regulations. 

 

It is clear, I think, from these and other sections, all of which I won’t detail, that the matters are designed to 

equip us to deal with, firstly constitutional matters of great importance to Saskatchewan and, secondly, the 

increasing range of contacts between the Government of Saskatchewan and other provincial governments 

and the federal government which result in formal agreements. 

 

We need to see that we can make our organization work effectively to handle these tasks. I do not think this 

bill would have emerged if we had not been entering into these crucial areas of constitutional negotiations. It 

is clear, I think that we need, in Canada, to develop a renewed constitution which will recognize the special 

needs and aspirations of the various regions of Canada and that this will not be done easily. What is required 

of us is a contribution that will accord to the people of this province and of every province their fair 

entitlement to the economic and other benefits of being Canadians. I know that all hon. members will agree 

with the basic objections of this bill and I suspect most hon. members will agree with the basic method of 

establishing a department of intergovernmental affairs and if there are questions or queries with 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1817 
 

respect to the details, I know they will arise in committee. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of pleasure to move second reading of this bill. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, I find myself slightly torn with the activities 

with regard to this department. I have, as the Premier well knows, urged in the past that we establish such a 

department. I think that the Premier was perhaps digressing slightly from his prepared remarks when he 

indicated one of the uses of the department would be . . . he used the example Qu’Appelle Valley 

Implementation. Now if this department is going to be a department that is going to get involved in all 

intergovernmental relationships, of course the Premier knows that this is far afield from what the original 

intent was, and I don’t think it was what he intended. I think of agriculture with the jurisdiction, federal and 

provincial for agriculture and whether we need an intergovernmental affairs department imposing itself on 

that; I think it would cause more problems than it would solve. So I see the Premier perhaps agreeing with 

me as to that not being the intent of the department. 

 

I would like to say generally that a department such as this is necessary, but I think that the Premier and the 

government opposite didn’t do themselves a service by making the deputy minister a political appointment. 

You know, there’s an awful lot of skepticism in the public right now over our constitutional process, and 

there’s more scepticism in the public over the way we’re handling our constitutional and intergovernmental 

debates on a national level. I don’t think that the activities of the government opposite . . . when during one 

of the constitutional conferences, half the activities of the Premier are being filmed for his TV for the 

upcoming election. I think that these constitutional conferences have become a great big political circus for 

the performance of the players to try to get some political benefit in their particular jurisdiction. I think the 

people of this country are starting to demand some performance from the leaders of the various jurisdictions 

in Canada. I believe there’s a campaign slogan somewhere that it’s time for performance and not promises, 

and that is all we have seen on the constitutional activities to date. I think we would be better served, quite 

frankly, for the next two years, and that’s a debatable time, if every constitutional conference held in Canada 

be in camera, so that the leaders can get to work instead of performing for the cameras and performing 

merely for votes back home and I say accomplishing very little other than an increase in scepticism in their 

constitutional debates. 

 

I think as well, that this department is missing what I believe to be a fundamental part of the constitutional 

debate. I have a belief that, in order for Saskatchewan to be able to assume a deserved role in the 

constitutional debate, it should get its own house in order. 

 

I go back and I look at the Premier’s debates and his speech back in 1972, when he announced the new 

government economic strategy for Saskatchewan and how it was no longer going to be based on the rude 

resource policy; that, in fact, it was not going to be a development strategy based solely on big 

resource-based industry; that they were going to promote manufacturing of goods in the prairie basin; that 

our resource industries no longer needed the mass of public subsidy. In fact, we have seen a total failure 

strategy set out by the Premier in 1972 in the actions of the government opposite when its whole budget 

depends on this crude resource policy that he so criticized in the past; that he has failed and failed miserably 

to implement that 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1818 
 

part of his economic strategy, which was a manufacturing base to serve the so-called prairie basin. 

 

The very fact that you have directed your efforts in your taxation policies to resources, and have become so 

dependent on the resources that 70 per cent or 80 per cent of the resource revenues have to go into general 

revenues, indicates I think, as well, a failure of the economic strategy set out in 1972. I suggest that this 

department regrettably will not direct itself to an approach which would assure or lead us to the direction in 

Saskatchewan of an (and I very carefully say) economically independent or self-sufficient Saskatchewan 

based on a broad base of manufacturing resources and agriculture. 

 

I say that as long as we are going to have a boom and bust approach, as the government opposite has married 

us to with its total dependence on risky resource ventures, then we do not have, I suggest, the moral right to 

be taking a position at the constitutional levels demanding great wealth and political power moving west. I 

suggest that in fact if we took a different approach in Saskatchewan which is, our efforts over the immediate 

term are going to be to establish an economic independence and self-sufficiency as much as possible, that we 

could then approach the constitutional argument saying look, we want to make this thing work. We’re not 

crying just for more power to get more tax revenue (which is what we’ve been doing). In fact, we’ve got a 

contribution. We made sure that our province could stand on its own two feet, look after itself, now we want 

to show some leadership to the rest of the country so that other regions can be in the same position. I say that 

we have failed to do that. I say that we’ve failed miserably and I say that this department, regrettably, will 

not — from the remarks of the Premier — direct itself to what I perceive to be a very vital direction in future 

development of the province. 

 

The Premier has indicated as well that we need a new constitution. Let me tell you what a new constitution 

will do. A new constitution will, perhaps, redirect the political powers east and west. I know that’s the 

intention. But let’s assume 15 years down the road that as we suspect, and I think it’s been made clear, that 

the uranium markets are not there and our uranium revenues are not as great as the government opposite has 

led us to believe. Let’s assume that 15 years down the road that great investment in potash is risky, and in 

fact we are back taking moneys from the federal purse. In fact at that point the cries will come out of 

Western Canada, the cries will come out of Saskatchewan, we’re not being treated fairly. The federal 

government isn’t doing us any favours, and we’ll be right back to where we are today. I say that until this 

country, and until the political leaders of this country decide, and in each region an din each province to 

attempt to get themselves, their economic houses in order, I don’t think that it’s going to serve any purpose 

other than, perhaps, ease some short term public concerns. As I say, I was torn because at the outset — I 

shouldn’t say at the outset — I have been urging an intergovernmental affairs department. I don’t for a 

moment suggest that that is the reason that the government set one up, but I don’t think you did yourself a 

service by making such a partisan political appointment as to the deputy. Although we will be supporting the 

establishment of this department, it is on the understanding that we reserve the right to criticize the political 

activities of this department, should they arise, and the partisan political activities which we suspect will 

arise as a result of the efforts of the activities you’ve embarked on to date was such a partisan, political 

appointment as deputy. I don’t’ think you did yourself and the province of Saskatchewan any great service 

with that approach. I think there was an opportunity there to get someone with a little more independence 

and perhaps, more qualifications other than loyalty of service to the party opposite. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1819 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have some more comments to make and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting 

the Possession and Distribution of Property Between Spouses. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this legislation is the result of the commitment of this government to reform the 

laws relating to matrimonial property. 

 

When we introduced the amendments to The Married Persons’ Property Act in 1974, the government 

explained at that time that they were an interim measure until we had the opportunity to thoroughly study 

this whole area of the law, and to come forward with some comprehensive proposals. Since that time, the 

Law Reform Commission has released three reports on matrimonial property. People all over Saskatchewan 

have been given the opportunity to react to these proposals and to put forward their suggestions for reform. 

The comments and suggestions have been seriously considered and in many instances, incorporated into the 

bill that we have before us today. I do not know of another area of the law in the last little while where there 

has been as much input by the public at large. 

 

We have come a long way, Mr. Speaker, from the day when married women were not permitted to own 

property. However, we all know the unsatisfactory state of the common law, which developed after the 

enactment of the married women’s property legislation in the late 18th century. The Rathwell and Murdock 

cases demonstrated how unfair it was that property must belong to the spouse in whose name it was 

registered, unless a financial contribution could be clearly established. It became apparent that the law no 

longer corresponded to the way people actually lived their lives. 

 

In 1974, the government brought forward an amendment to The Married Person’s Property Act. Under that 

amendment, the new section 22, a judge was given the authority to divide the property of spouses in any way 

he though appropriate. The legislation specifically directed the judge to consider contributions from either 

spouse, whether in the form of money, services, prudent management or caring for the home and the family 

— this to get around the effects of Rathwell and Murdock. 

 

Most people today consider marriage to be an equal partnership in which each spouse assumes whatever 

duties and responsibilities mutually are agreed upon. It is only logical, therefore, in a great majority of 

marriages, that whatever is acquired by either spouse during the marriage period ought to be shared equally, 

especially if the marriage breaks down. That is the purpose of this legislation and I would direct all members 

to the legislation and the intent of it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the specific aspects of the bill. 

 

First of all, the basic scheme. Under this bill the court must distribute all property of the spouses, except 

prior acquired property and awards of damages or insurance proceeds, equally between the spouses, unless it 

would be unfair to do so. When the court considers it unfair to make an order for equal distribution, it can 

make whatever order it thinks fair. A lengthy list of matters the court should consider in deciding whether or 

not it is fair to distribute the property equally is set out in section 22 of the 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1820 
 

bill. 

 

In addition to the distribution of property the court has jurisdiction to grant the spouse exclusive possession 

of the matrimonial home and household goods. That property is subject to the scheme. All property owned 

by one or both spouses or in which one or both spouses have an interest will be subject to the scheme. This 

includes appreciation and income on prior acquired property. Basically all prior acquired property, awards of 

damages and property acquired after decree nisi of divorce, a declaration of nullity or a judgment of judicial 

separation, is made exempt from distribution unless the court thinks it unfair to exempt such property and in 

that case it can make an order that it thinks just and fair. The value of property situated outside of 

Saskatchewan must be considered by the court in making a division of property. The property itself does not 

have to be distributed. The court can divide the value of the property instead. 

 

Will there be judicial discretion? Mr. Speaker, the scheme is subject to a certain measure of judicial 

discretion. However, it operates from the assumption that all matrimonial property except for most prior 

acquired property and the awards of damages, shall be shared equally. Judicial discretion can vary the share 

up or down from the 50 per cent. Presently the courts start from the assumption that any property owned by 

the husband belongs to him and then they determine how much the wife shall be entitled to. On the average 

this has worked out to splits which have not been equivalent to 50/50. 

 

Value of property. The value of the property that will be taken into consideration by the court is the value at 

the time the application is made to the court or at the time of the adjudication, whatever the court thinks fair. 

 

What is the matrimonial home? For the purposes of an order granting exclusive possession the matrimonial 

home is defined as follows: 

 

1. Any home or suite that is owned or leased by one or both the spouses or in which one or both the spouses 

have an interest and that is or has been or was intended to be occupied by one or both the spouses as their 

family home. 

 

2. Up to 160 acres appertainent to the home. 

3. Mobile homes, a part of business premises and condominiums. 

For the purposes of distribution of the matrimonial home, the matrimonial home is the same as the above 

except homes or suites merely leased would not be included unless a proprietary interest could be 

established. When more than one home comes into the definition of a matrimonial home, the spouse 

applying for distribution must designate one of the homes as a matrimonial home. 

 

The matrimonial home is a subject of special treatment. Subject to a valid and binding interspousal contract, 

a matrimonial home is entitled to what I may describe as special treatment. It is never exempt from 

distribution even though it may be prior acquired property. It is always shared equally under this bill unless 

the court considers that to do so would be grossly unfair or unduly harsh to the parent having custody of the 

children. In such cases the court can make whatever distribution it considers fair, including granting the 

entire matrimonial home to one spouse. 

 

Household goods, special treatment. Subject to a valid and binding interspousal contract, household goods 

are never exempt even if they are prior acquired property. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1821 
 

from distribution under the bill. However, they do not carry the same strong presumption of equal sharing 

that the matrimonial home (as I described just a minute ago) does, rather they carry the presumption of equal 

sharing all other property carries. 

 

What to do abut debts and liabilities. In making a distribution the court must take into consideration any 

debts existing or that existed during the course of the marriage and any liabilities of one or both spouses. In 

making an order granting exclusive possession the court must take into consideration any liabilities that may 

rise out of the occupation of the matrimonial home or the use of the household goods and the court must fix 

the responsibility for such liabilities. 

 

Role of children. Children are only mentioned in this bill insofar as the needs of any children residing in the 

matrimonial home are to be considered or an application for possession of the home. Maintenance payments 

being made to a child and any contributions made by a child on behalf of the spouse to property are factors 

which must be taken into consideration in making a distribution of the property under the bill. 

 

What of conduct on the part of one of the partners or matrimonial fault? Immoral and improper conduct is 

not to be taken into consideration by the court under this bill unless it results in the financial standing of one 

or both spouses being detrimentally affected. 

 

Length of marriage? The duration of the marriage or separation is one of the factors to be taken into 

consideration in making a distribution of the property. 

 

Common-law relationships, do they apply? The act does not apply to such relationships. 

 

Retroactivity. The act applies to all married persons in Saskatchewan and to all property regardless of 

whether it was acquired before the act comes into force. It also applies to any proceeding that has already 

been commenced but not concluded before the act comes into force. There is provision for the courts to vary 

a prior court order under exceptional circumstances if the spouses are still married. 

 

Contracting out? Yes, the spouses may contract out of the scheme by an agreement in writing acknowledged 

by each of them before separate lawyers. They may do so prior to or during their marriage. This contract may 

deal with ownership, division and possession of property during marriage and upon termination. If the 

spouses enter into a valid and binding interspousal contract, all property dealt with in that contract is exempt 

from the provisions of this act. Any other written agreement may be taken into consideration in the courts 

but does not carry with it the presumption that the property covered by it is exempt. 

 

Agreements, such as separation agreements entered into with respect to matrimonial property, before the 

coming into force of the act shall and any proceeding under the new legislation be given the same 

consideration by the courts that they would have been given in a similar action before the bill was passed. 

 

On death, does the bill apply to the estate? A surviving spouse has six months after grants of letters probate 

or administration to make an application under the proposed bill. If an action was commenced but not 

concluded before the death of the deceased spouse, the spouse or the estate of the spouse may continue the 

application. Benefits 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1822 
 

received as a result of the death must be taken into consideration by the court in making the division, except 

for benefits received under The Intestate Succession Act. The surviving spouse is not precluded from also 

applying under The Dependent’s Relief Act. If an action has not already been commenced before the death 

of the deceased spouse, the estate may not make a claim under the bill. 

 

Restraint of dispositions. During the marriage, spouses may continue to deal with their property as if the act 

had not been passed; however, a large gift or transfer to a third party may be a factor to be considered on 

distribution. Where a spouse has made a gift or transfer with the obvious intent of defeating this bill, or the 

claim of the other spouse, clearly the latter may then apply to the court for relief. 

 

Where a spouse suspects that the other intends to make a large gift or transfer which might defeat a claim 

under the bill, the court may restrain the gift or transfer, even while spouses are living together. 

 

If an order for exclusive possession of the matrimonial home is made, the other spouse may only dispose of 

or encumber his interest in the home with the consent of the spouse in possession, or under court order. 

 

Once proceedings have been commenced under the act, no one may dispose of or encumber any household 

goods or even remove them from the matrimonial home without a court order or the consent of both spouses. 

 

Where there is a valid and binding inter-spousal contract, the spouses shall be bound by that contract when 

dealing with their assets. 

 

What’s the procedure for application? The application in this proposed bill must be made in accordance with 

the rules of court, and the right to make an application expires on a decree absolute being granted. 

 

An application may be made, notwithstanding the fact that spouses are not separated and there is no marriage 

breakdown. (This is the case now under section 22 of our Married Persons’ Property Act.) 

 

If an application is made, each spouse must file and serve on the other, a sworn statement disclosing all of 

his or her property. There is provision for the court to hold in-camera proceedings where necessary. If it’s 

desirable to protect against the consequences of a possible disclosure of financial or highly personal matters. 

 

That is the procedure before this bill is passed and proclaimed but, Mr. Speaker, this act, we hope, will come 

into force on a day to be proclaimed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 

 

My department is preparing to take a number of steps to insure that the general public and members of the 

accounting and legal professions are thoroughly acquainted with the terms of the act before actual 

proclamation. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan, in my judgment, by passing this bill, have an opportunity to 

review matrimonial property and to update it in a positive way. In preparing this bill my department has had, 

as I said at the beginning, the chance to consult with a number of people in the community and also the 

opportunity to review other matrimonial legislation existing in other provinces. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1823 
 

I believe that we will have one of the best matrimonial property acts in all of Canada once we enact this bill. 

I’m therefore proud to be able to stand before the members of this House and put forward this legislation 

which I think will ensure equity and fairness in the distribution of matrimonial property, consistent with the 

attitudes and the mores of today’s world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — We’re waiting for the controversial legislation from the Attorney 

General. We would like to indicate to the Attorney General that we will be supporting this bill. The 

Conservative Party endorses in Saskatchewan the concept of judicial discretion in a situation such as this. 

We have discussed it, of course, with members of the judiciary and the feeling is that they don’t see a change 

in the existing law. I think that’s perhaps correct, the way it has in fact developed in Saskatchewan. When I 

say that, I say that that is not necessarily a bad thing. I think our courts in Saskatchewan have in fact 

administered or decided the law today in a fairly responsible and concerned manner. But I just don’t see — 

and I gather some of the judiciary is of the same view — much of a change with this act. 

 

There will be, I suspect, some problems if the Attorney General would hear me out. I suspect some problems 

if you proceed with your court amalgamation this year, as a new group of judges will basically have to get 

into the swing of things so that some body of precedent is built up. I suggest to the Attorney General that 

given that, and given the importance of this particular bill, he may wish to leave the amalgamation for six or 

eight months. Let’s get things established and rolling under this in case problems do develop. Again I don’t 

think that that’s going to be an earth-shaking matter, but I think given the seriousness of the problem, as the 

Attorney General accepts, then perhaps that might be a suggestion. 

 

There will be a couple of minor suggestions. Our position basically (favoring the principle of judicial 

discretion as we do) is let’s get the bill operating and the sooner the courts can commence to make the 

ruling, so much the better. I question the necessity any more of The Homesteads Act, given this particular 

bill. Perhaps the Attorney General would have his officials direct their minds to that. It has, frankly, become 

I think more of an irritant as more people and more women are aware of their rights. Secondly, if you accept 

the principle of The Homesteads Act as being maintained, then I suggest it follows logically that on the death 

of the spouse some notice should be sent when letters probate are issued to a surviving spouse; you have in 

fact six months to exercise your rights under this particular act. If we’re going to have it on the one, then it 

seems that flagging that advice may also be in order. However, I suggest that to the Attorney General. Again, 

our position favoring judicial discretion, we support the bill and are prepared to vote second reading today. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend 

The Mechanics’ Lien Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 1977 the Saskatchewan Construction Association submitted a brief 

requesting the repeal of The Public Works Creditors’ 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1824 
 

Payment Act and amendments to The Mechanics’ Lien Act to make it generally applicable to the Crown. 

 

After reviewing the matter raised in the submission it was decided by the government that subject to the 

exception recognized by the association that no lien could be allowed against public lands, there is no reason 

for distinguishing between the statutory protection that should be afforded the subcontractors, material men 

and laborers under contracts, whether they be in the private or the public sector. 

 

Accordingly, this legislation, together with the companion bill to follow, which repeals The Public Works 

Creditors’ Payment Act will make the provisions of The Mechanics’ Lien Act applicable to the provincial 

Crown, school boards and other similar public bodies. The act will then generally apply to construction 

contracts entered into with such public bodies after the amendments come into force, subject to the main 

basis exemption, as I say, that no liens will be allowed as charges against Crown lands. 

 

These amendments will expand the protection provided to subcontractors, material men and laborers 

involved in public works projects. They do not only continue the applicability of trust provisions similar to 

those presently contained in The Public Works Creditors’ Payment Act, but also will make applicable to 

public works contracts the statutory holdback requirements of The Mechanics’ Lien Act and the right of 

claimants to recourse against such holdbacks and certain other amounts which may be owing to the 

contractor. These amendments also provide an easy means of giving notice of claim of lien in respect of 

public works against the present provisions of the act requiring registration of the liens against the land 

occupied by the improvement would not be applicable. 

 

In addition to providing additional protection to subcontractors, material men and laborers on public works 

projects, the amendments should standardize and simplify the procedure for such persons to make claims in 

respect of public works projects by making it more consistent with the practice applicable to the private 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 71 — An Act to repeal 

The Public Works Creditors’ Payment Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as I said, this is a companion bill for the reasons that I have articulated the first 

one. 

 

I move second reading of Bill No. 71 — An Act to repeal The Public Works Creditors’ Payment Act as a 

part of government deregulation and government’s getting out of legislation. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 72 — An Act respecting 

The Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1978. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I need to make any speech on this particular bill. This deals with 

the ratification and consolidation of the revision which has just recently. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1825 
 

been completed. I think it is a pretty good revision — slight changes in the indexing which are confusing at 

first, in some areas, but I think are an improvement on the old system. I think the bill is routine but 

necessary. 

 

I move second reading of Bill No. 72. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend 

The Community Legal Services (Saskatchewan) Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise, today, to move second reading of a bill to amend The 

Community Legal Services (Saskatchewan) Act. 

 

When In introduced The Community Legal Services (Saskatchewan) Act in 1974, I indicated that the 

objectives of the bill were threefold. 

 

1. To ensure that all members of Saskatchewan society had equal ability to enforce their rights; 

2. To develop methods of informing citizens as to their legal rights and obligations; and 

3. To develop programs designed to prevent legal problems. 

These were solid objectives in 1974 and, Mr. Speaker, these are still objectives, which are just as valid 

today, in 1979. 

 

You may recall, sir, that the legal aid plan in Saskatchewan experienced a number of problems in the past 

year and that I appointed Judge R.H. McClelland of the district court to undertake a comprehensive review 

of the legal aid plan and to make recommendations to me regarding the future direction of it. 

 

In his report to me which was made public, Judge McClelland noted the extent to which the concept of local 

area involvement in the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Plan had taken effect. The major thrust of his report 

supports this concept of local area involvement. He suggest a system managed and directed by a strong 

central commission, a system which allows area boards, at the same to participate in the policy and 

decision-making process and in the budgetary process and a system which provides for strong lines of 

communication with the government. 

 

The major portion of the recommendations made by His Honour Judge McClelland, attempt to address the 

issue of greater participation by area boards in the developmental aspects of the plan. His Honour’s 

recommendations included both amendments to the act and recommendations respecting the administrative 

policies and practices of the commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Judge McClelland made the following recommendations, which could be accommodated only 

through amendments which are embodied in this bill. 

 

1. That the act be amended to remove the commission’s power to revoke the certification of an area board 

without a hearing and instead the commission chairman or designate be given the power to suspend an area 

board’s right to operate a clinic 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1826 
 

until such time as the area board has had a full opportunity to be heard before the commission. 

 

This recommendation has been accommodated by the amendment to section 14 of the bill. 

 

2. That a section be introduced into the act to acknowledge that area boards hold in trust for the commission, 

all assets, office supplies and leasehold premises acquired through funds provided by the commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, subsection 3 of section 15, amends the bill to accommodate this recommendation. 

3. That the composition of the central commission be altered by removing the provincial director from the 

commission, appointing a fourth area board chairman and appointing a representative of the Attorney 

General’s department. 

 

When I introduced this legislation in 1974, I stated then that with the exception of financial accountability, it 

was important that the provincial legal aid program be independent of any group or organization, including 

the government. While I agree with Judge McClelland’s recommendation concerning the greater 

involvement of local area boards in shaping the nature and future of the plan, in considering the membership 

or the composition of the commission, I have had to weigh our sympathy with this objective against the 

principle of the plan’s independence from any one group or organization. At the same time, I agree with 

Judge McClelland’s recommendation that one of the members of the commission should be a member of the 

Department of the Attorney General. 

 

This bill amends section 4, subsection 2 therefore, in two weeks. 

 

(a) It removes the provincial director and replaces him with an employee of the department on the 

commission; and 

 

(b) By broadening the scope of selection of area board representatives to include not only chairmen, but the 

directors of area boards as well. 

 

This latter recommendation came about as a direct result of discussions which were held with the 

Association of Area Boards and with the union, CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees). 

 

4. That the act be amended to remove the requirement that the provincial director be a solicitor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bill before you amends section 7 to accommodate this recommendation. 

 

5. That in order to exercise financial control and to establish an increasingly competent body of clinical legal 

aid solicitors, the act be amended by repealing clause B of section 21, so as to reduce the number of referrals 

to the private bar. 

 

There is no question in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that this recommendation is a very important one. In my 

discussions with the Law Society of Saskatchewan concerning amendments to the bill, concerns have been 

expressed by them about restricting a 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1827 
 

client’s freedom of choice of counsel, and the government’s position respecting the involvement of the 

private bar in Saskatchewan’s legal aid plan. 

 

I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the acceptance of this recommendation, 21 B, and the 

consequent amendment to section 21, is not as restrictive as the current federal-provincial agreement 

regarding the cost sharing of legal aid with respect to criminal matters. Under that agreement, freedom of 

choice of counsel is restricted to those offences under the Criminal Code or other acts of parliament, the 

minimum penalty for which is life imprisonment. 

 

If we were to apply that to the Saskatchewan plan, only those clients charged with first and second degree 

murder would be eligible to choose from the provincial panel of private lawyers. 

 

6. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say that there is a sixth provision of Judge McClelland’s report which 

has been implemented. That sixth recommendation is that as an incentive to the collection of accounts 

payable, the commission employ area clinics for this task. We are doing this by sections 24 and 25 to achieve 

this objective. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, these amendments incorporate the legislative amendments recommended to me 

by Judge McClelland. In addition, we have taken the opportunity to build on the recommendations and to 

introduce other amendments which instil a great sense of management responsibility and financial 

accountability at both the commission and area board levels and further enhance area board participation in 

the particular plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill would come into force on a date to be fixed by proclamation by the 

Lieutenant-Governor in Council. I conclude, sir, by saying the Government of Saskatchewan considers the 

legal aid plan as a very important plan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, putting it as seriously as I can, I think it is the 

best legal aid plan in Canada with the proposed amendments that are before us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — These amendments and this bill before you continues that confidence by this 

government in the partnership of legal aid which exists now for all of our citizens. By passing this bill, we 

hope to create a legislative environment in which this partnership can work co-operatively and productively 

for quality legal aid services for all Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 78. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of participating in this debate until I 

heard one of the strangest lines and that is that we have one of the best, if not the best legal aid system. In 

fact, if the legal aid system was in good shape, we wouldn’t need this bill; we wouldn’t have needed the 

study that was done because of the problems in the legal aid plan. In fact, we may have one of the worst-run 

legal aid plans in Canada. It’s a bureaucratic boondoggle out there. 

 

You have area boards on top of chairman or commissions and they can’t make up their 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1828 
 

minds with each other. You have a whole bunch of young lawyers running around because they can go into 

the legal aid plan and make more money and get their training at the government’s expense before they go 

into private practice. The fact is that it is a poorly-run plan. You have too many levels of administration. I 

don’t think the goals have been well set out an I don’t think the goals are being attained. In fact, I don’t think 

that the changes that you’ve made are going to solve the problem. I’ll venture to guess that after the next 

provincial election, there will be another review of the legal aid plan as the problems continue. We are going 

to oppose the bill on division because we don’t think it’s going to solve the problem. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and bill read a second time. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — MINERAL RESOURCES — VOTE 23 

 

ITEM 1 continued 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, as we closed down shop the last time in 

mineral resources, the minister indicated under questioning that last year (that’s the fiscal year that closed 

March 31, 1978) his department had budgeted for about $108 million. When the actual revenues were in, the 

figure turned out to be about very close to $114 million, if memory serves me correctly. Now for this year, 

into the heritage fund, it’s his department (I assume you department would provide these figures for the 

Department of Revenue), we’re talking about $113 million. As the minister indicated acknowledged, this is 

less than what was actually received the year previously. 

 

Mr. Minister, before I go on perhaps I could ask you a similar question about oil. Now last year you 

budgeted that you would receive about $349 million, a little over $349 million. This year you are budgeting 

or at least the Department of Revenue people are budgeting — I’ll qualify that. It’s anticipated that a little 

over $385 million will come in. Would the minister indicate to us what the actual figure was for the ‘78-79 

period, and perhaps explain why the figure you are coming up with this year is only about 10 per cent 

(roughly 10 per cent) over and above what was anticipated to be derived the previous year? 

 

Mr. Minister, at various times in the course of the year we notice great flowery press releases from your 

department informing us of the additional activity that’s taking place in the field of oil development — oil 

rigs coming in, drilling everywhere, find, etc. — and if one listened to these press releases and took them 

seriously we might actually think that something of a consequential nature was happening. 

 

Mr. Minister, from your numbers it doesn’t appear that a great deal is happening. The figure from one year to 

the next is going up 10 per cent. Now, may I suggest to you that that doesn’t even cover the rate of inflation. 

It certainly doesn’t even cover the price increases in oil itself. Well, perhaps, I’ll leave it to you, Mr. 

Minister. Just tell us what’s going on in relation to these figures (bearing in mind we’d like to be out of here 

by five, of course). 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, the member asked, I think a couple of 

questions. One was the actual 1978-79 revenues. The estimate was $349 million and the actual was $349.9 

million, so in that instance it was almost virtually right on target. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1829 
 

He goes on to ask a second question as to why we might only expect something modestly over a 10 per cent 

increase in revenues for this fiscal year, and he goes on to assume that figure should be substantially higher 

because of the purported activity that the government says is in process in the province as far as oil is 

concerned. He’s right that there is very much more activity in the province as far as oil is concerned. He’s 

right that there is very much more activity in the province, but I think that he assumes that the activity will 

bring immediate revenues, and I’m sure that, if he stops ad thinks for a moment, he’ll realize that the activity 

is primarily in the heavy oil area where they are experimenting (I think that is a correct and proper word to 

use) in extracting greater volumes of oil than up to this point in time they have been able to acquire, and also 

exploring for new pools of heavy oil. I think that those returns will not significantly affect the provincial 

government’s revenues until a year or two has passed. That is certainly one reason. 

 

The second reason is that the price increases the member talks about have not really come into place. We 

will recollect that the federal government has denied some of those price increases to take place, so that 

some of the assumptions that we may have had some months ago with regard to the orderly increase of oil 

pricing in Canada, it’s reaching something closer to the world price of oil, is not in fact coming into place as 

one could have assumed in 1978. That also has an effect on it. 

 

I might also say that as far as new oil is concerned, we announced, not recently but quite some time ago, that 

our policy would be a lower royalty as an incentive to develop that new oil, keeping mindful that new oil is 

much more costly to develop and that the royalty therefore should not be as high as for old oil. 

 

So even though there’s new production coming on, the province is recognizing that the cost of bringing that 

production in place is much more significant than it was in the past for the old oil that’s producing. 

 

I think that those three factors combined contribute to answering the member’s question. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, might I say very respectfully, and in a very noninflammatory fashion, 

that your government’s policy in the field of resources is a dismal failure. It is a dismal failure and it is 

reflected right here in these numbers. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think your department typifies the most insidious fashion of government that you conceive in 

the George Orwell fashion. We go back to the old days of Bill 42 and the potash expropriation. Exactly what 

have you done in the field of natural resources? How does your government operate? Number one, you 

decide there’s got to be a problem, and you find, or you create, a problem. In this fashion, it was in the field 

of natural resources. You started a fight; you started one with the oil companies; you started one with the 

potash companies. In the case of potash, you said if you don’t do it our way, we’re going to nationalize you. 

We took you to court; you said if you’re going to take us to court, we’re going to do this. So you threatened 

to nationalize the potash industry. You made some overtures of a similar nature in the oil industry, and then 

you passed legislation which enabled you to do it, you further threatened them. 

 

Under expropriation legislation, you gave your department extraordinary powers. And that’s another 

question I’d like to ask you before we’re done. How many vesting orders did you issue last year? Perhaps 

your people could start digging that out. Mr. Minister, you threatened them. You threatened to nationalize 

them, and then under the threat of 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1830 
 

nationalization, you bought half the industry. Many of these companies were quite happy to get their dollar 

and get out of here and invest it elsewhere. In fact, I’ve heard it cynically suggested by some of the 

remaining members of the industry that the unfortunate ones are those of us that weren’t offered a chance to 

sell out and get out of here. 

 

Then, Mr. Minister, you had 50 per cent of the potash industry; you had your own puppet corporation in 

operation. Once the dollars started coming in, (and, Mr. Minister, you’re very fond of using the term the 

bottom line), and when the bottom line was out, when the bottom line was there, and there was a comparison 

factor between the entrance of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) into the market and when they 

were not there, the numbers didn’t jive. Your comments in the oil industry today reflect a similar happening. 

 

After you had threatened, cajoled, threatened to nationalize, bought in, fouled up the market, fouled up the 

climate, you suddenly found that you had a problem. You found that it wasn’t working out quite the way you 

thought it would in the potash industry and that even though it’s taken a while for you to acknowledge it, it 

wasn’t working out in the oil industry either. So then, Mr. Minister, you did what you have accused us of 

wanting to do for years, and the extinct Liberal Party in a like fashion. You did what you have always 

accused them of doing. You went to the multinationals and you made an under-the-table deal. You said to 

them, we’ve fouled it up. You didn’t say, we’ve fouled it up, but you said, we want you to clean it up. It was 

a mess that had to be cleaned up, and so you did what you have accused us of doing, what you have accused 

what used to be the Liberal Party here of doing. You called them in and you made an under-the-table deal. 

That’s reflected in these numbers. It was reflected last week when you indicated . . .(inaudible interjection) 

. . . yes, it was indeed true — you would anticipate less revenue from the potash industry this year because of 

reduced royalties. You acknowledged that there was a problem in the area and you acknowledged it was 

necessary to reduce the royalty rates. Mr. Minister, you acknowledged that you made a deal with the hated 

multinationals. Those multinationals you have extolled so many times that have us in their hip pockets, 

whom the Attorney General on countless occasions has referred to as the dominant forces that control the 

Conservatives and the Liberals and pull the strings so that we would make all these under-the-table deals. 

You did every insidious thing you have accused us of doing; you did it also. 

 

You did the same thing with the oil industry. You have acknowledged today that you have had to reduce the 

rate for the oil industry. You have acknowledged you are not getting the increased production that you need. 

Obviously, you can’t get it from SaskOil. Obviously, you don’t think SaskOil can do the job and you’re 

right. You’re right because if you thought they could they would be in here and you’d have tem doing it. And 

from that, Mr. Minister, I acknowledge you are smarter than many of your other colleagues, because I think 

you, from the start, knew that PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) was going to be a turkey. At least 

you are shrewd enough to keep SaskOil where it belongs, closeted in some nondescript office in Calgary. I 

acknowledge you are shrewd enough not to allow SaskOil to come in here . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . no, 

I’m not going to start the jack for the Premier’s bandwagon — but at least you’re smart enough to keep 

SaskOil far in the background, keep them closeted where they belong. 

 

Mr. Minister, the point of this whole thing is that you have done every insidious thing you have accused us 

of doing. You have made under the table separate deals with the multinationals. I want to hear you get up 

and deny that for your backbenchers who are 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1831 
 

shaking their heads. I want you to deny that for the member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) who has been 

catcalling me, that you would never do that. I want you to get up and deny it. 

 

With that, Mr. Minister, I’ll pause for a cup of coffee. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the member should pause for a moment. I find him almost, 

in this particular instance, in a somewhat new character form to be as confusing as some of his other 

members when he talks about resource development. Obviously he has some difference in regard to the 

strategy of resource development for the province of Saskatchewan. The only, I think, really significant fact 

one should note in rebutting his remarks is that ours is working and his no one can really understand. I think 

as long as ours continues to work nobody is going to take very much time to try and understand it. And that 

not only goes for people here in Saskatchewan but it goes for the industry itself. 

 

I find him confusing, Mr. Chairman, because he on the one hand says in the instance of potash, my goodness 

the companies you didn’t buy are hurt. They say the only way of resolving their problems in Saskatchewan 

was to have been purchased by the government Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan because there is not 

future here. On the other hand he is saying now those companies have been asked to bail out the Government 

of Saskatchewan. I assume if that is correct that they are going to be getting some significant rewards in so 

doing. You can’t have it both ways. If the companies in one instance are saying, my goodness it’s so bad 

here in the future the only way we can resolve our problems is to have an opportunity to sell out to PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan), the Government of Saskatchewan or a Crown corporation of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

You can’t on the other hand say the government went to the private industry and asked them to bail out the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. The fact of matter, Mr. Chairman, is that neither one is correct. The 

companies which are here operating independently are now, I think, prepared to say that the climate in 

Saskatchewan is one which is attractive to them. In fact, they are talking about expansion of the industry in 

this province because of the circumstances they have here. 

 

We have not asked them to clean up any problems which may exist in the potash industry. In fact PCS in the 

short period of time that it has been in operation has attained a very high level of respect from the 

wholesalers and retailers and consumers of potash, not only in the United States of America but also 

offshore. In fact publications — Greenbrier and some of the other sales publications of the potash industry in 

the United States of America — are saying that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is the most reliable 

company providing potash of all of those in Canada. We have been able to improve the delivery of potash 

and the turnaround of cars. The sales operation of PCS has shown that it can be superior to any other which 

has been in the marketplace for a much greater period of time than PCS. So that we are not in trouble with 

PCS. I don’t believe that the potash industry in Saskatchewan is in trouble. 

 

The member, when he alludes to the increase in revenue to the province last year and that it is not 

significantly higher this year, forgets to include a $27 million figure which was collected last year over and 

above what was estimated because of penalties and moneys payable to the Government of Saskatchewan and 

which became payable because of the purchase ($27 million) of some companies that had been negligent in 

making those payments. That has increased the revenue for the last fiscal year which 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1832 
 

would have been paid in lesser amounts over a number of years previous. When we look at the estimate this 

year we’re looking at a situation where all companies will be making their payments to the Government of 

Saskatchewan in an orderly fashion on a year-to-year basis. 

 

The member also makes some comments about SaskOil — that it’s hidden away in a closet somewhere (and 

he’s happy that that is the case) and that it is not capable of improving the level of activity in the province of 

Saskatchewan. This is simply nonsense! It has a subsidiary in Alberta but it is very much present in 

Saskatchewan. It takes the entire 15th floor of the Chateau Towers. They are impressive to say the least. I 

don’t think anyone should criticize them because they are there doing a job. They are growing. They are, in 

fact, establishing a catalyst for heavy oil development. I think one of the best examples is the farm in 

arrangement with Petro-Canada and Gulf. I think it has not only created an interest with the rest of the 

private industry to pay more particular attention to heavy oil in Saskatchewan but has shown there is a real 

economic potential to develop that over some of the other more costly ventures they may have turned their 

minds to ion other jurisdictions, in particular, the province of Alberta. 

 

I just want to close with a couple of brief statistics because they are current — a week or two ago, April 5, to 

be exact. I released the results of the last petroleum and natural gas rights sale. I’m sure the member read it; 

it may have slipped his mind, otherwise I’m sure he would have mentioned it in his remarks today. Just for 

the record so that he and I are both happy, I want to remind him that the sale totalled $8.1 million. Even 

though it has been the smallest sale we have held for quite some time, it set records on a per acres basis. I 

think when he wants to talk about the bottom line, that’s a bottom line figure because here are private 

companies in Saskatchewan willing to pay record prices in order to acquire some interest in oil and gas in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One other statistic I think has some relevance. Because it is also current, I take the April 9 edition of Oil 

Week where (and I’m sure the member is fully aware) they have a little chart showing drilling at a glance in 

the various areas of interest in Canada and in Saskatchewan. We can take a look at the cumulative total of 

well completions up to the 31 of December, 1979. We see a figure of 221. If we compare that with the same 

period of 1978, we see a figure of 89, a very substantial increase in completed wells. I think if I went back to 

1977, the 89 was a very significant increase. The members may say we had a depressed period of time 

because of a whole variety of circumstances. I won’t argue that. They were not all instigated by the province 

of Saskatchewan; we went through that before. We had problems with the federal government, the barrier at 

the Canada-United States border, as far as heavy oil is concerned the non-deductibility of royalties paid — 

obviously those were hardships for the oil industry, as well as actions taken by the province of 

Saskatchewan. We make no apologies for that. We haven’t changed substantially. The companies are back 

here; they’re exploring; they’re anxious; they’re ambitious and they’re optimistic about what they may be 

able to do ion the province. They say that to me and I agree with them. 

 

I could give some other statistics in regard to meters drilled; perhaps I should, it only takes a moment. Again, 

showing in metric the meters of wells drilled to March 31, 1979, there’s 174,000, slightly higher. If I 

compare that with the same period last year, it’s 79,000, again twice as much achieved. I just want to register 

these and convey them to the hon. member because it indicates there is an activity here. There is an activity 

here. I want to make that clear, not because we have capitulated in regard to the resource development policy 

and the taxation and royalty structure of Saskatchewan, but because we have stuck by our guns and talked to 

the people. They have, I think, seen 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1833 
 

the merit of operating in Saskatchewan within that policy of development. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, may I make a couple of other comments? Perhaps it should give your 

departmental people something to do while we exchange comments. Could they break down that figure of 

$112,900,000 as to PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) and others? If possible, I would like it 

company by company. If you don’t care to give it out that way I am not going to argue. But I would like the 

private sector and the Crown corporation sector, while we are talking, if you don’t mind. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to say that we on this side of the House are very pleased that your extreme 

right-wing views within the New Democratic Party have prevailed in the area of resource development 

because, Mr. Minister, we are pleased that there is some degree of increased activity in Saskatchewan. But, 

Mr. Minister, at the same time, I notice you didn’t accept my challenge to tell your backbenchers that you 

have not been having secret, insidious meetings with multinationals, with hated multinationals, making 

under the table deals for future tax rates. 

 

Mr. Minister, I noted the look on the face of the member for Regina Wascana (Mr. White) as you were 

talking, pleadingly hopeful that you were going to deny it. I notice that you decided to deny that 

backbencher. I notice that you stayed away from that area significantly. I’m not particularly criticizing you 

with attempting to give incentives back to the private sector and I at least acknowledge that you have enough 

sense to know that to get the resource sector going again in Saskatchewan, when the windfalls have basically 

missed Saskatchewan and when they have virtually made other areas, it is necessary to go back to that 

age-old thing which usually gets the job done and that’s that little thing known as the profit incentive. Say 

what you want about it, there has never been anything better than the prospect of a reasonable profit to get a 

job done. I am pleased to note that the minister is acknowledging that. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you can talk about your publications which you have there and you can throw your 

numbers around. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s not my publication. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — All right, it really doesn’t matter what they are, but let’s talk about the bottom lines 

of your department. The bottom line says that the revenue from resource development for the current year 

will be just a little bit over 10 per cent from one year ago. Now, Mr. Minister, these figures are those of the 

Department of Revenue. I assume that the figures of the Department of Revenue probably come from your 

department. When you look at our resources as a whole — oil, natural gas, potash, uranium, sodium 

sulphate, coal, other — inflation alone is far over 10 per cent in this area. 

 

We are talking bottom lines. What are the people of Saskatchewan getting out of it? Mr. Minister, it just 

simply isn’t fair. You have moved further and further into the resource area and the numbers aren’t coming 

out. Again, Mr. Minister, I want you to deny to your members that you haven’t been talking to the big 

multinationals in the oil business, making separate tax deals with them to get them in here, to get them 

developing our oil. I want you to deny that! I want you to deny that you haven’t been talking to the 

privately-owned potash mines. I want you to deny that you haven’t been making deals with them for a 

reduced royalty in order to get increased production out of them. I want you to deny that you haven’t been 

making the same deal with them that you have been accusing us of attempting to do for years . . .(inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, he hasn’t done it. He skirted around the issue and talked about everything else except 

his dealings with 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1834 
 

multinationals. 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you to get to your feet and deny those deals, everything the Attorney 

General has accused us of since 1975. I want you to deny that you and your department, with your extreme 

right wing views in socialist clothing, have been making those under the table deals. 

 

If you have those numbers on potash I would appreciate them at any time. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Chairman, let me start with the numbers on the potash. I think for the same reason 

we will not give the breakdown by company, private company, it would not be appropriate for us to give the 

breakdown of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan). It if applies to one, it certainly applies to another. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, come on, Jack. 

 

MR. MESSER: — Oh, no. I would like to hear the member’s argument as to why it should not apply to 

private companies if it applies to PCS. I think the annual report of PCS will show a sum of money. I think 

the annual report of PCS will show a sum of money paid to the province of Saskatchewan in the way of 

royalties and taxes. I think one can just relate to the total amount that has been paid and deduct that amount 

and he will know what the privates pay in total. You will know what PCS pays in total and I think he has the 

answer there anyway. 

 

The member — and I want to first mention his comments on profit incentive on the bottom lines. He says 

where is the return to the Saskatchewan people? Well, Mr. Chairman, he knows, knows fully well that a few 

short years ago the resource take to the province of Saskatchewan was somewhere around $30 million. The 

1971 figures were $30 million, $35 million at a maximum. We are estimating something in excess of $500 

million this year. Now that surely cannot be sold to any one that stops and thinks for a moment as a dismal 

record of program from $300 million to something in excess of $1 billion or an increase of almost $500 

million. That is a story to be proud of. 

 

I don’t deny we leave room for incentive with the private industry here. I don’t think the member can ever 

bring evidence to this legislature that I have said we should be putting into place a policy that denies all 

profit incentive to the private sector that is operating in the province of Saskatchewan, nothing of the kind. I 

have never said that. I have never believed that. And, certainly, there has to be some incentive there. I guess 

the key is how much incentive is required? I think, unfortunately, past governments have provided more 

incentive than was really needed and consequently, the companies got a free ride and the people of 

Saskatchewan had a resource developed not in their best interest but in many instances at a cost to them. 

That need not be the case and we have proven that it need not be the case. 

 

I want to close my remarks to the member in answer to his allegations that I have had secret meetings with 

the oil companies and the potash companies, that I have met with these multinationals, as he keeps on 

talking about them. He almost spits the word out of his mouth. I think he’s got a hate war on with the 

multinationals and I can’t understand why, Mr. Chairman. Let me say that I make no apology whatsoever for 

meeting with multinational companies. I think it is only appropriate that as Minister of Mineral Resources, I 

should make myself available to those multinational companies as well as provincial and/or Canadian 

companies exclusively and I endeavour to do so. I do want to make it perfectly clear that the meetings are not 

secret and they certainly aren’t meetings where I will propose to them insidiously and secretly. They are not, 

Mr. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1835 
 

Chairman, and I want the record to show that. 

 

I also want the record to show, Mr. Chairman, that they are not the type of meetings that the member for 

Thunder Creek would want us to believe or would want the people of Saskatchewan to believe. That is that 

they are meeting one company at a time where we will wheel and deal (as he puts it) — a deal under the 

table in order to get some sort of satisfactory level of activity for the province of Saskatchewan. That is not 

the case at all. In fact, the instigation of meetings with oil companies and potash companies was done by 

sending invitation to all the companies involved for a meeting with myself so that we could talk about the 

policies and the future of resource development in the province of Saskatchewan. That may have brought 

about other private meetings and again, there is nothing wrong with that. But the discussions and the 

proposals that were put to them by myself and by the members of my department, the Department of Mineral 

Resources, were always consistent with the package that had been laid down to them as a group. So, yes, 

there have been meetings between myself and the industry as a whole. Yes, there have been meetings 

between myself and individual industries (multinationals included) and, yes, there have been meetings 

between them and the Department of Mineral Resources but always we have proposed and talked to them 

about the package that applied to each and every one of them. They are not separate and distinctly different 

arrangements or agreements that are being reached and I want to make that perfectly clear. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, your refusal to break down the $113 million in revenue that your 

department anticipates to receive from the potash industry is probably the most savage indictment that any of 

us could ever come up with against Crown involvement in a resource sector. Mr. Minister, your refusal to 

break down that figure says one thing clearly and concisely (far more clearly than I could ever say) and that 

is that PCS is no more putting forward its share of the revenue in terms of its productive capacity than fly to 

the moon. In fact, I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that PCS’s share of that $113 million is an embarrassment 

to you because if it wasn’t, you’d throw it out. 

 

Let me tell you that if they had even close to half of that figure, you would be proudly extolling it from the 

rooftops here. The fact is, Mr. Minister, you’re to put it forward. You’re afraid to put that figure forward 

because that figure would be an indictment of the entire potash debate. It would clearly and concisely 

demonstrate the failure of Crown involvement into the potash industry. 

 

I don’t know just how bad that figure is. I don’t know how bad it is. Mr. Minister, you skirted the number 

figure all afternoon, or at least all 20 minutes. 

 

Mr. Minister, you cannot deny the figures in the estimate book. They’re your numbers. You’re afraid to 

break them down. You’ve admitted that you’ve had to reduce the royalty rates for the private sector in the 

potash industry in order for them to carry PCS in that insidious government circle that we talked about 

earlier. Create the problems, threaten to nationalize them, threaten to expropriate them, buy them out, get 

into the business, and follow it up! And how do we get out of it? We go back and make a deal with them to 

get our revenues up and straighten out the business. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, in the potash industry alone — Now you can remember the potash filibuster; you can 

remember bills one and two from the 1976 legislature and the theoretical arguments that went on for days 

and days and days. 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1836 
 

Mr. Minister, every single one of those arguments that were against expropriation were borne out here this 

afternoon when you stood up and refused to break down the dollar split between private and PCS of $113 

million. 

 

I say to you that you are afraid! I say to you that that figure is an embarrassment, and I challenge you to do it 

again! I challenge you. Give us that number! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Chairman, the member’s like a wrestler who has just been defeated and wants to 

make sure there’s a crowd out for the next defeat, and I’m sure that’s probably going to be the case whenever 

we get around to another election in this province. 

 

He is somewhat misleading in his comments talking about the government expropriating the potash industry, 

and he knows fully well there was no expropriation of the potash industry. If one was to believe him, they’re 

all sorry that they didn’t all have an offer to purchase coming from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

They were negotiated purchases in each and every instance. There was no expropriation and I want that to be 

clear. 

 

The member continues to try to paint a case of failure for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan because 

we will not break down the take that the government receives from the private industry and the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. I’m telling him he can go to the annual reports from last year which show the 

amount of money paid and he can deduce from the mining operations in production that year their percentage 

of mining capacity, and he can dome to the figure that he wants. If he wants to do that, that’s the appropriate 

way of doing it because I don’t believe it is within my rights to say that I should give the figures of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a company that is operating competitively in the potash business, but it 

is creditable and legitimate not to give the figures of the private companies who are also making payments to 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. LANE: — . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. MESSER: — We give an annual report and the information is in there. It is not up to me to answer for 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan while I am here on mineral resource estimates. There is another 

more appropriate place to do that. 

 

I will tell the member that if he cares to wait until next year and takes a look at the operation of the potash 

Corporation for this year, that if the revenue take to the province of Saskatchewan isn’t within 10 per cent of 

its productive capacity in the province . . . If he would care to make a little wager, I would be prepared to do 

that, if it was in order, Mr. Speaker, I am sure. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Will you resign? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Will I resign my seat if we are not within 10 percent? The answer to that is, yes, Mr. 

Chairman. The percentage of production will directly relate to the percentage of moneys paid to the province 

of Saskatchewan. Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is not getting any favours and it is in fact doing a 

more creditable job in at least meeting its obligations, than some private companies have in the past. There is 

nothing to be ashamed of in the revenues that have been derived from PCS; in fact it is the opposite. Their 

production has expanded; their efficiencies on a per ton basis have 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1837 
 

improved; their sales have escalated and the price for product has also gone up — a lot of that because of the 

PCS activity in the marketplace and in the production area. 

 

We have nothing to be ashamed of, and if the hon. member wants to keep on tearing down the potash 

Corporation, I remind him that he will have to answer to that some time when he finds the rewards of the 

Corporation escalating and escalating very dramatically, to the people of Saskatchewan. It is his credibility 

that he puts on the line, not mine. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, allow me to get that (for the benefit of all concerned) very clear. 

 

What you have indicated is that when your actual figures are in for this year, you are saying that when the 

total dollars are in — the total revenue from the potash is in to the treasury, in to the heritage fund — if the 

share that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan pays is not within 10 per cent of the productive capacity 

they have in the province, you will resign your constituency. Am I correct on that? 

 

MR. MESSER: — I am saying that there has to be a percentage factors, a fluctuation. The member knows 

why I say that because PCS has newly acquired all of their mines and their depreciation rate will be 

somewhat higher than the established industry that is in place. They have taken advantage of that 

depreciation, and PCS will be taking advantage of $0.5 billion of depreciation that they don’t have. 

 

If the member wants to compensate for that, I am saying yes. You take a look at the percentage of production 

that PCS has and it will relate, compensating for the depreciation, in a percentage way almost the same, to 

the total amount that the province of Saskatchewan takes from the potash industry in total. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The minister just hedged his bet. 

 

MR. MESSER: — No, I didn’t. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yes, you just hedged your bet. You also just told us about a loss factor the people of 

Saskatchewan are taking. Because those mines were in place, those companies had already depreciated them 

down. Those dollars would be in the Department of Revenue had it not bee for you people having to rebuy 

them, having them to redepreciate. Those are your words, not mine! 

 

Mr. Minister, the bottom lines on these things, as you care to use them, indicate one thing for this year 

anyway, your actions in the field of resource development are a failure. The total revenues are up only a trifle 

over 10 per cent and you’ve asked the private sector to bail you out. You make a brave statement, I’ll resign 

my seat, I’ll resign my seat, if PCS doesn’t carry its share of the load. Then you qualify it, qualify it after our 

government boys, after your auditors finish with all of their figures. After we get around to shifting 

everything around, we’ll just see what they are. Take the depreciation that’s already been taken many times 

but taken years ago. You took over existing mines; these aren’t new mines being redepreciated. You covered 

yourself. Even at that, Mr. Minister, we’ll just check them out a year hence. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I would like to read a statement just to 

kind of back up the statement made by the member for Thunder Creek about SaskOil possibly not producing 

any new production in the oil fields or very little 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1838 
 

new production. It’s all based on increased production, but very little exploratory work from the oil industry. 

 

No Crown Corporation was every truly formed because of a need to provide service, but primarily 

because governments and people have been falsely led to believe that a particular industry is making 

too much profit and let’s get in on the gravy. They find out perhaps, it’s not that easy and continue 

demanding more money from the taxpayers to stay alive. The railways and the airlines were prime 

examples of this until the potash arose. Then, the Saskatchewan government jumped in and got in on 

the potash earnings by buying potash with the carcasses of the oil companies. 

 

This is followed by the 1973 Arab-generated oil price increase. Both the federal and the provincial 

governments formed Crown corporations — Petro-Can and SaskOil — by simply cannibalizing on 

good honest enterprises in the oil industry into huge conglomerates where the chief obsession 

appears to be trade for somebody else’s oil, or to look for oil in somebody else’s back yard as they do 

not have the know-how or expertise to do it at home where they should and must if they are going to 

hope to have self-sufficiency in oil. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the have not independently conducted any significant deep exploration nor have 

they found any oil that was not known previously. 

 

What would you say to that, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Just a very brief response, Mr. Chairman. One thing about the Saskatchewan 

Conservatives, they certainly try to be different from all other Conservatives in Canada. They talk about the 

Government of Saskatchewan and its Crown corporation involvement as though it is the only area, the only 

jurisdiction in Canada that has anything to do with Crown corporations as far as resource development is 

concerned. The last I heard (if the Leader of the Conservative Party federally, Mr. Clark, isn’t waffling), I 

think he is saying that he is going to keep Petro-Canada now. He started out by saying he was going to do 

away with it. But he is going to keep it. 

 

I remind them of colleagues in Alberta, where they are very much in the business as a Crown corporation of 

flying people around with an airlines. There is the tar sands development, which is good; there is the Alberta 

Energy Corporation, which has probably got the largest profile in the development of that resource industry 

and I just don’t believe that is a detriment to the people of Alberta or the people of Canada. If it applies in 

Alberta and it is correct there, I think it applies to Saskatchewan and it is correct here. I think the member 

can’t afford to have it both ways. At some point in time he is going to have to make his mind up as to 

whether or not there is a legitimate and credible place for Crown corporations and the development of 

resources. We say there is; we take action to put that into place, as have a lot of other jurisdictions in 

Canada, including Conservative governments. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I am talking about Saskatchewan. Really, it’s no concern of mine what is 

going on in Alberta or Ontario or whatever. 

 

I wonder if you would care to comment on this? In the November 16 Daily Oil Bulletin, Mr. Craig, the 

manager of SaskOil made the statement that there were not special 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1839 
 

privileges for SaskOil. I would wonder about a special reserve of several townships in the Minton area with 

Dome, where there was no Crown sale, and special permits in the Athabasca sandstone basin, no Crown sale 

— special grant only — SaskOil. What about the outright gift of $500,000 acres in west central 

Saskatchewan in the Lloydminster area to Gulf Canada, to Petro-Can and SaskOil? SaskOil was in on this. 

Would you not think those were special deals in SaskOil? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, I think that is not unusual. The member makes some references to the Minton area 

and the Dome, SaskOil, the Athabasca — exclusively SaskOil. It’s not uncommon for private companies to 

negotiate those kinds of arrangements. I can give him a list of other companies where similar arrangements 

have been negotiated. That is not new. The member knows that has always been the case in Saskatchewan, 

as it is in Alberta. Because of special circumstances the government believes it is in the best interest to 

negotiate such an arrangement rather than put it into a land sale. That has historically been the case. It 

continues to be the case. I do say, however, given that situation, SaskOil has no special consideration 

extended to it. 

 

I do take exception to the outright giveaway which he talks about, the 500,000 acres for heavy oil 

development. He knows that there is $100 million committed in that particular transaction and that there are 

two other companies, one another Crown corporation, Petro-Can, Crown Corporation of Canada and Gulf 

Oil. The only people, Mr. Chairman, that I have had criticize that transaction are sitting here to your left in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I’ve had considerable discussion with members of the oil industry (both small and large) and not one of them 

has conveyed to me a disappointment in that particular transaction. In fact, in some instances, this has been 

the contrary because they think that it has created an interest that might not have otherwise taken place and I 

think that that’s what counts, not what some people may be saying here. The oil industry doesn’t look on it, 

as any favoured deal and they’re prepared to live with SaskOil and to joint venture with them. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I wish you could look at some of these oil people who you’re talking to 

and you’d find their tongues were in their cheeks when they were talking to you. These people have to do 

business with you and they are going to have to do business with you for at least another three and one-half 

to four years. I can assure you they’re not going to display or convey to you their displeasure if they want any 

business at all, if they want to do any exploring in Saskatchewan. 

 

I still insist that we called it a sweetheart deal on that 500,000 acres at Lloydminster and the people of 

Saskatchewan never will know how much money they lost or if it was a good deal. I wish you would table 

that agreement. Would you agree to table that agreement on that 500,000 acres, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. MESSER: — No, I think I’ve conveyed that to the member before. It wouldn’t be in the best interest. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I think you know that there are any number of companies that would have 

loved to have bid on that 500,000 acres in the Lloydminster field. You have stated many times that oil 

companies and other companies make deals from time to time with governments and it doesn’t go to bid. I 

would like to know if this particular deal (you’ve talked around it) was offered to any other oil company at 

the time? This particular 500,000 acres at the time that it was let to Gulf Oil, was it offered to any other 

 



 

April 19, 1979 
 

1840 
 

company right at that time? 

 

MR. MESSER: — It’s not a case of it having been offered. It’s a case of companies approaching to put the 

proposal to the government. Certainly Gulf Oil and Petro-Canada weren’t the only companies that were 

knowledgeable of our interest in such a transaction but it was ultimately Petro-Canada, Gulf Oil and SaskOil. 

Other companies have been extended an invitation for similar proposals and I believe that there have been 

some very cursory discussions in that regard with the department so that it’s no exclusive transaction. 

 

It could well be that similar arrangements could be made with Mobil or Imperial or whoever but it’s on a 

case-by-case basis. I might also say that a large part of the contracted arrangement was made public, the 

amount of money, the references to the kind of activity that had to take place in the light; so that it’s by no 

means secret. 

 

I might also, for the benefit of the member, inform him that there wasn’t a lot of interest in that 500,000 

acres prior to and I think every after this deal was concluded. There may have been some small pockets there 

but by-and-large, it was a large tract of land that the oil industry had not indicated any real interest in. We 

felt that it had heavy oil potential. SaskOil felt that it had heavy oil potential. So did some others in the 

industry and the consequence of that was to farm in with the three companies involved. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5 until 7 p.m. 

 

 


