




















































Hansard: March 13, 1979


551 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 

Tuesday, March 13, 1979. 

 

EVENING SESSION 

 

Budget Speech Debate Continues 

 

MR. B.M. DYCK (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I regret now that time constraints prevented 

me from speaking a little bit more slowly, so the members opposite could understand a bit more of what 

I was saying but I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes I am tempted to. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They are slow learners, so it doesn't matter how slow . . . 

 

MR. DYCK: — I highly recommend the Tuesday edition of the Hansard for their reading, however, Mr. 

Speaker, before the recess I was referring to Northern Saskatchewan and some of the successes that we 

had developed in Northern Saskatchewan, and I believe that people in the North are developing 

self-government and are beginning for the first time to run their own affairs. It has been some struggle 

but certainly there have been a great deal of accomplishments in Northern Saskatchewan. I think that if 

we put our minds to it, we can have the same successes in our urban areas, and I challenge the people of 

Canada and the people of Saskatchewan to this goal. I challenge them to try and understand Indian 

people. I challenge them to try and understand the history of this once very proud people, the native 

Indians. If we accomplish that first step of understanding why Indian people have a right to be angry at 

times, then we might be well on the way to providing those other things that they need — those job 

skills, the jobs themselves, housing and so on. Most of all we must understand that all people have a 

right to live with a certain dignity and a certain self-respect. I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, to warn 

you that if this understanding does not come forth, that this appreciation of the Indian people does not 

develop, then the consequences might be quite severe and quite costly, quite severe and quite costly in 

human terms and in property terms. It is not because of these consequences that we should act. We 

should act because we have an impelling moral and humanitarian obligation to act. We should act and 

we should act now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to rise and speak in this budget 

debate is one not to take lightly. The fact that there was a budget leak, the fact that again there is a 

deficit, the fact that the government tends to make light of these issues, makes this particular debate a 

very serious and crucial one. The people of Saskatchewan can no longer afford to be conned by this 

socialist government's attitude of arrogance and irresponsibility. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — On one hand the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) states that our province is in 

fine shape, that our province ranks as one of the richest in Canada, that our economy is buoyant. Then he 

turns around and states that even in these prosperous times, he is not afraid of deficit budgeting. 

Obviously, the Minister of Finance is a firm believer in deficit budgeting. Introducing the fourth one in 

four years 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 552 

attests to this. That's hardly an impressive record, Mr. Speaker, hardly one to be proud of. Trying to pass 

off another deficit budget onto the people of Saskatchewan as prudent and responsible takes more gall 

that I can fathom. Perhaps the most frightening aspect of this budget is the blatant mismanagement of 

our heritage fund. This fund primarily set up as a heritage or legacy for future generations of our 

province is in great jeopardy. Using the capital from the heritage fund to run the government on a 

day-to-day basis is hypocritical to say the least. If one adds this capital flow to the projected deficit of 

$49 million, one gets the true deficit, Mr. Speaker, a deficit of $37 million. This shows the complete 

arrogance of this government. They juggle the books. They juggle the figures. And to what end? They 

do it to deceive the people of Saskatchewan. They do it to hide their gross incompetency. They do it 

because they know that a deficit of $377 million would be totally unacceptable by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Today we are on a merry-go-round of public spending. We, the people, have been sucked into a huge 

vortex. A vortex that we have no chance of escaping. We have locked our children into a legacy of debt. 

it is no wonder that people have lost the confidence in all governments. We, as citizens, are expected to 

be productive. We, citizens, are expected to prudently manage our own affairs. We are expected to turn 

blind eye to the excesses of government. We are being asked to accept deficits as being prudent and 

responsible. To be credible, Mr. Speaker, to regain the confidence of the voters, we must once more 

become responsible legislators. The heritage fund must be used for its intended purpose — to ensure a 

fair share of our non-renewable resources for the future generations of our province. But, Mr. Speaker, 

does this socialist government adhere to this? No, they don't. This socialist government, in total 

arrogance, transfers money from one department to another, from one fund to another. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, this socialist government, in their arrogance and contempt for the law, by-passes the elected 

legislators in order to meet its own end. Here we have example of Murphy's Law, Mr. Speaker. It is 

impossible to make anything foolproof because fools are so ingenious. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk government 

responsibility for a few minutes. In what I have seen in the past few weeks on the lack of shouldering 

responsibility, it frightens me that we are on the verge of entering the nuclear age. Commenting on the 

recent PCB spill, the Minister of the Environment shrugged it off as being an error in judgment. 

Commenting on the radon gas emission in a school in Uranium City, the Minister of Environment 

shrugged it o an error in judgment. Then the Minister of the Environment stated on TV that should any 

other serious or potentially dangerous situation occur, he assures that it would only be an error in 

judgment. Are we to trust this man with monitoring the environment during nuclear development? 

Never, never, never. How can a government that is to set the rules, to protect the environment, to be the 

ultimate referee, morally justify being an active participant in the development of nuclear energy? I 

challenge this government that you cannot be a referee and a player at the same time. Somewhere along 

the line, economics will take precedence over safety. 

 

The Premier himself states that the budget leak was a human error. I'd like to ask the Premier if he 

knows of any other kinds of errors. Of course it was a human error but someone has to be responsible 

for that human error. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list can go on and on. As I stated before, people have lost their 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 553 

confidence in governments and I believe this budget is irresponsible. Perhaps a more applicable 

postulate would be the one that states. 'No man's life, liberty or property is safe while the legislature is in 

session' and, Mr. Speaker, this is very true, especially in the light of the fact that the Bobbsey twins are 

in control. On one hand, we have boring Blakeney and on the other hand, we have squandering Smishek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the budget as presented. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.F. McARTHUR (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to start out by congratulating the 

Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) on the budget that he has presented to this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — In these difficult times, nationally, in terms of the economy, I am sure it will 

stand as one of the really great budgets that has been presented in the history of this Assembly. There are 

three terms that come to mind when I think of this budget. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — This term or the next two terms. 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — That's right, three more terms. I intend to hire that man as my speech writer. 

Other than those three terms. I have another three terms that come to mind. One is responsible, one is 

compassionate, and one is fiscally sound. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — I say, Mr. Speaker, first of all that it is a responsible budget. I believe that it is 

responsible in a number of important respects. First of all, it is politically responsible. It undertakes, in a 

conscientious and workmanship like way, to implement the commitments and undertakings that we on 

this side, the NDP, made during the election last October, and I believe that is important. We in the NDP 

have developed a strong tradition of meeting our commitments and honoring our commitments and that 

is the highest form of political responsibility there is. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — But this budget is responsible in another respect, Mr. Speaker. Our province is 

made up of a wide diversity of responsible locally controlled authorities — local government bodies, 

hospital boards, school boards, recreation boards — all of which are critically important in terms of 

providing strength, character and diversity to provincial life. All across Canada, and indeed in North 

America, the viability and independence of these is being threatened by the failure of senior 

governments to ensure that their financial requirements are being met. 

 

Now that kind of approach, Mr. Speaker, may have a satisfying cosmetic effect on the budgets of the 

senior governments involved and to that extent it may appear to be good politics. But I ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, what is the effect on the credibility and manageability of the local governing bodies involved? 

 

To get the answer, Mr. Speaker, we need only look to Tory Manitoba, Tory Ontario, and 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 554 

neo-conservative British Columbia. Municipal governments, hospital boards, school boards, and the like 

in those provinces are in serious difficulty, Mr. Speaker, as our daily papers show every day. The 4 per 

cent and 6 per cent guidelines being applied universally in those provinces are destroying the ability of 

those local authorities to do their job, and with it, in those provinces, the confidence of the people in 

those institutions. When that confidence dies, Mr. Speaker, the ability of people to responsibly govern 

themselves at the local level also dies. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — Provincial and federal governments that bring this about are not acting 

responsibly, Mr. Speaker. They are refusing to recognize that much of the strength of our democracy 

comes from the strength of these locally controlled institutions. Contrast that to the approach being taken 

in this budget, and other speakers have referred to it. Grants to local authorities and other third parties 

will increase by 11 per cent in 1979-80, and will consume 45.5 per cent of total provincial expenditures. 

 

That's not just words, Mr. Speaker, that's the financial resources that are needed, and that indicates a 

responsible view regarding the governmental makeup of our province and the need to maintain strong 

and credible locally controlled institutions. 

 

There is a third respect in which this budget is responsible, Mr. Speaker. In comparison to budgets being 

introduced all across Canada by provincial governments and the federal government, this is perhaps the 

only one that openly and clearly recognizes the importance of public sector spending for social and 

economic purposes. It takes the position that public spending must continue to occupy its historic 

position in our provincial economy. 

 

Compare that to the position of the Conservative Party. They advance the position that there should be a 

substantial reduction in the public sector's share of total provincial expenditures. I take that position that 

they advance seriously, and I believe that it's worthwhile and good that they advance that position. 

Those of us who believe in the importance of the contributions the public sector make have been 

challenged by the comments of members opposite and by the criticisms of members opposite to come 

forward and speak out and defend the purposes and usefulness of public sector expenditure. 

 

Now what exactly do the Conservatives mean by their approach to reduce the public sector share in the 

total provincial expenditures? Well, they have been somewhat imprecise. But their federal financial 

critics suggest, and suggest seriously, that we should attempt to return to a situation that would be 

roughly equivalent to the latter period of the last Conservative government in Ottawa, at a time when 

government expenditures amounted to about 16 per cent of total national expenditures. I presume, from 

what has been said, that the provincial position is somewhat similar and follows the guidelines of their 

federal members in this respect. Now an application of this guideline to our provincial economy and our 

provincial budget would require a reduction in ordinary provincial expenditures of between $400 million 

and $500 million. So that is one of the givens about Conservative policy with respect to public sector 

spending. 

 

The other given, and we don't have to dwell on it at this time because it has been stated so many times 

by the member for Thunder Creek and other members opposite, is that 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 555 

there must be a balanced budget. So, under the Conservatives, we would have a reallocation of 

expenditures from the public to the private sector involving a reduction in current provincial government 

expenditures of at least $400 million. In addition, they would want to reduce the burden of royalties on 

resource companies, and here again through adopting the Alberta model, by some substantial amount. 

Again, to be conservative, (we don't have precise estimates from them, I think this is a very conservative 

estimate) I would say, let's say that amounts to $50 million. In addition, they want to add certain items 

that they consider important, such things as a four-lane highway to the Manitoba border and a number of 

other very expensive items that they have raised in this legislature and are rightfully the priorities that 

they have put forward. Again, they haven't provided us with cost estimates of all these additional 

programs, but to be on the conservative side, I would say they would require at least another $50 million 

per year. This would require finding another offsetting $50 million in this government's estimated 

expenditures. This means, Mr. Speaker, if they are serious about meeting their stated policy objectives 

with respect to the public sector and still have a balanced budget, they would have to cut at least $500 

million out of the projected spending of this government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, where would they find that required $500 million? The member for Estevan, (Mr. 

Larter), says 500 hacks. Well let's go into that and see if we can find them. Well, in their now 

well-established slipshod fashion, they make comments of that sort — 500 hacks, better management, 

something of that sort. But, an examination of the spending estimates, a detailed examination, can give 

us some hints about where they could go and would have to go. Do they intend to go after direct 

government programs which they've criticized so often and so frequently — services such as ag rep 

services and other agricultural services, other extension services, family farm improvement grant 

services; those kind of services? Or do they intend to cut into public health services, our provincial wide 

public health program, including the dental program, public health nurses, medical health officers? Or 

do they intend to cut out services to labor and industry, such as labor conciliation services, the 

occupational health and safety program, safety inspections of places of work, fire inspection? Where do 

they intend to cut — assistance to small businesses through the Department of Industry and Commerce, 

family services, child care, senior citizen services? Or do they intend to go into the education budget — 

cut out school superintendents and other curriculum and program support to schools? or policing? 

courts? jails? or some of the many other well established services provided directly by the provincial 

government? 

 

Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, total spending on direct services of this sort is only $470 million less than 

the total amount they are looking for even if they'd closed down everything and dismissed every civil 

servant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they make light of these kinds of comments with respect to what kinds of programs; they 

laugh; they say they'd cut them all out. But Mr. Speaker, I've done some of their work for them. I've 

gone through the estimates in detail a number of times and I would say that not even the Conservative 

Party, however mean and however vicious and however tough they got with respect to the budget, could 

only find $25 million to $50 million of direct services that they would cut out and then at a great cost to 

the quality of provincial life. So, if they were in government, they would still have to find mother $450 

million to open up this new space in the economy that they want for the private sector. 

 

Here's where we get down to the crux of Conservative policy. Where would they get it? Where could 

they get it? Well if we take their position seriously about their ends and 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 556 

objectives (and I say we should), I'll tell you where it would have to come from, Mr. Speaker. It would 

have to come from the moneys that go to the local municipalities and it would have to come from the 

money that goes to the hospital boards and the schools. It would have to come from the money that goes 

to medicare and from the money that goes to supplementing the incomes of the working poor and senior 

citizens; in short, from the $1.24 billion of transfers to local authorities and individuals indicated on 

page 37 of this budget. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the bottom line with respect to the Conservative public sector spending policy. 

The Conservative approach would necessarily play havoc with all of these things that this province has 

worked so long and hard to build, and for which it is rightfully the envy of all people across Canada. 

 

It was to fight this kind of irresponsibility on the part of the Conservative Party that I personally got into 

politics. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — It was because of the knowledge of these implications of Conservative policy 

that the people of Saskatchewan elected an NDP government on October 18. The problem is that your 

policy is wrong and not the kinds of excuses you've been trying to make in this legislature. The people 

of Saskatchewan do not want to go through an experience like the people of Manitoba went through, 

after a Conservative government was elected there. 

 

That illustrates why, Mr. Speaker, this is a responsible budget. This budget stands by the commitment of 

the NDP to take a responsible view of the role of the public sector in modern society. Mr. Speaker, I 

started out attempting to characterize this budget. In so doing I have characterized it as a responsible 

one; responsible in a political sense, responsible in its concern for our local authorities and responsible 

in a general economic and social sense. 

 

It is more than a responsible budget, Mr. Speaker. It is a compassionate budget. It is built on the 

principles of caring and sharing that have so long guided the NDP and the CCF before it. We, on this 

side, have heard Tories and Liberals attack the poor and the needy who draw assistance from the state as 

welfare bums and as a drain on our society. Well, Mr. Speaker, we in the NDP reject such viciousness 

and this budget shows it. We believe that we are our brothers' and sisters' keeper. We have stood by that 

creed in the past and we stand by it today. Evidence of this compassion — the member for Qu'Appelle 

(Mr. Lane) listen to the evidence — evidence that comes from the Minister of Finance. That's who we 

have to listen to to find out where things stand. Some examples, Mr. Speaker, some examples in this 

budget: the tax cuts, with their substantial impact on low-income earners with families; or the changes in 

the family income plan. Would a Conservative government consider a family income plan with the 25 

per cent increase in the basic entitlement as well as the 12.7 per cent increase in the maximum income at 

which full benefits may be received? 

 

MR. LANE: — Run that man through with your sword. 

 

MR. McARTHUR:—Mr. Speaker, if I understand the rules of the House, I am now standing and have 

an opportunity to speak and the member for Qu'Appelle (Mr. Lane) will have his opportunity when he 

chooses to rise in his place and speak. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 557 

Other kinds of examples of the compassion in this budget, Mr. Speaker: a 193 per cent increase in grants 

for home care; 178 per cent increase in expenditures on administration of home care and senior citizen's 

programs; 53 per cent increase in the provision of family and community services in the Department of 

Social Services; a 42 per cent increase in allowances for day care, primarily to assist low-income 

families with working parents. If I might say, Mr. Speaker, I consider this to be a very important item in 

the budget. I consider our day care program to be one of the most important of our social programs. It 

has been developing through the years here in Saskatchewan and I think today we have the best 

supported day care system of any province in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — It is an important part of a policy that provides an opportunity for women to find 

a rightful place in the work force and to have an opportunity to take that place on in the work force. But 

I say to all members that our day care program is having some difficulties. Our day care co-ops are 

having some difficulties and we must look at our approach to them, look at the kinds of resources we are 

allocating. I think this increase in grants is a major step forward and I hope it goes a considerable way to 

helping solve the problems of our day care programs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — Other indications of compassion in this budget: a 31 per cent increase in grants 

to social service organizations primarily directed to assisting Indian and native organizations in 

addressing the social and economic problems of their people. I don't need to speak long on that item 

because many speakers have emphasized that in this budget debate. 

 

There are many, many such items that indicate the emphasis and concern with social problems in this 

budget. These, and other increases, indicate the concern of this government for the poor, for low-income 

families, for people of Indian ancestry and for senior citizens. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we must not become complacent, even in the face of these kinds of budgetary 

provisions. We still have, in this province and in Canada as a whole, a number of significant social 

problems that must be addressed. 

 

Poverty is still very much with us. A recent Statistics Canada study, covering the 25 year period from 

1951 to 1975, shows that contrary to widely held opinions, there has been very little improvement in the 

distribution of income in this country. Mr. Speaker, 40 per cent of Canadian families, according to this 

study, Mr. Speaker, in making up our low income population, receive a measly 19.2 per cent of total 

family income earned in Canada in 1975 and this situation has changed hardly at all over the last 20 

years. Meanwhile, the top 20 per cent of families in terms of income have consistently received about 40 

per cent of total income over the period. As this study goes on to point out, those areas with relatively 

generous programs in the field of health and education such as Saskatchewan, show a somewhat better 

picture if these benefits are included or could be included in income, which they are not in the statistical 

sense, so we are somewhat better off. Nevertheless, the broad picture cannot be denied: 40 per cent of 

families get only 19 per cent of the income while the privileged 20 per cent of families get almost 40 per 

cent of the income generated in this country. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 558 

I say to all members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that these figures clearly point out one direction that 

we must go over the coming years. In four or five years time, Mr. Speaker, it can be expected that 

Ministers of Finance of the day will be confronted with much increased public revenues from resources. 

There will be much debate about how these revenues should be used. I, for one, believe that there should 

be little doubt a major portion of these revenues should be and must be used to mount a major offensive 

against income and equality, its causes and its manifestations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to again congratulate the Minister of 

Finance for the compassion he has shown in this budget. Our much hoped for resource bonanza is not 

yet with us in that sense. Indeed, the great rapid growth is a few years off. I know that he and his cabinet 

colleagues have had to struggle hard to allocate expenditures within the means available to include the 

socially progressive provisions that are found in this budget and I applaud them for their efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that I characterized this budget as: (1) responsible, (2) compassionate, and (3) 

fiscally sound. I want to now direct my remarks to the third of these characterizations, namely that of its 

fiscal soundness. In doing so, let me concede right off that this is a deficit budget but in direct contrast to 

the thundering of the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) who is not in his seat and other 

members opposite, I maintain that a deficit budget at this time is fiscally sound. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — Any Minister of Finance in constructing the budget must consider the state of 

the provincial and the national economy and the needs of that economy in terms of economic 

stimulation. I emphasize that it is both the provincial and national economy that must be considered, Mr. 

Speaker, because it is clear in a federal state such as ours that both provincial and federal governments 

must accept responsibility for the management of the economy and for the implications of the things 

they do. Provincial government expenditures today in Canada account for about 42 per cent of total 

government expenditures — exactly equal to the percentage for the federal government — which shows 

the importance of joint federal/provincial action with respect to the management of the economy. 

 

The Minister of Finance made reference in his speech to the expected state of the national economy in 

1979. He has indicated that the national economy will take another downward turn in this year. 

Projections by the Conference Board of Canada indicate that the unemployment rate will reach the 

highest level of the decade with 9 per cent of the labor force being unemployed over the year. The 

utilization of our industrial capacity which increased somewhat in 1978, will again fall back to around 

85 per cent. The major economic stimulus of 1978, a very rapid growth in exports, will not materialize 

to the same extent in 1979. 

 

While we can expect that the agriculture and resource sectors will have a good year in Saskatchewan in 

1979, our industrial and business sectors will not be able to totally avoid the impact of the expected 

down-turn in the national economy. This situation clearly calls for some stimulation of the economy. 

The Minister of Finance has very 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 559 

wisely provided for some excess of current expenditures over current revenues in order to generate just 

such a stimulating effect on the current account. But he has gone further than that. He has also 

recognized that a provincial government can have its greatest impact on the capital account. He has 

recognized that the time to make major new investments for the future is in times of national stagnation 

when one does not run the danger of overheating the capital goods producing sectors. Thus, the minister 

has made provision for almost $600 million of capital development through our family of Crown 

corporations. These are carefully planned investments which will build on our strengths and leave our 

children with a stronger, more secure economic future than would otherwise be the case. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a mildly expansionary budget, utilizing the vehicles of a small deficit and a 

major capital program in the cost-recovering Crown corporations. What we do not have is the mindless 

slashing of public expenditures that has become the stock in trade of Conservative governments and 

Conservative politicians all across Canada, and now adopted, if evidence in Ottawa is to be taken, by the 

Liberal government as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is hardly a serious student of the Canadian economic situation today, who does not 

agree that this country's economy needs some stimulation. Nor is there one who would argue that deficit 

financing in the public sector should not play a part along with other measures, including increased 

consumer spending, export stimulation, increased rates of investment in plant and equipment, and so on. 

But the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the provincial and federal Tory politicians (and this is a problem 

for our full national economy), all across Canada, have been able to build up a head of political steam in 

their minds by fighting on the issues of government — spending and government deficits. 

 

This has become the big issue for the rightwing of Canadian politics in the 1970's with tragic 

consequences for our economy and sometimes, farcical consequences for individual politicians. So we 

have the farce of the federal Tories, becoming victims of their own successful propaganda. A few 

months ago, to many people's surprise, Joe Clark consulted a substantial group of economic experts and 

after some consultation and education, he was able to understand that an overall package of economic 

stimulation is urgently required and that deficit spending would need to form part of such a package. 

Thus, he came to announce his ill-fated policy of a stimulative increase in the federal budget deficit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) spoke at some length about his 

concerns about cynical manipulation of public opinion and public understanding of the public finance 

system. I say there is nothing more indicative of such cynical manipulation than what happened in this 

case. No sooner had the federal Conservative leader announced this policy than he had all the hacks and 

political opportunists in the Conservative party from all across Canada saying, 'no Joe, no, no, you can't 

say that. You've got to back off. We're making great political mileage out of exploiting this anti-deficit 

spending hysteria in the country, but we can't go on exploiting it if you go around talking economic 

sense about economic policies'. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's right! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — And so what happened? The members opposite know very well what happened. 

Joe Clark backed off and we now have as Tory policy the great proposed 30 day — I'm not sure, maybe 

now it's down to one day — increase in the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 560 

federal deficit to stimulate the national economy. 

 

So now speaking of cynicism, Mr. Speaker, what are the people of Canada to make of a party that will 

so quickly repudiate its leader just to gain some short-term political advantage regardless of what it 

means to the national economy? And what are the people of Canada to make of a leader who will so 

easily and quickly back off from his stated convictions simply in order to manipulate and exploit public 

opinion? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side make no apologies for the deficit that is proposed in this budget. Unlike the 

Tories, this government has always been prepared to play its part in terms of good economic 

management and this is simply another illustration of that fact. It would have been very simple to play 

the political advantage and come in with a balanced budget but the Minister of Finance did not succumb 

to that temptation. To his great credit he decided to stand by sound economic principles and come in 

with the budget that he did. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, having said that, I want to add that the members opposite and their 

spokesmen have advanced on occasion two objections to deficit budgeting that bear some further 

examination. 

 

The first of these is the argument that a deficit will contribute to inflation. The members in this House 

opposite have only made passing reference to it, but the Conservative party in general makes a great deal 

of it. Mr. Speaker, inflation is a tremendous problem in Canada today. There is no doubt about that. Its 

causes, Mr. Speaker, tend to be of three kinds: (1) the deep-seated power of monopoly corporations to 

administer prices rather than to respond to any sound criteria regarding adequate profits and prices, (2) 

the almost uncontrolled expansion in our money supply as a result of some complicated factors 

associated with the weakness of our Canadian dollar and the intervention of the federal government in 

the dollar market, (3) inflationary pressures in the price of world-trade commodities, the kinds of which 

we both import and export. But government spending . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . just listen, listen 

Mr. Member, I’m coming to that. Government spending and government deficits can hardly be much to 

blame for inflation. During the past few years our national economy has been plagued by a very low rate 

of growth and overall demand for consumer capital and export goods and services. A high propensity to 

save, in a corporate sector that refuses to renew itself through reinvestment, has meant that a major 

problem within the economy has been a deficiency in effective demand for goods and services. This has 

continued to be true even with very substantial national government deficits because these deficits 

cannot have been large enough to fill the hole of the deficiency in the gap of demand for goods and 

services. 

 

Now deficits in these kinds of times in the economy, Mr. Speaker, whatever else they may be blamed 

for, cannot be blamed for inflation. Broad categories of spending of any kind whether they be personal, 

business, investment, or government can only generate inflation if the totality of all kinds of spending in 

the economy exceeds the capacity of the economy to meet such spending demands. 

 

Our problem in Canada has been quite the opposite. Personal saving has risen from 4.5 per cent of 

personal income in the early 1970s, to almost 10 per cent in 1979. Expenditures on goods and services 

have fallen from 75 per cent to 70 per cent of personal income over the same period, with a resulting 

under-utilization of the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 561 

productive capacity of our business enterprises, and a high unemployment in our work force. Broad 

categories of spending cannot be blamed for inflation under those kinds of conditions in the economy. 

 

So the charge that deficits encourage inflation at this time simply do not stand up and should be set aside 

to let us get on to the serious questions of examining what is the matter with the national economy. 

 

The second criticism made by the members opposite is that a deficit will place an unfair burden on 

future generations, because of the public debt that must accompany it. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a complicated question, but, it should be quite clear to anyone that it is impossible 

to take future consumption and move it back through future time to the present. We cannot in that sense 

rob the standard of living of future generations in order to advance our own. 

 

Under certain circumstances, however, the funding of deficits can have a significant impact on the 

distribution of income of future generations, because of the interest charges on debt incurred. I think the 

member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) was speaking of this. Fortunately, however, in our case at the 

present time the surplus in the heritage fund will exceed the deficit on current account, with the result 

that the financing can be done internally. Future interest payments, which agreed must come from the 

public sector, will also be paid to the public sector, with the result that there will be no disrupting impact 

on future income distribution as a result of this kind of budget deficit. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McARTHUR: — As a consequence, Mr. Speaker, we can conclude that the opposition has not 

proven its case against this budget. The small deficit indicated is just the right economic medicine for 

these times, and the arguments advanced by the members opposite in opposition to the proposed deficit 

do not stand the test of careful examination. Mr. Speaker, I support the budget in all its forms. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin the few remarks that I 

have to offer in this debate by congratulating the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) on yet another 

rational and progressive budget proposal. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — I would also like to take this opportunity to offer a few words of welcome to the 

new members to the Legislative Assembly and offer words of congratulations to you, Sir, on your 

election as Speaker of this House. (. . . inaudible interjection . . .) I think, Mr. Speaker, the vigour of the 

political scene in Saskatchewan is reflected in a very major way by the quality of the people who have 

been elected as MLAs on our side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — I am particularly pleased with the wide diversity of experience that our 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 562 

new government members have and I know that they'll add in a very marked degree to the ability and to 

the strength of our caucus. I want also, Mr. Speaker, to express some particular satisfaction that the 

outcome of the election in the city of Moose Jaw on October 18 last. This represents the sixth occasion 

that the people of Moose Jaw have so honored me and in the 1978 election. Mr. Speaker, it was the best 

yet with the good people of Moose Jaw offering something on the order of 60 per cent of the popular 

vote in my case. But even more gratifying, Mr. Speaker, was the resounding victory of my colleague, the 

hon. member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Skoberg). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, those traditional bed partners, those Grits and Tories, 

attempted to join forces in a futile effort to defeat John Skoberg. The Liberal organization in Moose Jaw 

deliberately abandoned their candidate, dispelling any suggestion of credence, Mr. Speaker, in the old 

adage that there is honor among thieves. When the dust settled, Mr. Speaker, John Skoberg had walked 

over that pair of conspirators with hobnail boots and I want to congratulate him once again. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — May I also offer my personal congratulations to the Leader of the Opposition, the 

member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) on his personal victory and express at the same time my sincere and 

my genuine wish that he will continue to lead the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan in perpetuity. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — I am very gratified, Mr. Speaker, that the New Democratic Party has been returned 

to the legislature with an increased majority. I think this indicates that the people of Saskatchewan 

clearly support the actions and policies of this government over the past eight years — policies which 

direct the management of our natural resources, our oil, our potash and our uranium so that 

Saskatchewan people benefit from their development, policies, Mr. Speaker, which protect and improve 

our health care systems, policies which protect the family farms and rural communities at a time when 

that way of life is being threatened. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have given us a rather 

major mandate to continue with these policies into the new decade. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I would like to caution my fellow New Democrats that we must not become 

complacent about our electoral success. After all, we may not always be able to depend upon the 

assistance given us by the Leader of the Opposition or by what used to be the Saskatchewan Liberal 

Party. The results of October 18, Mr. Speaker, represented an obvious voter recognition of the complete 

absence of any kind of substantial policies on the part of the Liberals and Tories and were I think a very 

clear and absolute rejection entirely of the inappropriate and ill-conceived proposals of these political 

parties who occupy the opposition seats in this House and outside of the House in Liberal circles. Nor, 

Mr. Speaker, can we always depend upon the assistance provided by the Supreme Court of Canada. It 

was apparent, Mr. Speaker, from the CIGOL (Canadian Industrial Gas and Oil Limited) decision that the 

people of Saskatchewan knew that if they wished to benefit from their own oil resources they must elect 

a government that was strong enough to withstand the attack which was being made upon 

Saskatchewan's resource policies. The outcome of the October election makes it apparent who the 

people of Saskatchewan trust to look after their 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 563 

interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this term of office we are on the threshold of a new decade and we are placing great 

emphasis on improving industrial relations and the prevention techniques in terms of providing for better 

labor-management relations. However, I'm afraid that there are not unanimous views and not everyone 

agrees with that particular approach. I detect, Mr. Speaker, a dangerous current of reaction and 

conservatism abroad in our country. Every day we hear of new incidents of attacks against working 

people and the rights of working people. 

 

The Trudeau government in Ottawa, for example, has done nothing to reduce the numbers of 

unemployed. They have simply reduced the number of jobless workers that are eligible for 

unemployment insurance benefits and have reduced those benefits substantially, Mr. Speaker. There's a 

policy of attacking the victims of unemployment, not its causes. That same Trudeau government, Mr. 

Speaker, in Ottawa, has also introduced a bill which effectively denies full free collective bargaining 

rights to thousands of public employees. 

 

In essence, Mr. Speaker, this dangerous Bill C-22 tries to use the low wages and poor working 

conditions of many unorganized workers to undermine the position of federal employees. 

 

Just a few months ago I think members opposite (and surely members on this side of the House) will 

recall that the Bennett government in the province of British Columbia responded to an industrial 

dispute involving some non-teaching school board employees by passing some exceedingly sweeping 

amendments to their essential services disputes act. These changes greatly increased the number of 

workers whose crucial bargaining rights can arbitrarily be undermined by the government. 

 

In Manitoba, in that haven of Tory people across the border from us in Saskatchewan, we see massive 

lay-offs of civil servants and abrupt terminations and cut backs in social programs such as health 

programs, occupational health and safety in particular. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that ever since Sterling Lyon and his forces of reaction have tried to drive 

Manitoba backward into the dark ages, there was a certain bumper sticker that is seen more and more 

around the province of Manitoba and it simply says: 'Don't blame me, I voted NDP.' 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, in Alberta another Tory government recently implemented an act 

which effectively denies the right of free collective bargaining to more than 30,000 working people in 

the province of Alberta. This public service employees' relation act practically makes the public 

employees of Alberta second-class citizens under that law. It is not surprising, I think, that that serious 

threat to free collective bargaining, the very existence of trade unions and the fundamental rights of 

working people, have been widely condemned. It has been condemned, Mr. Speaker, by the provincial 

government employees' association, by the Alberta Federation of Labour, by the Canadian Labour 

Congress and more recently it has been criticized by the committee of the International Labour 

Organization. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these forces of reaction and conservatism all have a common theme. They all tend to 

attack the social and the economic well-being of working people and attack the fundamental rights and 

freedoms of democratic organizations of 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 564 

working people. 

 

One of the areas of attack has been on the collective bargaining process in general. There have been 

suggestions which we hear from time to time that we should have what is known as right-to-work 

legislation. This essentially would mean, Mr. Speaker, that any new employees who joins a work place 

that is represented by the union would have the option of whether or not he or she wish to join that 

union. I would have hopes, Mr. Speaker, that this would have been a philosophy that might have gone 

the way of the dinosaur. The right-to-work concept, Mr. Speaker, is in direct opposition to fundamental 

democratic principles. If a union attempts to organize a shop, for example, with 100 employees, the 

Labour Relations Board, if there was a significant show of support, will require that a vote be conducted. 

If, as a consequence, 51 per cent of those employees vote against having a union represent them, then 

the remaining 49 per cent of 49 employees must accept that decision. They must work in a non-union 

shop. Conversely then, I think, Mr. Speaker, if in the same set of circumstances, the majority of the 

workers determine that they would like to have a union represent them, then the minority must also 

acknowledge that fact, Mr. Speaker, if collective bargaining then is to function in an effective way, labor 

organizations must have some measure of security in terms of maintenance of union membership. The 

rationale for the union security provisions included in industrial relations legislation across Canada is 

that all employees in the bargaining unit who share in the benefits which the union has been 

instrumental in obtaining, should support that labor organization. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, in a truly democratic fashion, The Trade Union Act contains a number of 

safeguards to ensure that unions operate in accordance with democratic principles on which our society 

is based. For example, the act requires that when an application for union certification is made, the 

Labour Relations Board must be satisfied that the union represents the majority of the employees in that 

bargaining unit ballot. When a union certification is ordered, those existing employees of the employer 

involved who do not wish to join the union, are not required to do so as long as they tender regular union 

dues. In addition, if the majority of employees in a bargaining unit, on the anniversary date, no longer 

wish to be represented by that union, they may apply to the Labour Relations Board for an order 

decertifying this. This can happen on the anniversary date once a year, Mr. Speaker. An order will be 

issued where the board is satisfied that the request represents the majority opinion of the employees. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the proponents of right-to-work legislation are dangling a red herring when they say 

it should be an individual’s right to choose to join or not to join a union and indicate that that somehow 

represents democracy in the work place. Those same people, I expect, at least I would hope, would 

never suggest that those in our society who do not agree with our laws should have the opportunity to 

opt out. That just isn’t democratic principles as is the rest of our society. If the majority of employees 

decide in favor of a union, then the minority cannot be allowed to undermine or circumvent that 

decision. Mr. Speaker, this government has always been a leader in the field of industrial relations. In 

1971, when we took over from the previous Thatcher administration, the industrial relation scene in our 

province was in a state of absolute chaos. Since that time we have implemented a new Trade Union Act 

which I believe re-establishes the rights of working people to organize in a union and which sets 

guidelines to promote harmonious labor management relations in our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 565 

MR. SNYDER: — We have already, Mr. Speaker, also expanded and upgraded the mediation and 

conciliation services in the Department of Labour and our industrial relations officers. I suggest to you, 

enjoy the confidence of both management and labor in our province. Their work has gone far in helping 

to avoid a great number of work stoppages and in cases where work stoppages have taken place, they 

played a major role in shortening the duration of the work stoppage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been our belief that unions play a legitimate and a respected role in the democratic 

scheme of things. We feel that sound industrial relations must be grounded in the conviction that the 

collective bargaining process and its institutions can effectively play a giant role in terms of good 

labor-management relations. We continue to hold this belief on the threshold of a new decade of 

progress for workers' rights. Our government will continue to make special efforts to improve the 

industrial relations climate in the province of Saskatchewan in the 1980s. We feel that there's a 

disturbing lack of knowledge and understanding on the part of the public as well as on the part of labor 

and management in some instances on many aspects of labor management relationships. This lack of 

knowledge, I think, is having an unfavorable impact on the operation of the collective bargaining 

process. There is, I believe, increasing public criticism of labor relations procedures and this is exerting 

a negative influence on the industrial relations climate generally. To help to counteract this, my 

department will be involved in a new educational thrust to generate greater knowledge of labor 

legislation and programs on the nature of free collective bargaining and on the role of working people in 

society. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, in the budget which is being proposed, provisions have been made for new 

operational initiatives in the labor relations field also. We will be establishing a preventive mediation 

program which is intended to open and maintain continuing dialogue between labor and management. It 

will explore avenues and procedures for effective problem solving away from the crisis bargaining 

atmosphere at the expiration of a contract. A neutral mediator will work with and advise labor and 

management between contract negotiations. Between them they will try to seek ways to avoid 

difficulties in the future and establish more co-operative working relationships between labor and 

management. 

 

Plans also call for the designation of an industrial relations person in the north — a person who will be 

operating out of La Ronge and will deal with the particular problems and issues characterizing 

labor-management relations in northern Saskatchewan. This action is designed to develop, in industrial 

relations, consciousness of the needs of particular groups in that part of the province. It is in keeping 

with this government's pledge, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that northern citizens receive an equitable share of 

the benefits accruing from the development taking place in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — In keeping with this preventive approach to labor-management relations, Mr. 

Speaker, my department will be designing an educational package, particularly for employers. 

Throughout this program, we hope to inform them properly of their rights, of their obligations and their 

responsibilities under our legislation. 

 

All too often, Mr. Speaker, we have found that because of a lack of understanding of legislation, 

management-employee relationships have started off on the wrong foot. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 566 

On another occasion in this House, Mr. Speaker, we heard the member for Regina South (Mr. 

Rousseau), complaining about alleged bias of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board. I notice the 

member for Regina South is not in this House, but if he were here I would like to remind the hon. 

member that the Labour Relations Board in Saskatchewan is composed of people who were nominated 

by both labor and management groups. These people enjoy the respect and the confidence of the people 

they represent. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it has to be said that the member for Regina South has 

indicated, by his poor experiences with the Labour Relations Board, that it is not because the board is, or 

was, biased, but because he epitomizes a major problem. He epitomizes a major impediment in the 

development of good industrial relations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the vast majority of cases, employers in our province are good and 

honest citizens. They deal with their employees in what I believe to be a just and honorable manner and 

on a mature basis. There are always a few rotten apples in the barrel, Mr. Speaker, which are bringing 

hostility and discord to the industrial relations climate in our province. 

 

It wasn't my intention, during this debate, to make particular references or indulge in detail with respect 

to past difficulties between Crestview Chrysler Dodge, Paul Rousseau and the Canadian Brotherhood of 

Railway Transport and General Workers, but kindly remember, Mr. Speaker, that it was the member for 

Regina South that chose to attack the Labour Relations Board, a body of people whom he charged with 

bias and discriminatory practises — a charge which the board is unable to respond to on its own behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Trade Union Act in Saskatchewan, Section No. 3, indicates quite clearly: 

 

That employees have the right to join in, to form, to join or assist trade unions, and to bargain 

collectively through a trade union of their own choosing. 

 

Now this is a fundamental principle, Mr. Speaker, that is acknowledged in every provincial jurisdiction 

across the entire country: in some provinces, with some modification or qualification. 

 

In Saskatchewan and elsewhere, Mr. Speaker, it is an unfair labor practise under our Trade Union Act 

for an employer to: 

 

discriminate in regard to hiring or tenure of employment, or any term or condition of employment, or 

to use coercion or intimidation of any kind, including discharge or suspension, or threat of discharge 

or suspension of an employee with a view to discouraging membership in or activity in or for the 

selection of a labour organization or participation of any kind of proceedings under this act. 

 

The act also states Mr. Speaker, that it's an unfair labour practice for an employer to, and I quote again, 

 

Use coercion or intimidation of any kind with a view to encouraging or discouraging membership or 

activity in or for a labour organization. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 567 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are basic fundamental principles which are embodied in similar statutes in 

every other Canadian province in the dominion, and it is obvious that the member for Regina South (Mr. 

Rousseau) would find every labour relations board in the whole of Canada, in his words, to be 

discriminatory and biased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just let me then give an example of how a work relationship can be ruined at the very 

outset. The Canadian Brotherhood of Railway, Transport and General Workers was in the process of 

trying to organize the employees of Crestview Chrysler Dodge in the summer and early fall of 1974. Let 

me quote to you from the written reasons provided by the Labour Relations Board in an unfair labour 

practice charge filed against Mr. Paul Rousseau, page number 273-74-5, all a matter of public record. 

 

In this case the evidence accepted by the board lead the board to the following conclusion of fact. 

When Joseph M. Schafer was employed by the firm June 8, 1974, he was told by Mr. Paul Rousseau, 

the General Manager and President of the company, that he did not want a union in the shop and that 

there was not going to be any union in that firm. This statement was made after Mr. Rousseau became 

aware of the fact that Schafer had formerly been employed at Mid-West Motors in Regina and that 

there had been a strike. Schafer told Rousseau that he was not interested in unions. It is presumed that 

in this case discretion was the better part of valor as otherwise Schafer might not have obtained 

employment. Later, after Rousseau became aware of union activity, he called Schafer to his office and 

asked Schafer why he was trying to start a union. Rousseau also asked if he attended a union meeting 

at noon. The date was August 20, 1974. Schafer denied any activity on his part, although in fact he had 

signed a union card on August 19. After the discussion Rousseau told Schafer that he was going to 

check into it. On August 22 Schafer was dismissed. This was in the midst of a concentrated union sign 

off campaign. 

 

This is a public record. I'll provide the documents for you if you like. Mr. Speaker, the Labour Relations 

Board in its written reasons for decision went on to say this: 

 

In his evidence Rousseau stated that he had first been advised of union activities by one of his 

department managers. This man mentioned Joe Schafer and Barry Sullivan had been involved. Upon 

receipt of this information Rousseau stated he called Schafer to his office and asked him if he was 

involved in any way in union activities. This was apparently the occasion referred to. Mr. Rousseau 

passed off this incident by stating, 'basically I asked because I like to know what is going on'. It also 

stated that he had asked Schafer about it because of what Schafer had told him earlier about his 

employment at Mid-West Motors. 

 

In the body then, Mr. Speaker, of the written reasons, the board concluded and I quote again: 

 

In this regard the board could not escape from drawing the inference that the very immediacy of the 

discharge following this interview between Rousseau and Schafer in his office could lead the board to 

no other conclusion but that union activity was the reason for the discharge, even though it might not 

have been the only reason. 

 

Accordingly, the board ruled in a manner which any semi or quasi judicial body would 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 568 

have been obliged to rule in any jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

Order issued: 273-74-5 Canadian Brotherhood of Railway, Transport and General Workers Local 44 

(CLC). Applicant and Crestview Chrysler Dodge Limited and Paul Rousseau, General Manager, 

Regina, Saskatchewan, Respondents . . . The board found that the respondents had committed an 

unfair labor practice within the meaning of Section 11(1)(e) and (o) by using coercion intimidation of 

an employee with a view to discouraging membership in or activity in or for a labor organization or 

participating in any kind of proceeding under this act, by interrogating employees as to whether or not 

they or any of them had exercised or were exercising or attempting to exercise any right conferred by 

this act. An order is accordingly issued. 

 

The second instance, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Order issued 276-74-5 Canadian Brotherhood of Railway, Transport and General Workers Local 44 

(CLC). Applicant, Crestview Chrysler Dodge, Regina, Respondent. 

 

The Applicant filed one application for reinstatement and one application for monetary loss in respect 

to one employee, alleging an employee had been terminated within the meaning of Section 11(1)(e) of 

The Trade Union Act 1972. The board found that the respondent did engage in an unfair labor practice 

within the meaning of Section 11(1)(e) of The Trade Union Act by discharging said employee with a 

view to discouraging membership in or activity in or the selection of a labour organization or 

participation of any kind in a proceeding under this act. An Order was issued accordingly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is not a labour relations board in Canada which could have ruled otherwise. I 

think this is an instance, Mr. Speaker, where actions by Crestview Chrysler Dodge and the member for 

Regina South were in clear contravention of The Trade Union Act. The act ensures workers of the right 

to organize in a union or to join a trade union. Following our democratic system, the union must 

represent a majority of the workers in a particular union before it can be certified. The act also clearly 

outlines the restrictions on both employers and workers and their union so that the individual employee 

can make his or her decision to join or not to join without fear of coercion or intimidation from each 

other or from any quarter. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, to help to avoid situations like the preceding one, my department will be developing 

an educational program for employers on their rights and obligations under Saskatchewan law. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — The Department of Labour, looking forward to the 1980s has been studying new 

approaches to labor relations. These vary from new techniques for collective bargaining to innovative 

methods in solving labor relations disputes. Our department stands ready to help the workers and the 

employers of this province to improve the industrial relations problems and the industrial relations 

climate in our province. 

 

As I stated before, Mr. Speaker, our view has been that sound industrial relations must be grounded in 

the conviction that free collective bargaining can effectively solve the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 569 

problems between management and labor. 

 

At the recent first ministers' conference, our Premier put forward a proposal that a thorough review of 

industrial relations in the transportation sector be undertaken by the Canadian Labour Congress, the 

trade unions and the representatives of the business enterprises directly involved. This proposal does not 

include any third party so that the solutions that the bilateral review brings forth will be solutions that 

labor and management have worked out themselves. I'm hopeful that these solutions will result in the 

improvement and the rationalization of the collective bargaining process in the transportation sector and 

particularly, Mr. Speaker, in the grain handling industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the threshold of a new decade, with a new term of office being heralded in by this new 

budget, we look forward to a bright future of progress for workers' rights. Our concern about the rights 

of working people also encompasses a special situation relative to women in our work force. Our 

government has always placed a very high priority on improving the status of women in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, early this year I was pleased to announce that the amalgamation of the Career 

Development office of the Department of Finance with the Department of Labour's women's division. 

The new womens' division will have all of the functions that the two offices had previously except for 

career counselling of government employees which will be done by the Public Service Commission. 

These duties include education and information programs, research, the administration of equal pay 

provisions and maternity leave provisions of The Labour Standards Act and the affirmative action 

programs for the public sector. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, there will be three new mandates for which the women's division will also be 

responsible, including affirmative action programs and career counselling in the private sector and 

authority to review legislation and programs to ensure that there is no discrimination against women. 

 

A study is being conducted to determine the most effective way to implement the affirmative action 

programs for government and the Crown corporations. As well, a consulting service on affirmative 

action will be developed for the private sector. A review of government legislation and programs will be 

one of the major tasks of the new women's division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this move reaffirms the government's commitment to improving the status of 

women in the province of Saskatchewan. Having both of these offices under a common organizational 

structure will result, I believe, in a great deal more being accomplished than has been possible in the 

past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vital contribution of working people to the economic and social development of our 

province cannot be exaggerated. The measures which I have outlined are intended to lead to even more 

effective realization of the objectives of government labor policy, namely, the promotion of the welfare 

of the work force to encourage the continued development of the province in a rational, equitable and 

orderly fashion. So, Mr. Speaker, this budget carries on the New Democratic tradition of progressive and 

innovative programming. We have accomplished a great deal in the past, we are undertaking some 

exciting new programs in this budget. The future is bright and it's promising for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I will be exceedingly pleased to offer my support for this budget. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 570 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, it's with pleasure again that I rise this evening to 

debate this budget: I must admit it's a bit more of a document than was the throne speech. Although one 

must question whether it has much more in it, if it's going to be of a real and true value to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into the text of my remarks this evening I want to thank you and the members 

of this Assembly for the opportunities that are provided here for the members of this Assembly to speak 

freely, and to speak on the issues, voice their opinions, as they themselves as individuals see them. I 

would also take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate you. I made mention of it in my remarks 

to the throne speech. You were not in the chair that night. I would take this opportunity when you are, to 

thank you for your election to the chair again for this, the 19th legislature. As was previously stated I 

expect to see the impartiality displayed as in the previous four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words about the comments that have been made, previous 

speeches. As I said, these members are expressing their views, they have a right to their views. We don't 

necessarily agree with them — and I'm sure you don't necessarily agree with our comments. But it's in 

that light, Mr. Speaker, that I thought about what my remarks were going to be this evening regarding 

this budget. 

 

I was, Mr. Speaker, searching within myself for a reason for each of us to be taking our place, and 

obviously shooting back and forth. And surely, Mr. Speaker, it must raise the question, why are we here 

at all? especially, Mr. Speaker, for those members on this side of the House. Because regardless of the 

legislation that is introduced, regardless of the worth of the throne speech. regardless of the worth of the 

budget, regardless of the worth of any legislation that is brought to this Assembly, this government with 

its majority will pass it. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, regardless of the worth of the motions put by members of this side 

of the House, regardless, Mr. Speaker, of the worth of the bills that may be put by members of this side 

of the House, this government as in the past will unanimously stand and all vote together to defeat us on 

this side of the House, but only, Mr. Speaker, for political reasons. Not for any other reason will they do 

that. Surely, Mr. Speaker, that is evident when you see 43 members of this government side of the 

House all stand unanimous on the votes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is one member, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Prebble), who I 

believe has a mind of his own. I would like to see that member . . . oh, the members, Mr. Speaker, laugh 

when I suggest that that hon. member has a mind of his own. You can laugh at your own members if you 

like, Mr. Speaker. These people can laugh at their own members and think that is a joke and I tell you 

that hon. member won't think that is a joke when he finds that out tomorrow. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

member does think for himself. I see him leave this Assembly in disgust. I see him leave in disgust when 

he is watching legislation and statements from his own government side of the House. You don't see 

him, you don't see his reactions because, Mr. Speaker, this government has him sitting at the back. How 

could they see his reactions? Now, they are still laughing, Mr. Speaker. They still think that is funny, in 

particular his seat mate. Well he is a big fellow and he can keep him in line, I am sure. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 571 

None the less, Mr. Speaker, the point that I am trying to make is that we have, in this Assembly, in this 

19th legislature, a majority government that is going to be arrogant and rule this province as they see fit, 

and only as they see fit, and not by the wishes of the people but by their ideological and philosophical 

whims and wishes that may happen to pass through their vacated minds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, surely there are a number of members on that side of the House — and I believe 

there are — I believe the member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. McArthur) is such a member. I believe he 

is. I believe he has the capabilities. I think, possibly, within the next two years these members will see 

that they have the opportunity to stand and speak what they believe and not what is the government 

policy or the government position only. Well, I am optimistic, Mr. Speaker, I am optimistic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my seat mate happens to have a book entitled Man's Search for Himself. Now, of 

course, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) has unfortunately left the House and I would 

make some comments regarding the Minister of Labour, that if he were ever in a search for himself I 

would hope that he would not find himself, because he may have to commit himself for a decade. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, surely we have ministerial irresponsibility on the part of the Minister of Labour. The 

Minister of Labour in his remarks which through 80 per cent of, I had no real argument. The Minister of 

Labour usually presents his speech in the context that he sticks to what he knows. It may be the only 

thing he knows, but it's what he knows and that's labor. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when he moved off of that and took his place with the majority of the members on 

that side of the House, on the government's side of the House, in their continual attack, personal attack 

on members of this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I have to take some objection to that approach. 

Surely the personal affairs of the new member of this legislature, the member for Regina South (Mr. 

Rousseau), cannot really be pertinent to this legislature. If any member of this legislature can explain to 

me how the personal and previous personal business of the member for Regina South has any relation 

whatsoever to the business of this Assembly, then Mr. Speaker, I ask that member to stand and take his 

place and explain that to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we should be doing on this side of the House, if we didn't have principles, if we didn't 

have some honor and dignity, if we were not men of integrity, we would be looking and looking deep 

for a file that we could pull on those members opposite for some dirty low piece of information that we 

could lace these members in the legislature with. Now surely, Mr. Speaker, this government with its 

majority; it has its majority; it has its mandate — from the people of Saskatchewan in the October 18 

election — it has its mandate to rule and to govern and to dictate as well. For that matter, Mr. Speaker, 

then I ask you. and I ask again the members of this Assembly, why would the Minister of Labour have 

to stoop so low? Why would he have to do that I don't know. To make a personal attack on the member 

for Regina South . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Cheap shot. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Just a cheap shot, that is correct. That's all it is and, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan should know. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will know. We'll be sure that they 

all know what the comments of that Minister of Labour were. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 572 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn now to some of the comments by the member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. 

McArthur). Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I commend the member for Regina Lakeview for presenting a 

good speech in this legislature. He had his facts down. He had his philosophical approach there in place 

and he made a good presentation. He made a very good presentation, Mr. Speaker. And as I said 

previously, I don't necessarily agree with all that member had to say, but, Mr. Speaker, I appreciated the 

honorable way in which he presented it here in this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that I would maybe remind him possibly of is that he referred to his 

government and his party as the 'people's keeper' — 'this government the people's keeper.' Well, no truer 

words were ever spoken, Mr. Speaker. They even have some examples. Mr. Speaker, to prove that in 

fact they are 'their brother's keeper.' They have the former member for Arm River defeated by our 

member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead) who, unfortunately, is not in the House tonight. Now that 

member was defeated in the 1978 election. He was defeated at the polls. The people in that constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Attorney General, did not give that member a mandate to do what he wanted. But, 

Mr. Speaker, and I will remind the member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. McArthur), your government, in 

keeping with its brother's keeper, felt it incumbent upon themselves to keep that former hon. member for 

Arm River. Now, Mr. Speaker, that's not the only one that they've kept. Who else are they keeping or 

have they kept? 

 

Well, we have the new member now for Kinistino (Mr. Cody). Now as I understand it, in going back 

over the history in the course of events in this wonderful province of ours, Mr. Speaker, I find the 

member for Qu'Appelle defeated that member in the 1975 election when the famous magnificent seven 

were elected. And in that interim when he was not a member of the legislature, it is to my understanding 

that he too was kept by this government. So, Mr. Member for Regina Lakeview, you're correct. That's 

example No. 2 — you are 'your brother's keeper.' I don't know whether I am your brother or not because 

if I had lost the election in my constituency I really don't think, Mr. Speaker, this government would 

have hired me. I really don't think they would have. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You don't know talent. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 573 

MR. BIRKBECK: — No, that's true, the Member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor), because they 

wouldn't recognize talent if they saw it. Now, Mr. Speaker, it would seem that in 1978 we elected a new 

member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod). We thought he would be the tallest and the biggest man in the 

legislature but unfortunately we placed second there. None the less, Mr. Speaker, he defeated the former 

member and now I understand that former member is kept by this 'brother's keeper' government. We 

shouldn't really forget that cliche, 'the brother's keeper government'. Mr. Speaker, I see that there’s one 

other example that we may as well refer to and that is the former member for Estevan. He was defeated 

by our member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) who was victorious in '75 and again in '78. Now we see that 

member is, in part, kept in terms of at least prestige. Mr. Attorney General. I realize that he's not 

receiving any sums of money but none the less . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Don't be too sure. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, yes. I'm not too sure but, Mr. Speaker, again he's kept in abeyance. They've 

got him on cold ice until they need him. They're training him and bringing him into the true socialistic 

front . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Yes, the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) 

refers me to it. It's the annual report to Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts and it's clearly there — 

chairman of the board. Well, none the less, keep him in the fold. You made may need him sometime. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Moose Jaw wants to read a book. Have you got another copy of that? 

You should send him one. He wants to read a book. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You'll find yourself; you may drop your membership . . . 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — You should ask the Minister of Revenue for a book to read because he doesn't 

charge any taxes on those books. That might be appropriate for your mind. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, it's too bad the Minister of Labour is now back in his seat. He 

missed what he should of heard but I'm sure that he'll look in the Hansards and he'll see that my remarks 

were, I think, well taken by all members in this House. While you were out, Mr. Minister, the other 

members of the Assembly, even your government's side of the House, who have been very funny over 

there lately didn't even laugh when I made the comments regarding you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me go a little further to look at what the government has been saying with regard to its 

election commitments that were kept. Well, they were kept, Mr. Speaker, but let's not, at the same time, 

let the people forget nor let these members of government forget that those promises were kept with the 

people's tax dollars. In fact, they were kept with the tax dollars of all of us on this side of the House as 

well. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Bribe them with our money. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — That is a very important point, Mr. Speaker, for all to take note of. Programs 

provided by this government, whether it's an election year or whether it is not, are kept with the 

taxpayers' dollars. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have heard the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation (Mr. Messer) refer to the increased price of natural gas being caused by that terrible Tory 

Alberta, gouging Saskatchewan, gouging the Saskatchewan consumers and the Minister of Telephones 

(Mr. Cody) agrees. Today, one of the other members (the Moose Jaw twins) referred to this again; 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 574 

he made reference to Alberta gouging the provincial government in its efforts to purchase gas from 

Alberta. They used that argument, Mr. Speaker, in their debates here in this legislature on the budget. 

They have used them many times but when we suggested that they cease to use natural gas from Alberta 

and start to uncap some of the Saskatchewan wells and use our own Saskatchewan gas, then oh no, that 

was a joke. That was just a laugh. Why we had to use this mix of Conservative and NDP gas — and I 

might add there's more gas on your side of the House than there is on this. Now, Mr. Speaker, we had to 

have this mix in order that we could keep the price uniform over the years and we'd have gas for future 

generations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Surely you can't use this argument both ways. I mean, you're either going to use it one way or the other. 

Now is Alberta gouging you or are they not? . . . It's a little quieter now they understand that, that they 

can't use both arguments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that has to be a point that has to be well taken by this Assembly. Surely, as I said, you can't 

use it both ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government refers to the agriculture department and its reinstatement of the rebate on 

the farm fuel. Why I never heard of anything quite so preposterous. We asked that this be brought in 

when they took it out initially, and they said, no. Election time came along, Mr. Speaker, and then they 

said, 'oh yes, that's a wonderful thing and we'll promise the farmers a rebate now on their farm fuels'. 

Now then I don't know when you're taking it off. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that when they rise to 

speak one of those other members might tell me when they're going to take that rebate off again. So 

what they're doing really, Mr. Speaker, is they're using things of this nature to their own political 

advantage. 

 

Comments were made that suggested that agriculture is fuelling the provincial coffers. Well, I agree, Mr. 

Speaker, agriculture does fuel provincial coffers and provide for a lot of the programs and a lot of the 

services and a lot of the high standard of living that we enjoy here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

agree, as I said, with that. But, Mr. Speaker, I don't know that the Premier agrees with that. Members 

may not recall, one day in the House, when the Premier took his place in debate (and I don't even recall 

what we were debating that day) but none the less he went on and on and on about all of the wonderful 

programs that this province has — education and the health program. Wonderful programs! And when 

he got finished, Mr. Speaker, he said we are providing all of this for the people of Saskatchewan from 

our resource industry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Right from the ground. A very earthy statement by the Premier — provided for 

by the resource industry. My question, Mr. Speaker, was, Mr. Premier, if you're providing for all of 

these wonderful social justice programs in Saskatchewan with the resource industry, would you mind 

telling me where the profits from the agricultural industry are going? Which is the number one industry 

and, in fact, provides for over half, in fact more than all of the other industries put together, to the gross 

provincial product . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . now he didn't know that . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . he didn't know that either. Obviously he didn't. But, Mr. Speaker, again the point I want to make is 

that they use the same argument two different ways, and I say you can't have that argument one way one 

day and another way the next . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, Mr. Speaker, that's possibly what it 

could be. The member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson) suggests it's socialist flip-flop. Well, it 

could be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes I'll bet. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 575 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, although again he's not present in the House tonight, make few comments 

regarding the mayor and member of this Assembly. He lays claim that government spending is good. He 

feels that we should have planned government spending, planned borrowing, and subsequently, Mr. 

Speaker, planned debt. And only about five minutes later in the text of his remarks Mr. Speaker, he says, 

and do you know, he says, and he's there, he's really there, the federal government is on the verge 

bankruptcy? Why, Mr. Speaker, why is the federal government on the verge of bankruptcy? They didn't 

plan their debt, and this government can't plan their debt, because it's going higher and higher every 

year. The fourth deficit budget in a row, and what does the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) do? Why, 

he slumps in his chair and fiddles with his wristwatch, trying to figure out what time of day it is and 

when he might balance the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, surely, there has got to be some sense eventually coming from that side of the House. 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, screening out some of the comments that are made in jest, as soon as those 

comments are screened out, there is a point made, and surely, Mr. Speaker, they haven't got such deaf 

ears. They're not that lacking in intelligence to see what I'm trying to say, and possibly we could come 

eventually to some terms of agreement and work together as an Assembly of 61 members, because quite 

frankly, we don't want to fight you every day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . it's true. The Attorney 

General (Mr. Romanow) says oh, yeah, well, he's right, and I'm right on this and he agrees. We want to 

work with them in the areas which will be of benefit to the people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . yes, Mr. Speaker, I can understand the minister responsible for SPC (Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation) (Mr. Messer) having some fears that possibly we might be sitting on that side. None 

the less, we'll deal with the issues when the time comes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few comments with regard to agriculture. I know the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) is somewhat relieved that he doesn't have me on his tail anymore but, and I 

see he isn't in the House again tonight, none the less, he has been . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has suggested that there will be more dollars invested in irrigation. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that it's high time that this Minister of Agriculture started to think about 

ways and means in which this province could bring itself into a position where it would be 

self-sufficient at least in vegetables. Maybe we could use some from that side of the House, that would 

help the problem that we have. But none the less, he's going in the right direction when he talks about 

irrigation to provide for vegetable production in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now surely, if a small island like Prince Edward Island can be number one potato producing province, a 

big province like Saskatchewan . . . we've got enough waste land, we've got enough marginal lands that 

we could put into this type of production with irrigation. I concur 100 per cent with the Minister of 

Agriculture so I don't really appreciate the interruptions from the Minister of Finance, but I'm agreeing 

with their minister, Mr. Speaker, the proposals that they are putting to this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, the 

problem there is that he comes right around and he takes all of the good away from a good program by 

saying, 'and then we are going to establish and put into place a marketing board to deal with all this 

vegetable production'. So what are we going to end up with? We're going to end up with a bunch of big 

multinational vegetable producing corporations. We're not going to end up with a lot of smaller 

producers that can get into it and make a few dollars. So I condemn the Minister of Agriculture on that 

point. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 576 

He talks about 12 per cent of purchased land bank land. Well I think that surely verifies my comments. 

When he announced the new policy, I said no, $1,000 a year is no incentive whatsoever for people 

leasing land bank land to buy it. And it isn't. Members on that side of the House realize that; surely we 

on this side of the House realize that. This government's intention is not to sell land bank land. They 

have now tripled the amount of money which will be spent on land bank land from $100 million to $300 

million. So their intention is not to sell but to buy and buy more and more and more. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I really don't need to go into any depth regarding land bank. All members know what my feelings are. 

But let me suggest to you that in speaking to the first purchaser of land bank land and providing him 

with our option as opposed to yours and asking him what program he would have opted for given an 

option, he said well, definitely yours. Now again, Mr. Speaker, I ask these members of government, who 

again laugh at that, to be in touch with Mr. McKnight of Duval. Give him our proposals — if you 

haven't got a copy of what our proposals were regarding land bank, then if you will come to our 

agricultural critic, the member for Rosthern, I am sure he would be more than happy to provide you with 

a copy. You would find, Mr. Speaker, and members of this House, that that new purchaser of land bank 

land, the first one to purchase, would have opted for our program over this government policy. Now that 

is a fact. They can call him and verify that if they like, as I did. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — How many other packages have you sold yet, John? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — He wasn't happy about losing $22,000 to the provincial government — not at all. 

He would have been glad to pay capital gains tax on $11,000, even realizing that this government didn't 

pay any capital gains tax because the federal government does not make a practice of charging 

provincial government capital gains tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former Minister of Agriculture, says, how did he lose it? Well, you know how he lost 

it. Had he opted for our policy at the time of purchase, he would have had title to that land and he would 

have been able, Mr. Speaker, to make that $22,000 profit had he so chosen. But because he did not have 

the title to the land under the NDP government's proposals and program under land bank, he did not 

have that option. They were the ones who made the $22,000; they were the ones who profited on the 

future lands for the Saskatchewan people. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — I feel the urge to make a speech. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — All right, Mr. Minister, I would welcome you to make a speech. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture said that he drove around the province talking to poor 

farmers. Well I wish he had driven another 100 miles because if he had, he would have lost the 70 vote 

margin that he won by. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't run into a lot of poor farmers as such. I refuse to go 

much farther on that point. It might be difficult to refrain from saying things I shouldn't. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that it is not incumbent upon members in this House 

to use four-letter words, so for that reason I will use a six-letter word, and it is a six-letter word which 

offends this government. That is, 'profit'. Now, that is the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 577 

problem with this government in every program they have. They do not want to see individuals in 

Saskatchewan make a profit. This NDP government is the one that wants to make a profit. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture talks about the funding in the hog industry and how he is supporting the hog 

industry. I tell the Minister of Agriculture that Quebec is the number one producer of hogs, and not only 

are they the number one producer of hogs, they are producing those hogs on Saskatchewan feed grain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture was unsuccessful in putting forth a grain policy which would 

allow western Canadian cattle producers and livestock producers of all descriptions to use western 

Canadian grown grain, less the freight charges to Thunder Bay. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that's a shame. It's a shame. Prince Edward Island leads the way in 

vegetables; Quebec leads the way in hog production; we lead the way in national and provincial debt. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Right on. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — That's what we lead the way in. If we're not out front now, Mr. Speaker, we soon 

will be at the present rate they're going. Now, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House suggested more 

funds for research, and, Mr. Speaker, thank goodness there are more funds now provided for research. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Per capita? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, in light of a consumer's concern that our produce in 

Saskatchewan is becoming contaminated with herbicides and pesticides and the like, that part of this 

research — and I suggest, this Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and if I may interrupt my 

hon. seat mate at the moment, since I would really like to make a very important point, that I would like 

very much for the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) for this government to utilize part of that 

research funding to assist in a lesser use of herbicides and pesticides in particular because of the 

increasing costs for those chemicals, and as well because of an increasing concern, Mr. Speaker, by 

consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture referred to the 15 per cent reduction in the Department of 

Agriculture in Manitoba. Now, Mr. Speaker, again it's unfortunate that the minister isn't here but the 

other members will convey the message . . . well if you can, take notes . . . none the less, Mr. Speaker, 

that 15 per cent was comprised in particular in two areas: number one, they were in the business of 

manufacturing ladders, would you believe, in the Department of Agriculture. They had a ladder 

manufacturing plant. The Progressive Conservative government that took office did not really feel that 

they should be building ladders in the Department of Agriculture. Possibly it was to climb themselves 

out of the mess they'd created — the Schreyer government. Mr. Speaker, the other thing, and the other 

part of that 15 per cent was that the Department of Agriculture was involved in, would you believe, the 

housing industry. They were building houses. So they simply transferred those two to the proper 

departments. Now if we had Sask Housing in the Department of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and removed 

it from the Department of Agriculture to a new department, then surely it would show a decrease to that 

department. Now there's two things right there. It surely was in nonessential and non-productive areas 

that constituted that 15 per cent. So, Mr. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 578 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture did not make a valid point, not at all. 

 

Furthermore I was very surprised, very surprised, Mr. Speaker, to hear some of the comments from the 

Minister of Agriculture. He says that he's against the Canadian Wheat Board — the Minister of 

Agriculture. We asked him if he took a case to the Canadian Wheat Board, if he opposed purchasing 

hopper cars. No, he said, I didn't. He didn't do that. In particular, Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool supported the stand that I had taken and issued a news release condemning the Canadian 

Wheat Board for purchasing hopper cars — I was supported in that by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

and the Minister of Agriculture does not and I surely don't understand that, I really don't understand that. 

 

Furthermore, he goes on to say — and for a member who is just hanging on by the seat of his pants, Mr. 

Speaker, for a man to take a position opposing the Rt. Hon. John Diefenbaker, the former Prime 

Minister, is really quite unbelievable. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the last reference I would want to make regarding the Minister of Agriculture is the 

pasture rates that we have, the community pasture rates. It was said that these rates would more or less 

be consistent with the price of cattle. Now, we have noted, Mr. Speaker, that the pasture rates have 

increased at a time when cattle prices were low, at one of their lowest points. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to put the question to this government, and again, maybe one of their 

hon. members could stand and answer, but I would predict that pasture rates, in keeping with their 

suggested policy, are going to increase and increase sharply, 

 

Further, if I might just take a look at some of the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. Messer) wants me to tell him a lot of things and I have a lot to tell him 

but I haven't got time tonight, Mr. Speaker. If he wants me to introduce an amendment or something so 

that I can go on again? Well, if you keep listening I will finally get you clued in. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, in his speech, says that Saskatchewan farmers have just come through a 

period of depressed beef prices. Wow, isn't that wonderful news! Was there anyone here who didn't 

know that? Was there anyone in Saskatchewan who didn't know that? That statement is something like 

the Minister of Agriculture's news releases from his department. It is something like some of the news 

releases that come out of the Minister of Highway's (Mr. Kramer) Department . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . That's right, don't wake him up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those comments that are related to department news releases are so simplistic as to suggest 

that the roads are improving because the snow is melting away. Surely, Mr. Speaker. Then he goes 

further to say — to assist farmers to maintain and expand their beefing herds, FarmStart approved 3,086 

beef loans, for a total of approximately $50 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will recall and I am sure members on this side of the House recall when we pleaded 

with this government to stay out of the beef industry in terms of its superficial support that they are the 

ones who created a surplus of cows. They didn't understand that that cow, in three years, would likely in 

all probability, have a calf. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what happened and we ran ourselves into a 

surplus to calves and then, Mr. Speaker, the government had to come on looking like they again 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 579 

were the supporters of the small farmer and they were going to save the farmer and the poor little calves. 

So they had these loans that they made. Now, Mr. Speaker, what happened a year later? The loans were 

supposed to be repaid, but the prices hadn't increased, not at all, and the calf still wasn't worth anymore 

than $75 even after a year's time. Things were bad then. But, Mr. Speaker, there is a time when 

government involvement and government spending, grants to certain sectors can be very beneficial. Mr. 

Speaker, when the government tinkers in the market place and artificially brings people into production 

who really are not meant to be in production, who not necessarily wanted to be in production . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . but said well, it's there and it's free and it's provided. Why shouldn't we go 

into it? If we don't get the money, somebody else is going to get it. Mr. Speaker, the former Minister of 

Agriculture understands what I am saying. He knows that if you stay out of the market place, quit 

tinkering around with it, there will be some stability . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and you ask the 

Saskatchewan cattle producers today if they want government assistance. They don't . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, I'll come up in your area. Hopefully, during the next election I'll come up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won't refer to any more of the land bank. I think that the position is quite understood 

there. These are the Minister of Agriculture's notes. I don't happen to have any notes . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . None the less, those are some of the comments of the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there seems to be most definitely a problem with this government. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You're not kidding. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the problem and the confusion that they have in 

their own minds is being transferred to the residents of Saskatchewan. Now I really should not criticize 

them for that because that's exactly what they want to do. They want the people of Saskatchewan to 

think like they do, just like the members on that side of the House all think alike. They all follow one 

philosophy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and that philosophy, Mr. Speaker, is perpetrated by none 

other than the Premier of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Premier is at the head of all 

of this and he is the minister most accountable the first minister in this government. Now how is this 

happening Mr. Speaker? Very simply. There seems to be a confusion, Mr. Speaker, between socialism 

and social justice programs. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Jealousyism, not socialism. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, whichever. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Jealousyism. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, let me attempt now to describe to hon. members of this Assembly 

the difference between socialism and social justice programs. Possibly, Mr. Speaker, this message could 

be taken to the rest of the people of this province, and then they, too, could understand the difference. 

Then they would understand that not only a socialist government can provide for good health, good 

education, social programs in the Department of Social Services — not only a socialist government can 

do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me say, since I am a member of government, and since government solves and 

causes issues and problems in society, let me talk briefly on the subject. Let me discuss vital issues of 

the day such as individualism, the competitive enterprise 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 580 

system and socialism. In Saskatchewan we hear a great deal about socialism versus the free enterprise 

system. We hear a great deal about social welfare programs. This leads us to a couple of good questions. 

The questions I've already put. What is socialism? What is social welfare? 

 

There is a big difference. A difference which society seems unable to understand. To begin with, we in 

the Progressive Conservative Party see social welfare as social justice programs. The lack of 

understanding between socialism and social justice programs causes human suffering and destroys 

individual initiative in our nation and in our province. Social justice programs are the investment by any 

government of some portion of the nation's income in programs of social value such as education, 

health, pensions, unemployment insurance, social assistance and so on. Socialism is the ownership and 

operation by the state of the assets and means of production of the nation. 

 

The recent potash legislation was a typical socialist program. The alternative to this is our competitive 

enterprise system whereby the means of production are mainly operated by individuals or groups of 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the competitive enterprise system and socialism have nothing to do with social justice 

programs. But in this province our socialist government has convinced large numbers of people that only 

its system will provide social justice programs. That, simply, Mr. Speaker, is not true. 

 

The main concern of society, and society through government, should be to maximize the nation's 

income so that when money is desired for social justice programs it will be available. Will socialism or 

the competitive enterprise system best achieve this goal? 

 

The basic reason for economic failure of socialism is that it tends to discourage freedom of action and 

individual initiative. It is most unfortunate that many of our citizens equate socialism with social justice 

programs. Because of this they tend to support socialist parties emotionally and politically. We do not 

have to have a socialist government to have good social justice programs. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Right on. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Now, Mr. Speaker, individual freedom is the right to be wrong, not the right to 

do wrong. Today in our society we often hear these two phrases — individual freedom and individual 

initiative. I fear many of us seem to be apologetic in these areas. What is wrong with individual 

initiative? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Nothing. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — A desire to better oneself . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Nothing wrong with that. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Should there be anything wrong with seeking satisfaction through personal 

achievement? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, in reply to that comment from the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) I say yes, Mr. Speaker, the member for Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. Messer) does 

know that because he has been very successful in his personal endeavours, in particular economic 

endeavours, and any endeavours I'm sure that that member would attempt would be successful, because, 

Mr. Speaker, that 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 581 

member is an individual. For me, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, it hurts, it simply hurts to see a 

member like that sitting on that side of the House . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I don't blame him 

for leaving, I don't blame him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you this. Where would this country be, Mr. Speaker, where would it be if it were not 

for the members like the member that just left this chamber. Where would it be, Mr. Speaker, if our 

pioneers had lacked individual initiative? Where would we be if they had not had freedom of choice? 

Mr. Speaker, socialism says we will nationalize so that the people own it. That is an illusion. We all own 

the resources of a nation. But under the competitive enterprise system we, as individuals, develop those 

resources. Mr. Speaker, when socialists suggest that the people will own property under their system . . . 

(Mr. Speaker, the member responsible for the environment would do well to listen, he really would) . . . 

when the socialists suggest that the people will own property under their system, we should ask, one, 

how he sells this property. If I can't sell, Mr. Speaker, what I supposedly own, then I don't feel that in 

fact I own it. Mr. Speaker, why is today's society so apathetic? I feel because our society is being 

stripped of its individual initiative and responsibility. Government is becoming more powerful over each 

of us in our daily lives. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — People are simply surrendering themselves to government and Mr. Minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office I would tell you and maybe do the same 

to you, Mr. Speaker, as I refer to this member responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance that 

we will do the same to you as your Minister of Labour did to one of our members. That if I'm successful, 

Mr. Speaker, in pulling a file on that minister I'll show that he's irresponsible and I'm working on it. You 

can be sure I'm working on it. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that who I've been talking to has taken just the 

approach that I have just stated — people in this province are just being apathetic; they are just 

surrendering, surrendering themselves to this government because they're afraid to do anything else. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, people are simply going to take, have to take an opposite approach to the one they 

have now. Democracy itself is at stake since it rests upon a critical and questioning attitude of its 

citizens. Who's asking questions? Who's being critical? Mr. Speaker, as government grows and is run by 

only a few (like right now in Saskatchewan by a dozen or so even though there's 43 on that side of the 

House.) I can be sure only a few are making the major decisions. Our citizens feel they no longer have a 

say in the running of their daily affairs and to a large extent, they don't have a say. For this reason, I 

believe, people are losing faith in their governments. They feel that big bureaucratic governments have 

no room for the individual or the respect for the common man or his needs. Mr. Speaker, let us look at 

what our federal government did. They said they would fight wage and price controls when the hon. 

member Robert Stanfield suggested he would introduce wage and price controls for 18 months. Not long 

— only a few months after being elected — Pierre Elliot Trudeau introduced wage and price controls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments of the day are campaigning on one philosophy, saying one thing during an 

election campaign and turning around and doing yet another. Mr. Speaker, let me refer to the 1975 

election of this provincial government. They made no mention that they were going to nationalize 

industry, no mention whatsoever. And then bang they hit us with bills No. 1 and No. 2, the potash 

expropriation and subsequently, the Government of Saskatchewan owned the potash industry. No 

mention, Mr. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 582 

Speaker, of this during the election campaign — deceptive! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that Canadians are looking for leadership in their governments. It is time for 

governments to stop interfering in our day-to-day lives. Mr. Speaker, we as responsible citizens of this 

province and of this country must take a position against big, bureaucratic governments that have 

overstepped their mandate — being elected to government does not mean to say that they can do what 

they like. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have pointed out this evening that our citizens do have many misunderstandings 

regarding our economic system and competitive enterprise system. It is misunderstood to the point 

where, as I have said before this evening, profit (a six letter word) is a dirty word. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest that we launch a program to explain the benefits which society receives through profit 

motivation. Whether it be as a group or as individuals, we can do much to change the attitudes 

throughout society. I challenge the people of Saskatchewan to get involved in the political process, to 

stand for what they feel is right and oppose what they feel is wrong. Again, as I've said before, there are 

members on that side of the House that I feel want to stand up and oppose what they feel is wrong. I feel 

that there are members there who do want to stand and support what they feel is right. I'm asking them, 

Mr. Speaker, to be individuals, gain our respect and stand up. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Me! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, if we can encourage citizens across our great country to take these 

kinds of stands then democracy will succeed and individuals, as you and I, can control our governments 

and be part of them. Mr. Speaker, the individual then will have an identity. Mr. Speaker, they then will 

have initiative and responsibility. Mr. Speaker, the governments then will be our servants and not our 

masters. Mr. Speaker, let us reverse the trend to big governments. Let us put more authority and control 

in the hands of local governments. Let us give ourselves a direct voice in our daily lives. Mr. Speaker, 

democracy, like love, can survive any attack but not neglect and indifference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest (and not only to the members of this Assembly but to the people of 

Saskatchewan) that if I am the only one that has to carry that message to the people of Saskatchewan, 

then I will carry that message. But that is their choice . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Just getting warmed up. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, if there is any member of this Assembly who does not agree with 

what I have just said regarding the lack of control by the people of Saskatchewan on the governments of 

Canada and on the government of Saskatchewan, and for that matter, yes too, the government of Ontario 

— that Tory province. People have lost control. They have! And let me, Mr. Speaker, with that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are members in the back who don't listen and they don't understand when you do tell 

them . . . and I'm going to tell you I don't have time to repeat anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at some of the U.S. figures since our main concern regarding the budget 

is that it is a deficit budget. Now, the Attorney General says, 'so what,' to a deficit budget in 

Saskatchewan. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 583 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Attorney General and he can reply at any given point. In fact I would be good 

enough, kind enough, Mr. Speaker, to put the question in a general way to all the members in the House. 

Are you, as individuals, in debt? Are you in debt over and above what equity you have? Are you worse 

off now than you were five years ago? Well, I hear yes, no, yes, no, they don't know which it is. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, the point of the matter is this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I will ask my seat mate, 

Mr. Speaker, the very point that I am trying to make and is not very difficult to make, is that each of us 

as residents of Saskatchewan must balance our budgets, our own personal budgets. We can't just be 

broke half of the time otherwise we would all just quit working. Why do people work? They work to 

earn money to pay for costs of living, for the things that they want, And that isn't much different, Mr. 

Speaker, than government. It is providing, I suppose, for the demands of the masses, the public. But 

when the individuals have to balance their personal books this government says that we don't have to 

balance ours — four deficit budgets! The minister responsible for finance can't explain that, he can't 

explain that to anyone. It's all right for him to balance the government's books in a deficit, but all of you, 

as individuals, have got to balance your books. Now surely that has got to make some kind of sense, 

even to those members across the way, and I know the Premier understands what I'm saying. If he could 

balance these books, he would. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if this government would like to know where we're going with regards to deficit 

financing in Saskatchewan, deficit financing in the nation, federal government. Let us look at some of 

the figures. Well, let us look at some of the figures in the United States. In 1900, through to about 1916, 

the U.S. national debt was only about a billion dollars. Well, then it started to climb, and it just went up 

progressively and I'm moving now from the year 1916 on through to 1978-79. It just went up to 3, 12, 

25, and going on up it hit $137 billion in 1943. It hit $303 billion in 1962. Now, Mr. Speaker, the U.S. 

National Debt is $866 billion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I use this as an example to show this government and the federal 

government where deficit financing is taking you. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Attorney General, 

you would agree that this is a horrendous situation in the United States. Would you believe that the taxes 

collected from the average U.S. taxpayer will only pay the interest on that $866 billion for three 

seconds? Now if there were ever a reason for western Canada to not annex to the United States, that's 

got to be it. Mr. Speaker, that could be the underlying reason why the population of Saskatchewan has 

not risen any more than 100,000 since 1926 — 100,000 when in the rest of the country it has more than 

doubled. That's got to be one of the reasons because people don't want to live in Saskatchewan and 

inherit this legacy of debt that this government is going to leave them, a legacy of debt which is created 

by irresponsible ministers, Mr. Speaker. Now, surely, Mr. Speaker, if figures like that don't put these 

minds to work and make them think a little, then I don't know what's going to make them think. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now if I might move into the main context of my remarks 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of very important points that I have yet to make 

and I want to just very simply go down them point by point. As I have said I feel that it's irresponsible of 

this government, irresponsible of any government, to deficit finance. I believe it's due in part to 

irresponsible ministers or at least surely 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 584 

they're irresponsible in the fact that they're taking advice from people who are irresponsible themselves. 

 

Let's look at the first point. It is that the people of Saskatchewan are being bribed — yes, bribed, with 

their own tax dollars. That's the first thing. A member says careful. There's no need to be careful. It's a 

fact of life that the people of this province are being bribed, in particular at election time, and in this 

Assembly, as they build to the next election by using taxpayer, dollars to buy votes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was never a time in the history of this province when there was a greater demand or a 

greater dollar spent on grants. Now, Mr. Speaker, that, surely, is a comment that will have to be heeded 

by this government. We are not going to let them bribe the taxpayers of this province any longer with 

the people's own money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fiscal policies that have to apply, as I've said, to individuals, must in fact be applied to 

governments. I don't single out the NDP on that comment. I suggest governments of any political stripe. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — The NDP. Mainly the NDP. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, it may be very difficult for this government to understand, but I 

suggest to this Assembly that this government is breeding irresponsibility and the federal Liberal 

government as well is breeding irresponsibility. Their question is how are we doing that? How are we 

doing that? Wholesale castration, the member for Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. Messer) suggests. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there's no need, Mr. Speaker, to castrate anyone on that side of the House, as the Premier has 

already done his research and proven that Progressive Conservatives on this side of the House are very 

productive in more ways than one, and will continue to be so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one example of how you breed irresponsibility. Come a yearend when a particular 

community must make a decision as to whether or not to make use of a grant that's available, they tend 

to opt for that grant because, well, 'if we don't get it somebody else is going to get it' or at least, 'we'll 

miss out on it, we better grab it, we better think of something to build.' Furthermore, it creates animosity 

between communities. It has a community that gets a grant in one area and the next one didn't. So they're 

fighting with each other. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General has asked me if I would do away with grants. I have enough 

courage, Mr. Attorney General, to stand in this Assembly and to suggest that we are going to have to 

take a very serious look at the grant structure in this province. We are going to have to take a very 

serious look! You, Mr. Attorney General, and your government behind you. You have got community 

recreational organizations in debt, like you're in debt, and they're going to have a heck of a time getting 

out of it. Now they really are! 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know of communities that are just waiting for the next grant to be announced so they 

can get it, so that they can complete their rinks. Drive around. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Kaeding) may be on his journey as he meanders through the province, might fall in a deep hole or before 

he does, he might take a look and see that there are a lot of unfinished recreational projects in this 

province. They're unfinished because this government took them into a debt. I say that's how you bred 

irresponsibility. Yes, we are going to have to take a serious look. Mr. Minister of Labour, you listen. I 

listen when you are on your feet and if anybody needed their mouth washed 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 585 

out, you needed it. Now, and you needed to be here when I made my comments. You think I'm bothered 

by you. I could be bothered by someone 10 times you. Mr. Speaker, I haven't the time for the Minister of 

Labour. I will tell this government again that if there was a need to take a serious look at the grant 

structure; yes, there is. There's a need in this respect. It's one thing to provide so many communities with 

a white elephant. It's yet another to operate those facilities, with the Minister of Sask Power increasing 

the Sask Power rates because terrible Tory Alberta is gouging and Sask Tel's increasing the Sask Tel 

rates, these recreational facilities are having a very difficult time to operate. If any of you took the time 

to ask, you would find that to be true. Now, Mr. Speaker, that's my reply to the Attorney General. Yes, I, 

as an individual am talking to our communities. I am talking to them about the grant structure. I am not 

happy when I go into a business place and the businessmen say, look Larry what we have to have is less 

government spending. We have to have fewer civil servants. And I say, yes, we agree with that and as I 

turn around they say, 'But just before you go, do you think you could get us some money for our rink?' I 

say, look you hypocrites, either you believe it one way or believe it the other. I tell our supporters and, 

Mr. Speaker, I've been successful in that or I wouldn't be back here for a second term. So, I am prepared, 

Mr. Speaker, as members on this side of the House are, to take an issue and to provide a policy and to 

stand behind it and I don't take anything from you as a government for doing that because you are 

successful at it. 

 

Mr. Minister of Labour, have another drink of water and listen to another compliment directed at you. 

You're very successful at handling the labour relations situations in this province. You're very successful 

at that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, all I'm suggesting is that we on this side of the House are learning 

from those members across the way and we're not going to let you away with it. Come the next 

provincial election in Saskatchewan, the Progressive Conservative Party will be government. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, let me move on. It's very much concluded that we have irresponsibility in this legislature on 

that government side of the House. No question. Mr. Speaker, we've had the Premier apologize twice 

within a week to this side of the House. Obviously there's something wrong over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are creating a debt in prosperous times. Now doesn't it make mathematical sense or 

any kind of sense to anyone, that if you can't come out with a balanced budget during buoyant 

economical times, as the premier has stated so many times, this wonderful, buoyant economic times we 

enjoy, if we can't balance the budget then how are we going to balance the budget when we don't have 

the grace of God on our side and good crops? Mr. Speaker, surely we are going to be in big trouble. Mr. 

Speaker, as I have suggested, what this government will leave for the future generations and at a sad 

time, the Year of the Child, is nothing more than a legacy of debt. A debt, which unfortunately has to be 

shared by the this side of the House because we as well are residents of this province and you on that 

side of the House have to commend us for staying here and putting up a fight. It would have been much 

easier just to have moved to Tory Alberta, or anywhere. Obviously, a lot of people have. Yes, and the 

Premier suggests Tory Manitoba — we might have to move there too. It'll be a sad state when we see 

that province move ahead of this province because we have a lot more to offer than either Tory 

Manitoba or Tory Alberta — but are we? No. So, Mr. Premier, you'll have to back your remarks up in 

substantiating what this province represents in respect to those two Tory provinces on the left and right. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 586 

Mr. Speaker, let me give you another example of the concerns we must all share regarding deficit 

financing. Let us look at the cities of New York and Cleveland. The young people are moving away 

from Cleveland. The tax base is moving from Cleveland. Cleveland is going to become nothing more 

than a senior citizen's home. Now, you know the language that comes from that side of the House is just 

not too acceptable but none the less, Mr. Speaker, that is the type of situation that we're looking at here 

in Saskatchewan. When in the last budget the Minister of Finance said there would be so many people 

removed from the tax rolls, I wasn't happy with that. I forget what the figures were — there was a per 

cent of tax reduction but none the less what that meant was that I, the taxpayer, would have to pay more. 

Only those that were relieved from the tax rolls had the benefits. You can only do that so much. Who's 

going to be left here in Saskatchewan to pay the taxes that eventually pays the debts and bills on an on 

going basis? Who's going to do that? The Minister of Finance has to have some concerns in that regard. 

Surely he must. Doesn't it make any sense to anyone that if we don't have anyone here to pay taxes as is 

becoming the case in Cleveland and New York then we're going to be economically bankrupt? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest this government has no right, moral or otherwise, no right whatsoever to take not 

just the future generations but as our member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) the critic for finance 

suggested, those that are even unborn. They as well will be born with a debt attached to them. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP government, in my opinion, and in the opinion of the members of this side of the 

House, has overstepped its authority. On October 18 you were not given a mandate. You were not given 

a mandate to take this province and do what you jolly well like to do with it. That is not your mandate. 

Your mandate was to govern and to govern responsibly, and whenever you don't, Mr. Speaker, that's the 

time when the people of Saskatchewan should have an opportunity to judge and not just at election time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals and provincial NDP are very similar in their fiscal policies, very 

similar. They both believe in deficit financing. They both believe in using the people's money to bribe 

votes. They both believe in those philosophies. There is no difference surely, Mr. Speaker, between 

NDP and Liberal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance Minister (Mr. Smishek) has lost control. The provincial Finance Minister 

unquestionably has lost any control of his Department of Finance. I don't know where he gets his advice. 

Who tells him to run a deficit budget? Mr. Speaker, no question, he has lost control. This government 

has managed now using traditional fiscal policies that don't work rather than managing with a bit of 

imagination linked with common sense. Mr. Speaker, I hold the Premier of this province and the 

Minister of Finance responsible today and for future generations. For those of you who smile and think 

all is well, and that the future is just fine and dandy, you just remember, I hold all of you, but in 

particular the Premier and the Minister of Finance, accountable. If I look back on this province 10 or 15 

years from now and see it in a mess, I'll know why, because you didn't act. You didn't act upon the good 

advice of opposition, good opposition and strong opposition in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very simply, government spending is exceeding economic growth. That has got to be the 

case. They have flushed economic reality down the drain as they sit on their thrones of ideological 

socialistic philosophies and their fantasies. Government spending, Mr. Speaker, again, that's another big 

joke. They have no understanding of the social and economic problems of this province today. They 

have no understanding of the reality of their actions. Mr. Speaker, taking 1973 and 1978, total 

Saskatchewan debt increased at a compound annual growth rate of 18.3 per cent. Total debt has risen 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 587 

from $22.1 billion with $419 million in new borrowing but now there's over $2.6 billion. What is a 

billion? These are astronomical figures. Crown corporations comprise 94 per cent of that provincial debt 

— those wonderful Crown corporations. Saskatchewan Power absorbs $22.3 million, Sask Tel, $17.9 

million in terms of net profits. That's what their net profits are. Here's Sask Power and SaskTel with 

immense profits even in light of that gouging by Tory Alberta in regards to gas prices. They show these 

kinds of profits and yet together comprise 94 per cent of that debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in reply to the Attorney General I'm not against any of the utility corporations but as 

has been stated many times before and I stated the last time you asked me that question, we suggest that 

the profits surely should be marginal. Surely there should be not those kinds of profits in utility 

corporations. They were not meant to be profit-making corporations. Now a member of the government 

suggests who says that's right? I guess if one of you boys over there says so well, they'll be 

profit-making utility corporations. Mr. Speaker, in five years the Saskatchewan government borrowed 

close to $1 billion — as I have said 44 per cent for Sask Power, 22.6 per cent for Sask Tel. This NDP 

government seems to be able to do these things and get away with them. It is very convincing to that 

ordinary man in the street. He doesn't seem to have a grasp of what in fact this government is doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again the member suggests, am I running the public down? I am suggesting and I don't 

mind, you can quote at any time, that the public does not have access to information that would make 

them knowledgeable to make decisions. We, on this side of the House are having time enough getting 

information from your departments. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say it again, where does the money 

come from to pay interest on debt to Sask Power and SaskTel? Where does it go? Where does it come 

from? It's a question we have to ask ourselves — provincial debt not through the legislature but through 

Crown corporations. It's not something that we on this side of the House could effectively deal with. It's 

not something that we on this side of the House could effectively oppose — not effectively but in terms 

of stopping it in anyway. So, Mr. Speaker, we are at a disadvantage. The people of Saskatchewan are at 

a disadvantage because of the controls and the power that this government has — because of the lack of 

information that they will provide to the people of Saskatchewan. I can be questioned by the government 

in this House, but at the same time I can go down the streets of Regina tonight and talk to people and ask 

them a question, just ask them one. How much do you pay for your health care? I don't pay anything . . . 

(inaudible interjection). . . How much in debt is Sask. Power? They won't know. They won't even know 

it is in debt, but they'll be saying they don't know why the rates are increasing. They don't understand 

those problems, Mr. Speaker. What I am suggesting here in the Assembly tonight is that this 

government, under the leadership of Premier Allan Blakeney, has been very successful in kidding the 

man on the street, very successful. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, we know there is a lot to be learned. Mr. Speaker, we know there 

must be more to learn than even we can imagine on this side of the House, when we ask for full 

disclosure on that side of the House, and we don't really get an answer. They don't want to give us full 

disclosure. I mean it wouldn't sound good if we found out that the members on that side of the House 

were very rich, very well-to-do, very capitalistic in the things which they involve themselves in. That 

wouldn't be good for their image; that would destroy them. Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, there are 

a lot of hypocrites sitting on that side of the House — preach one thing and practice another. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 588 

It amused me and I want to just use an example. The minister responsible for industry and commerce 

stood in this Assembly, where the member for Morse (Mr. Gross) is and he said, Mr. Speaker, that those 

terrible Tories are capitalists. Well, I looked at him and I thought my goodness sakes have I missed 

something here, because his big Cadillac was parked out there beside my Dodge Royal Monaco. He 

calls me a capitalist! If he's a socialist, I guess I'm in the wrong ball park. That's the kind of hypocrisy, 

Mr. Speaker, that I find in members opposite. Now, if a few of them would like to come clean, as we're 

asking . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you know. I wouldn't mind. I really wouldn't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's one area that I want to touch on and that is our suggestion regarding the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, the policy that we would have implemented so the people in fact could 

have been true owners of the industry, so they in fact could have sold what they supposedly own, as I 

have talked previously about. As has already been said, British Columbia has adopted that proposal. The 

United States is adopting that proposal. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this government would do well to 

adopt that proposal the next time they take a notion to nationalize something. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me touch very briefly on the heritage fund — $722 million expected to be in the 

heritage fund by the year end of 1979. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the profits that they claim to make on 

that could be made very easily, to the tune of $80 million in any bank or credit union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the so-called loans to the Potash Corporation and Saskatchewan Mining Development to 

the tune of $400 million as an example, to potash, is where the supposed heritage that they are going to 

leave our future generations, is going. The heritage fund which is supposed to be a fund that we could 

leave to future generations is being used today. Mr. Speaker, by this government, with their power, 

through those corporations, to pay for day to day expenditures and operations of this government, and I 

say, shame on this government for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we realize the worth of a heritage fund that could be operated properly — not one used for 

transferring funds back and forth and juggling in your corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very simply, let me move to a very quick point regarding sales tax. You made a big noise 

when you were going to reduce the sales tax. You slipped it back on very quietly. The people of 

Saskatchewan should realize that. The sales tax is now back up to 5 per cent from 3 per cent. Let me 

capsulize that now, Mr. Speaker, if I may. As I have said, this NDP is irresponsible. The budget should 

have a surplus in good years to be put away for stimulative purposes when times deteriorate. There is no 

excuse for deficits in good years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let's look at the provincial debt again. In the five-year period from 1973 to the end of 1978, the total 

debt of Saskatchewan increased by a compound annual growth rate of 18.3 per cent. This is a higher rate 

than in the worst years of inflation. This is a higher rate than the revenue intake of this province. This is 

a higher rate than the expenditure rate of the province. Look at the provincial debt again. At the end of 

1970, the total debt of the province was $2.1 billion. The $419 million in new borrowing debt will bring 

it to over $2.6 billion by 1980. This $2.6 billion means a debt of over $2,600 for every man, woman and 

child in the province. It was suggested before that for a family of four, the wage earner is going to be 

paying interest on $10,400, Mr. Speaker. Approximately, as I have said, 94 per cent of all borrowing 

incurred is to finance Crown enterprises or Crown corporations. Such enterprises should be charged with 

all debt services 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 589 

incurred by the province for those funds. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I see the new minister responsible for the environment. I suppose his problem is that 

he may have lost a button or two. If he doesn't relax he may lose another one. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, if you don't bring order to the House, I will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the exception is SEDCO, which assumes 87 per cent debt servicing cost for funds 

borrowed on its behalf. That's the only exception, that two principal Crown corporations, Sask Tel and 

Sask Power earn net income as of March 31, '77 of 17.9 million and 22.3, respectively, after payment of 

all expenses and debt service charges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, between April 1, '72 and March 31, '77, the province borrowed 920,898,000, of which 44 

per cent was for Sask Power and 22.6 for SaskTel. Same period only 206,850,000 worth of debt was 

redeemed. In the same period the province issued 627 million in public debentures, 275 million in 

debentures to Canada Pension Plan and 20 million in promissory notes and debentures to federal 

government; all these moneys was borrowed for Crown agencies except 20 million which was reloaned 

to Saskatchewan municipalities. Mr. Speaker, period ended 31, 77 to December 31, '77 Saskatchewan 

borrowed 175 million by way of public debentures and issued almost 59 million in debentures to the 

Canada Pension Plan and in the same period retired only 25 million of the total debt. Only 25 million of 

the total debt they retired. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the bulk of the debt is on Crown corporations everybody in the province pays 

interest on debt every time they pay a power bill, telephone bill or put a gallon of gas in their car or pay 

sales tax or income tax. Mr. Speaker, last year the Saskatchewan Power Corporation had a total interest 

debt of over $80 million individuals pay this through their power bills. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Point number three. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — The Minister of Labour doesn't think it's a concern. He doesn't think it's a 

concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's go through the steps in the borrowing. Ninety-five per cent of all money borrowed is 

from Crown corporations. Step one: Crown Corporations decide to borrow the money. Step two: Crown 

Investments Corporation . . . O.K. Department of Finance is step number three. Treasury Board: step 

number four. Step number five: it goes into the budget speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the example is no legislative involvement, no original decision to borrow, no Crown 

corporation having to justify the need for borrowing to the legislature. They do not have to account to 

this legislature, Mr. Speaker. Crown Corporations Committee only allows scrutiny by an MLA one year 

and sometimes almost two years after money is borrowed. Mr. Speaker, there's no reason why monopoly 

Crown corporations such as Saskatchewan Power should not have to justify borrowing to the House 

before borrowing is actually made. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 590 

Mr. Speaker, surely there is a lesson to be learned. Mr. Speaker, if I have to take my place and repeat 

these very important issues that we have on behalf of Saskatchewan residents to this government, to see 

that these issues are made clear and that the people of Saskatchewan understand them — if I have to do 

that every night for an hour or two — then that's what I'm dedicated to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let's look at a few of the federal blunders. In 1973, the five western provinces tripled, 

and in one case quadrupled, taxes on resources. This flattened the mining industry and in particular the 

oil industry. The member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) would know about that. The federal government then, 

in the wisdom of Otto Lang, introduced operation LIFT (Low Inventories for Tomorrow) in 1970, which 

took farmers out of wheat and into cattle. They then introduced a tight-money policy from 1969 through 

1970. This was right after Pierre said he was going to wrestle inflation to the ground. Well he didn't do a 

very good job of it and the result was a stop in the growth of the economy. In 1973 and 1974 there was a 

big influx of money from the government. The result was that money and prices went even higher and 

created unemployment and further inflation. The government put their faith in monetary policies which 

have proven to be wrong. In a three-year period they attempted two policies: one of tight money and one 

of loose money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next thing they did was introduce a loose-money policy which increased money even 

more and brought about more unemployment. Continuing the flip-flop they moved into wage and price 

controls from '75 to '78. They controlled wages but they didn't control prices. They did this after they 

said they wouldn't. The result again, as predicted by Conservative Members of Parliament, was an 

inflationary rate of between 7 and 11 per cent — they ended up with a 9 per cent inflationary rate. 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, residents of this province and the people of this country can condemn the federal 

government for those actions. If we have any luck, Mr. Speaker, we might get the support of this NDP 

government when we condemn the federal Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next blunder by the federal Liberal Party was in 1971-72. There was a drop in wheat 

prices from $2.10 a bushel to $1.60 a bushel. The result was that we ran out of wheat which caused 

prices to go up to $5.00. This cost $1 billion in income, less taxes. The same thing was repeated in 

1976-78 — a drop in wheat prices. In 1976 wheat dropped by $1 a bushel, then immediately dropped an 

additional 25 cents, totalling $1.25. Last year the price climbed up to $5.00 again. The result was that 

farmers took a loss in 1976-78 which hurt all governments, and especially the farmers. 

 

The conclusion, Mr. Speaker, is that governments should stop flip-flopping around with tight money and 

loose money. What we are suggesting here, Mr. Speaker, is what the members of the Assembly need to 

hear. What we are suggesting is that we need to take a look at cutting taxes. Allow individuals to get to 

work. The more a person makes the more a person saves, thus decreasing interest rates. Let me suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, that being the rich country that we are, we should be lending money to other countries and 

not just to ourselves. What are we doing, Mr. Speaker? We in Canada are borrowing massive sums of 

money to support a falling dollar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say shame on the federal government for its monetary and fiscal policies and shame on 

this government for its monetary and fiscal policies, both of which are similar and both of which are 

traditional and both of which, Mr. Speaker, are contradictory to what the quantitative analysis is in terms 

of financing. They have followed the advice of so-called whizzes in economics. They have followed that 

advice. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 591 

Mr. Speaker, I tell this Assembly and this House that we have evidence and we have proof and I want to 

give it, Mr. Speaker, to this Assembly now. Very briefly as I conclude and I would like, Mr. Speaker, for 

members of this Assembly to try and understand as I refer again to monetary and fiscal policies that are 

traditional policies by governments, not only here in Canada, not only in our provinces, but throughout 

the world and never mind the political stripe of the party of the government, policies, Mr. Speaker, that 

have repeatedly proven to be wrong, policies, Mr. Speaker, that are causing hardships for people 

throughout the world, policies, Mr. Speaker, that will never reduce inflation or unemployment, policies, 

Mr. Speaker, that are taking this country and our people into a debt that we will never relieve ourselves 

of for many years to come, policies, Mr. Speaker, that are bureaucratic oriented, policies, Mr. Speaker, 

that are not of the minister's making, policies, Mr. Speaker, that these ministers should be held 

responsible to. Mr. Speaker, what are these horrendous policies? Very simply they're traditional policies 

designed supposedly to reduce inflation and unemployment in a variety of forms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are just a very close knit number of items which explain what those traditional 

policies are. It's government spending — they attempt that. They attempt a reduction in transfer 

payments which you people are suffering from now transfer payments from the federal government. 

That's what they are attempting — to reduce transfer payments to provincial governments. I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is a very valid point — that the social justice programs and good programs that the 

CCF and yes the NDP introduced in Saskatchewan are being jeopardized by these very traditional 

monetary and fiscal policies and that is my concern. Think about it. Think about it you people. Mr. 

Speaker, governments have tried high interest rates. They have tried low interest rates. They have tried 

land price increases and we've got that going on here now with the land bank, Mr. Speaker. They are 

working on deterrent fees — they attempt that. They've attempted reduction in spending — not very 

successfully but they have attempted it — reduction in spending in the civil service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the traditional monetary and fiscal policies that have been used by governments throughout 

the world that are following the advice of economists have been proven wrong. I suggest that on the 

basis of what is referred to as the Mundell Theory. Robert Mundell is a lecturer at the University of 

Waterloo (or was, I should say) a lecturer at the University of Waterloo, in economics. He is now a 

resident of New York. He has an associate, Professor Laffer. Their quantitative analysis, that has been 

done in other countries, is proving very valid points, and in particular in North America. Mr. Speaker, 

they have looked at governments that are devaluing the dollar, the currency. They do this in a number of 

ways. You people here in Saskatchewan did it by purchasing American companies operating here. You 

bought those companies. They went home and took our money with them. You assisted in devaluing the 

currency. Mr. Speaker, those problems have got to be dealt with. 

 

Very simply, that Mundell Theory and the Laffer Curve, which are being used now, have been accepted 

in the United States to this extent, that about three of the major items in President Carter's budget were 

defeated on the strength of those two theories. Very simply as I said before, the theory just consists of 

reducing taxation on individuals, allowing them to go out and work and earn and they will invest in their 

own country. 

 

You, Mr. Speaker, if I may refer again to this government, have taken those options away from the 

people. You have gone with a traditional fiscal policy of higher taxation. Looking at the debt, Mr. 

Speaker, it's going to get higher. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 592 

The last point, Mr. Speaker, investments in common stocks — as you will see, they will be used to write 

off. You will not have to pay capital gains tax on investments in common stocks — investments in our 

own country. People of this country, Mr. Speaker, will do that if they are not overtaxed. So that is really, 

Mr. Speaker, what I am suggesting. Let's take a look at some of these new ideas. Let's take a look at 

possibly reducing taxation. Mr. Speaker, we could possibly look at balancing some budgets, not only 

here in the province of Saskatchewan but here in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think I have got to say any more. Surely if this government is not convinced now 

that they have taken the wrong approach, then one wonders when they ever will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it goes without saying; I will be opposing this budget speech. 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, in 

rising to participate in this budget debate, I want to congratulate you on your re-election as Speaker of 

this Assembly. Your patience, combined with your record of being fair, your ability to confirm are 

qualities which enable you to discharge your duties, Mr. Speaker. I also want to congratulate my 

colleague, the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) for the outstanding budget he delivered here last 

Thursday. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — The budget clearly revealed this government is honoring the trust which the people of 

this province placed in the Blakeney government last August, October pardon me. I thought the last 

speaker started in August, but . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — . . . I wasn't sure whether it was going to be August when he'd finish. Any observer of 

the political scene in Saskatchewan with a measurable memory span, who has observed successive CCF 

and NDP governments deliver their election promises in regular annual doses with little regard for the 

electoral calendar, is not surprised that this government delivered some of its election promises last 

Thursday. This government initiated in its first budget more commitments from our October election 

mandate than most people expected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Who is still recovering from this with surprise and shock? The Conservative 

opposition Party because of ideas like rebating school taxes for senior citizens and a revenue sharing 

pool of $77 million to help local elected councils sit down and plan the future of their communities and 

an agricultural research fund exceeding $3 million to support the needs of present day farmers, who 

supported this government, and their new neighbours established under an updated land bank and a 

FarmStart program, who supported this government. Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives to your left are 

shocked and surprised at these and other provisions in the budget because, Mr. Speaker, such ideas 

haven't yet found their way into the Conservative think tank. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — As was so clearly demonstrated to the House again tonight, the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 593 

Conservative think tank is so empty and so small, it couldn't be spotted in the rumble seat of a Bennett 

buggy. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — In the rumble seat of a Bennett buggy? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I have listened for the second week in a row to what I thought was going 

to be the second hourly fireside chat of the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck). Tonight it 

turned out to be two hours. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — No substance, no thought. 

 

MR. BYERS: — As he spoke, he reminded me of Columbus, the first Conservative, who when he 

started out didn't know where he was going and when he arrived, he didn't know where he was. When he 

got home he didn't know where he had been, and he did it all with somebody else's money. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I grew up as a farm boy in the prairies in southern Saskatchewan during 

the years of Anderson, the last Tory government in Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Better listen to this. 

 

MR. BYERS: — The policies that were enunciated tonight took me back to my boyhood years because, 

Mr. Speaker, those were windy years and it was dry. The wind came up, it blew the topsoil away and it 

left the gopher holes sticking straight up in the air. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — We saw that relived tonight with the agricultural policies of this gentleman, the hon. 

member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck), who is still smarting from his demotion from agriculture critic 

for this legislature. Mr. Speaker, I've been listening to the broadcasts and proceedings of this legislature 

for 34 years. It's about 34 years ago that we started to broadcast proceedings from this legislature and 

there has been an understanding. I think after 34 years an understanding between hon. men in some 

sense becomes a tradition. It's been a tradition that the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition have 

about an hour and a quarter in the throne speech debate, that the Minister of Finance and the financial 

critic have about an hour and a quarter in the course of the budget. Because of that tradition the rules of 

this House were changed not many years ago to shorten the time of both the throne and budget debates. 

It is basically the backbenchers who have spoken 20 or 30 minutes; ministers have spoken 40 to 45 

minutes. And we have cut down the number of days allocated for the budget debate. I have only been a 

member of this legislature for about 14 sessions. I'm a relative newcomer to this institution. But I have 

never in my life heard an opposition member filibuster to prevent his own colleagues from speaking in 

the budget debate. 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Yesterday, this House did not sit in the evening. I was ready to speak. Some of my 

colleagues were ready to speak. The members of the opposition didn't have a speech ready last night and 

consequently this House did not sit. Today we had the hon. member for Moosomin and I sat in this seat 

for one and a half hours and listened to 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 594 

him talk. He has effectively prevented some of the new members from speaking in this debate. What did 

he talk about? Well, I made some notes. First of all he said this government is trying to bribe people 

with their own dollars, that we're borrowing money to put in telephones in his constituency and power 

lines in the other hon. member's constituency, that we are bankrupting the future taxpayers of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, he was reciting tonight speeches given by the Liberals in the early ’50s and the 

late ’50s and the early ’60s. I remember them well. They were on the radio telling us that the Minister of 

Finance had gone to New York and he had borrowed $4 million or $5 million at astronomically high 

interest rates of 3.75 per cent and 4 per cent, over 30 years, to bankrupt future generations and burden 

them down with debt that they'd never get . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They haven't learned a thing! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, we paid off some of that debt last year, those 4 per cent bonds. I wish we 

had a good deal more of them. 

 

And then he says that people are surrendering their . . . bribing with their own bonds. He talked about 

the hypocrites in his own constituency. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That's no way to talk about your own people. 

 

MR. BYERS: — That we are paying them grants to mortgage their future — bribing them — from 

which they will never recover. Well I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the resource moneys that we 

have past collected and passed on to the people of Saskatchewan (both rural and urban) have enabled 

councils and citizens and organizations to sit down and plan and provide and deliver the facilities and 

services that we need. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — I want to say to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that many of the new facilities that are 

about Saskatchewan would still be plans on the drawing board or figments of many people's 

imaginations if they had waited for the mentality of the opposition to deliver. They are now a reality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — The people, he said secondly, are apathetic. They are having no part in developing the 

policies of the political parties. That's a disgraceful remark to come from the Conservative Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the policies and the programs which we were elected on in '71, re-elected on in '75, 

re-elected again in 1978, were all designed and developed by the common people of the New 

Democratic Party in this province. We developed them at our provincial conventions and we had a 

mandate to deliver them. When we were elected we proceeded to deliver them for the benefit of Liberals 

and Conservatives and New Democrats alike. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 595 

MR. BYERS: — Yesterday, or earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, the Tory Party tabled, or distributed, in 

this House the Progressive Conservative Prairie Rail Action Committee report. The Leader of the 

Opposition admitted and acknowledged that it was written in Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons this party was formed years ago was because we were tired of having 

policies written in eastern Canada for western people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — And the people of this province, when they have time to speak again within months. 

will want western transportation policies developed by New Democrats in western Canada to meet 

western Canada needs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn tonight to the department for which I have recently 

assumed responsibility, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and what his budget means to the 

people of that part of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to comment on some of the provisions in this budget which will advance the social and the 

economic and the political developments of the citizens in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

When the Department of Northern Saskatchewan was first set up, it faced an immediate need to 

drastically improve living conditions in the North. There were poor community facilities, poor schools. 

poor roads and airfields, very poor housing. We recognized the need to transform these conditions and 

we set out to give northern people a standard of life comparable with the rest of the province. We had a 

choice. We could move into the North with a major construction effort based on the southern 

construction industry or we could take the approach that construction in itself, though badly needed, 

would have to be combined with a strategy for northern employment. 

 

Now there are plenty of precedents for governments in Canada and elsewhere to undertake development 

in remoter areas without seeking to combine that development with the effect of local employment. 

Those results have been obvious improvements in the facilities in remote communities but little 

improvement and development in the unemployment skills and the income of local people. When DNS 

(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) started, we therefore decided that any improvements to the 

physical living conditions of the North must be combined with the maximum possible northern local 

employment. Perhaps this approach has caused some problems. Some are administrative and even 

politically difficult, but we judge it to have been worthwhile, when you see a new facility, a new school 

or a road in the North you can be sure that Northerners have been involved in the building of it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear. hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — The benefit of this involvement, the local incomes, development of work skills for a 

sense of effective participation have been a major success. 

 

When we look at the various programs undertaken by the department, we see clear evidence of our 

policy of our highest priority — the providing of local jobs. Northern 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 596 

public housing program in 1978-79 generated a total of 250 man years of employment. Of this total 212 

jobs or some 85 per cent were occupied by native Northerners. The department's capital budget activities 

— roads, airfields, public utilities, schools, public buildings — also generate a high proportion of local 

northern employment. In 1978-79 the total capital program produced close to 630 man years of 

employment Northerners totalled 283, or just over 45 per cent of the work force in this sector. 

 

In government-operated commercial enterprises, which include sawmills, four agricultural farms and the 

Prospectors' Incentive Plan, we have achieved close to 90 per cent of the total employment for native 

Northerners. We estimate that the small business assistance and support we have given through loan and 

grant programs have resulted in at least three jobs for local people for each job occupied by a 

non-native. In the department's permanent staff we have also had a fair measure of success. Of the total 

permanent salaried positions, about 23 per cent are now occupied by native Northerners and we are also 

finding that there is a trend towards Northerners entering the department at higher classification starting 

positions. We regard these statistics as a demonstration of considerable success especially when account 

is taken of the relative lack of skills to be found in the northern work force. To meet the problems 

associated with lack of skills, we have also operated a number of training programs. Let me touch on 

some of the highlights of these programs. 

 

In co-operation with the northern school boards and the University of Saskatchewan, we have 

introduced a Northern Teacher Training Program. This program is now in its first three-year training 

cycle. We expect that eight teachers will graduate this year with full academic teaching status from this 

program. In years one and two of the program, there are another 33 trainees who will be continuing their 

studies and will graduate in subsequent years. We regard this program as a major success and expect the 

arrival of local teachers in northern schools to have a major beneficial effect on the general educational 

climate in the North. We also operate a program called Options North, to aid the entry of Northerners 

into permanent positions with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Since that program started, we 

have graduated 23 students and 18 of them are now employed by the department. Our most notable 

success has been in the area of social services where we have placed 11 social service workers. Having 

local people in the social services area has proved to be a major factor in helping us to understand and 

meet the needs of local people who require family and counselling services. 

 

A Manpower Secretariat has been created within DNS, some three positions to monitor the Amok lease 

agreement and to negotiate northern employment provisions in future lease agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the record I have presented to the legislature is a good one. We shall continue 

to give the highest priority to maintaining our employment role in the North and to bringing about full 

participation of Northerners in the development of the North. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, this government believes that one of the most important initiatives the 

province can take to unlock the doors to economic independence, so that northern people can share and 

participate in the opportunities offered by northern resource development, is to bolster our initiatives in 

academic education. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 597 

Our record of performance in the field of academic education in Northern Saskatchewan is outstanding. 

The physical needs for larger enrolments; success in training students at the high-school level; enriched 

programming such as industrial art shops, home economic and science labs and commercial classes — 

all these were non-existent seven years ago. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has constructed 

77 classrooms, 52 teacherages, 5 gyms, 4 science rooms and industrial arts shops since 1972. We have 

taken great strides to improve the situation. In the past six years more than $20 million has been spent to 

improve educational facilities in some 30 different communities. With this level of construction we are 

gradually catching up to the actual requirements for academic educational facilities in the North. I 

expect this level of building activity will level off within the next few years. 

 

I want to caution the members of the House that we may be required to maintain a high level of 

expenditure for academic education facilities, not only to meet the needs of economic development, but 

to accommodate the increased number of students. While the improvements, both to the system and the 

facilities, are starting to have an impact, enrolments are increasing year after year. The number of 

students entering kindergarten is increasing. Drop-out rates, while still very high, are continuing to 

decrease. Students are staying longer in school. Enrolment in Grade 12 is up by 196 per cent since 1973, 

with some communities such as Ile-a-la-Crosse graduating their first Grade 12 students in 1978. The 

percentage of northern teachers possessing a degree certificate is up from 18 per cent in 1971 to 60 per 

cent in 1978. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1978 budget contains a number of financial and program commitments designed to 

respond to the ongoing need to improve education facilities and programming. The budget before the 

House, Mr. Speaker, proposes an expenditure of $5.6 million on academic education facilities. 

Construction will be completed on the La Loche, Turnor Lake and Brabant schools and will continue at 

Deschambault. Major additions will be commenced at Pinehouse and Stoney Rapids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is proud of the new school facilities dotting the northern landscape, the 

new local interest in education, the dedication of our northern educators and the benefits this generation 

of northern students are deriving from the new educational facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the tests of a responsible and responsive government is its willingness to 

periodically assess the effectiveness of its programs and to modify programs to meet changing 

conditions. 

 

The present formula used to calculate northern school grants has two basic components: 

 

1. A basic student rate; 

 

2. A northern cost supplement designed to provide additional funds for the higher costs of operating 

northern schools so that school programs would not be jeopardized when school boards are faced with 

uncontrollable operating costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unaided by any advice from the Opposition, our government has detected a few 

weaknesses in the formula presently used to calculate the operating grants for northern schools. 

 

The basic student rate calculated under the The Formula Grants Act generates about 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 598 

64 per cent of the funding required by northern school boards. It is deficient in that it does not earmark 

funds for special northern needs such as the development of curriculum, teaching materials, teaching 

methods that are culturally appropriate for northern Saskatchewan. A grant calculated on a per student 

basis can work to the disadvantage of the northern school board where the drop-out rate averages 39 per 

cent compared to 22 per cent in southern Saskatchewan. About 48 per cent of northern students are at 

least one year behind the average age-grade achievement, so this situation places additional pressures on 

teachers and school boards for enriched and remedial programming. 

 

The supplemental grants make up about 36 per cent of the total operating grant package. The 

supplemental grant is an ad hoc method of coping with the special problems of operating a northern 

school system — problems such as higher energy costs and maintenance and renovations. The result has 

been that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan has received many requests from school boards for 

additional funding. 

 

Now, in the past year the Department of Northern Saskatchewan has, therefore, developed a new 

northern education funding program, under which operating grants will be allocated to school boards in 

northern Saskatchewan. I was hoping the critics, if there are any left of northern Saskatchewan, would 

be here tonight so they would get an understanding of the components and the implication of this new 

formula. 

 

There are four components to this new grant formula. There will be a northern basic student rate. 

Expenditures common to all school operations such as instruction, administration, non-capital 

renovations and, of course, the plant renovation costs will be considered in establishing the basic student 

rate. It acknowledges that insufficient funding is provided by using basic rates for southern 

Saskatchewan. It should eliminate an excessive number of requests from school boards for additional 

funding. 

 

The second component of the new grant formula is the northern differential student rate. The reason for 

including this component in the new formula is to recognize that the actual cost of operating schools 

varies greatly for the community because of their distance from supply centres or their degree of 

isolation. It will therefore be necessary to develop a cost index for each community, taking into account 

such factors as northern allowance, instructional aids, supplies, room and board allowance and 

non-capital purchases. This component of the new grant formula will eliminate the need for 

supplemental grants. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, due to the great variations in the operating costs of school facilities and due to the 

size, location and types of school facilities, the new grant formula will recognize 90 per cent of the 

actual cost of operating and maintaining the school plant. I want to emphasize that explicit guidelines 

will be developed with regard to the definition of operating and maintenance costs, to be included under 

the provisions, to recognize 90 per cent of actual plant costs. The remaining 10 per cent of these costs 

can be recognized through the basic rates to ensure that the school boards are finally responsible in 

determining the levels of maintenance and operation. 

 

Fourthly, to recognize that there are disproportionately higher fixed costs associated with operating 

smaller schools, the fourth component of this new grant formula will recognize these higher costs for 

administration, school board expenses and teacher recruitment. This provision is similar to the scarcity 

factor in the southern school grant formula; it earmarks special funds for the continued operation of 

smaller schools. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 599 

Mr. Speaker, the best designed formula will be meaningless unless it is matched with a pool of money to 

provide the educational requirements for northern schools. I am pleased to announce that operating cost 

grants for schools in northern Saskatchewan for 1979 and 1980 will be $11,631,000 compared to 

$9,895,540 for 1978 — 1979, an increase of 17.5 per cent. The actual expenditures for 1978 — 1979 

will be $10,266,000 as the result of additional grants amounting to $371,060. When this supplementary 

adjustment is counted, the 1978 — 1979 budget for operating grants for schools represents a 13.3 per 

cent increase or over 11 per cent on a per student basis. In 1978 — 1979, the grant per student was 

$1,803 and for 1979 — 1980, $2,008. 

 

The amount of funding to the individual boards for 1978 — 1979 will be as follows: (all of them are 

increases) northern school boards, $7,928,010, an increase of 9.9 percent; Creighton, $817,870; 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, $1,005,920; Uranium City, $1,578,080; Flin Flon Boundary Agreement, $133,120; 

conditional grants, $8,000; educational opportunity grants, $160,000 for a total in 1979 — 1980 of 

$11,631,000 — 13.3 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges that northern school boards and teachers face is the development of 

curricular materials, teaching materials, teaching methods that are culturally appropriate to northern 

Saskatchewan. This year, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan will introduce, through the 

academic branch, a new program called the Education Opportunities Grant Program. 

 

The sum of $160,000 is earmarked for the 1979-80 fiscal year to permit greater innovation in areas such 

as co-operative work experience, learning assistance centres, improved student counselling services and 

the development of materials on native cultures. The maximum annual grant per project will be $40,000. 

Funding for this program will be in addition to grants under the new northern education funding 

program. Project proposals initiated by school boards will require approval from the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

A wise person once said, give us the tools and we'll do the job. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that the 

school boards, the teachers and the students in northern Saskatchewan will welcome this initiative by 

this government, which gives them the tools so they can, and they will do the job. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that there are more northern students attending more schools for 

a longer period, demands that additional finances and staff be provided to support a wider range of 

activities. The needs of the handicapped student, the need for better counselling services, the need for a 

relevant curriculum are real needs in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Members of this legislature should be aware that the workload of the Academic Education Branch is 

expanding rapidly through the new northern education funding program, the new education 

opportunities grant, the number of newly formed independent school boards. Even though the northern 

school board employs several school superintendents, currently there is one school superintendent 

responsible for 1,600 students and 96 teachers. In addition, the present staff are unable to provide the 

level of support desired by the northern school board. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 600 

This budget provides for two new positions in the education branch: 

 

1. An additional superintendent's position; 

 

2. An education consultant to work with northern school boards to develop improved programming for 

children with learning and other handicaps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is keeping its pledge of 1971 to provide opportunities for northern people 

to accept productive positions in construction, in government, in administration and in the professions. 

 

Two training programs launched to increase the number of native northerners employed as instructors in 

the school system are an outstanding success. I referred to one of them earlier in my remarks namely the 

Nortep. 

 

The teacher aid training program has been operated over the past three years by the northern school 

board with LEAP (Local Employment Assistance Program) funding from Canada Manpower. It is a one 

year training program. To qualify applicants must speak a native language and be selected by the local 

school board. 

 

I am pleased to report to this House, Mr. Speaker, that of the first 20 students there are six working in 

schools, 13 have advanced to the Nortep (Northern Teacher Training Program). Only one has dropped 

out in three years. It can be truly said, Mr. Speaker, that this is a record of success with great promise for 

tomorrow. 

 

Now, since Canada Manpower funding is limited to three years, DNS (Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan) will be assuming funding from the teacher aid training program starting in 1979-80, with 

a budget of $195,000. We are anxious to continue this program as it increases the number of Northerners 

employed by schools, office participants and opportunity to gain experience before entering Nortep. It is 

estimated that 15 Northerners will benefit from this one year training program in 1979-80. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the new education act, school boards are required to set a uniform mill rate. Based 

on a school mill rate of 57, this requirement will result in a substantial school mill rate increase in some 

locations. In general, school mill rates are 40 to 41 mills in most northern communities. Ile-a-la-Crosse's 

school mill rate is about 20 mills. The education mill rate transition grant will be included in the grants 

to northern local governments. The program has the objective of raising the school mill rate to 57 mills 

over a three year period. Under the program the Northern School Board would set its own mill rate at 

57, which would be an increase of 37 mills for Ile-a-la-Crosse and a 21 to 22 mill increase for the 

remaining communities under the Northern School Board's jurisdiction. This short term program is 

therefore being implemented, Mr. Speaker, to cushion the impact of the annual school mill rate increase 

to a maximum of 10 mills. Grants will be paid to the local governments so that the effective increase 

would be no more than 10 mills in a single year. In the first year the grants would hold the impact of the 

57 mill rate to 45 mills by providing a subsidy of 12 mills for the Northern School Board worth 

$114,495 and a subsidy on 27 mills for the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Board worth $7,905 or a total for 

1979-80 of $122,400. In the second year the subsidy would be two mills or $16,675 for the Northern 

School Board and 17 mills, or $4,975 for Ile-a-la-Crosse. In the third year only Ile-a-la-Crosse would 

require subsidies to the extent of 7 mills or $2,050. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 601 

The impact of this transitional program should be to have mill rates set at 57 mills across the North and 

the education mill rate transition grant is designed to ease the impact on local governments in the first 

few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members of this House are aware that historically northern Saskatchewan residents 

have had severe health problems compared to the rest of Canada or the rest of the province. The 

Federal-Provincial Task Force on Northern Saskatchewan carried out in 1969 stated that the three major 

causes of health problems in the North were: 

 

1. Deficient diet; 

 

2. Substandard housing; 

 

3 Lack of proper sewer and water facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lest we forget, when this government came to power in 1971, both the rate of hospital 

admission and the infant mortality rate were almost three times as high as the rate in southern 

Saskatchewan. But there have been some general improvements. The number of visits to health clinics 

and health centres has increased; the public health nurse visits to homes are up; the community health 

worker program which is locally operated provides a grass roots approach to encouraging proper 

nutrition, hygiene and other basic health practices. 

 

Sewer and water systems have now been introduced in 12 communities and the percentage of 

households having access to a safe water supply has increased from 30 per cent in ’71 to 100 per cent in 

1978. 

 

The three new positions requested in this budget are (1) a dental nurse, (2) a community mental health 

nurse and (3) a public health nurse. The children's dental care program was well accepted and deeply 

appreciated in northern Saskatchewan communities. The current ratio of dental nurses to children is 

1:1172 in the North compared to 1:560 for the South. This year we will expand the dental care program 

by adding a dental nurse position at Cumberland House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mental health nursing services were provided to citizens of the east side communities, 

through facilities in The Pas and Flin Flon, Manitoba until June 1978. We will, therefore, be adding a 

community health nurse position, who will join the public health nurse presently stationed at Creighton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although there is a hospital at Ile-a-la-Crosse, there is no community health staff assigned 

to this area. This year we will add a public health nurse position to provide community nursing services 

to Ile-a-la-Crosse, Jans Bay and Cole Bay. This new position will enable DNS to establish a 

comprehensive public health program in these communities including such activities as child health 

clinics, prenatal classes, home follow-up and hygiene counselling. 

 

I want to turn, now, and comment briefly on the capital program. I want to say a little bit about local 

governments and I have a word or two on Northlands. I appreciate the members bearing with me. I will 

not be here tomorrow and, unfortunately, I will not be here on Friday either. I will be going to an 

opening of the new community centre in Denare village that day. They are very happy about the 

assistance they got from this government. For that, I hope all members will share with them in their 

jubilation. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 602 

I want to comment on the main elements of the DNS capital budget, because it is through the DNS 

capital program that the roads and airfields, the camping and recreation sites, municipal facilities, 

community utilities and schools become a reality for our northern citizens. 

 

In 1972-73, the government allocated $100,000 in the then Department of Natural Resources capital 

budget for community services. Each year since, we have improved the department's capability to 

employ northerners in building new facilities. This year the Department of Northern Saskatchewan's 

capital budget is $21.6 million. I want to comment on some of the components of it. 

 

1. Northern air transportation has received intensive attention. We will be required to spend substantial 

sums upgrading and constructing airfields to meet the needs of northern residents and industrial activity. 

This year we will complete the Pelican Narrows airfield and improve the lighting and fencing at other 

locations. Of the 19 licensed airfields in northern Saskatchewan, 10 will remain to be upgraded. 

 

2. Roads — there were only 336 miles of all-weather and trail roads in existence in 1972. Since 1972 the 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan has constructed 289 miles of all-weather roads and 205 miles of 

trail roads to provide access to communities for a total of 830 miles. When you add the 270 miles of 

winter roads maintained by DNS the total road system is now 1,100 miles. 

 

Our present estimate is that in the next five years the department will construct about 150 miles of 

all-weather roads and 50 miles of trail roads to complete the basic road system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the capital budget of DNS for road construction is $4 million but when you add an 

estimated $4 million that was to be spent on the Cluff Lake road this year by the Department of 

Highways, an estimated $4 million on the Key Lake road to be financed from the heritage fund, an 

estimated $1 million on the Beauval Pine House to be financed from the heritage fund provided approval 

for construction is obtained from the Department of the Environment. That adds up to $ 13 million in 

northern development roads in this budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — These expenditures from the DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) Capital 

Budget, the heritage fund, reflects this government's on-going commitment to establish the community 

and transportation infrastructure which is the very foundation upon which the economic and the social 

development of the North is being built. 

 

I want to provide the House with the details of the 1979-80 road construction program. 

 

1. Complete the Stanley Mission access road; 

 

2. Continue with the Dillon-Michel access road: 

 

3. Complete the Uranium City by-pass; 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 603 

4. Continue upgrading the road from Uranium City to Eldorado; 

 

5. Complete the Southend — Reindeer Crossing; 

 

6. Continue the Sturgeon Landing Road; 

 

7. Construct resource roads at an estimated cost of $460,000. 

 

As tourism is an important industry for northern residents, we will continue to develop and improve 

recreation sites. We expect to complete the campgrounds currently under construction at La Ronge, 

Weyakwin, Whelan Bay, Geikie River, Elaine Lake and Courtney Lake. Work will commence on a 

campground at Jan Lake. Capital improvements will be carried out at other locations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new community halls and the other municipal facilities are one of the catalysts that 

have nurtured and fostered community pride. To honor their esteemed political warriors some 

governments erect monuments in the parks for the birds to sit on. The new municipal buildings, the fire 

halls, the wells with fresh pure water, community centres in every community are not monuments to 

politicians of another day. They stand as permanent evidence that this government, despite the fact that 

every opposition party has voted against every budget in this House that authorized the bucks for these 

facilities, evidence that this government is committed to providing the people of northern Saskatchewan 

with their fair and proper share of the resources of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — We have allocated $800,000 for municipal facilities in the next fiscal year. The 

1979-80 program provides for the completion of four projects: 

 

1. The Buffalo Narrows LCA (Local Community Authorities) office; 

 

2. The Turnor Lake fire hall; 

 

3. The Pinehouse fire hall; 

 

4. The Cumberland community hall. 

 

It provides for the commencement of these new projects: 

 

1. Stony Rapids fire hall and equipment; 

 

2. Ile-a-la-Crosse community hall; 

 

3. Fire equipment at Cumberland House and Denare Beach. 

 

The 1979 capital program provides for the completion of a number of major projects, namely: 

 

1. The La Ronge provincial office building; 

 

2. The Buffalo Narrows depot; 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 604 

3. La Ronge hospital expansion. 

 

Construction will continue on the Uranium City provincial office building and the Pinehouse health 

clinic. New road maintenance facilities will be constructed at Pinehouse and La Loche. These facilities 

are to provide equipment maintenance and storage for road crews that are required as a result of the 

construction of the new resource roads into Key Lake and Pinehouse. Construction will commence on a 

two medium security facilities — a 25 bed facility at Buffalo Narrows and a 15 bed facility at Creighton. 

While DNS is assuming the responsibility for the capital reconstruction of these facilities, the 

Department of Social Services will assume responsibility for their design and their operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the provision of water and sewer service to northern communities has been a massive 

undertaking. In 1972 (and I wish the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) were here) . . . there 

were no integrated sewer and water systems in the North. Today the systems are completed in eight 

communities: Buffalo Narrows, Cumberland House, La Loche, Weyakwin, Sandy Bay, Stoney Rapids, 

Green Lake and La Ronge. I hope the next time he is up there he will tell them we bribed them with a 

knife. 

 

We expect the Beauval and Ile-a-la-Cross projects will be completed in 1979-80. Construction for the 

Pinehouse and Denare Beach projects will continue in 1979-90. We can expect construction of the Air 

Ronge system to commence in 1979-80. It is the intention of this government to assist in providing 

integrated water and sewer systems in communities of over 500, as well as some modified systems in the 

smaller communities. 

 

Earlier in my remarks I dealt at some length with the need to continue our efforts to improve the quality 

of instruction in the school facilities in northern Saskatchewan. May I conclude my remarks on the 

capital budget by placing on the records of the legislature, the capital budget for education facilities for 

1979 and 1980, we will complete the following projects: 

 

1. La Loch High School; 
 

2. Turnor Lake School; 
 

3. Brabant School and teacherage. 
 

Construction will continue on the Deschambault School and the teacherage will be completed. New 

projects include additions to the Pinehouse and Stoney Rapids schools, a teacherage at La Loche and 

Turnor Lake and improvements to the Ile-a-la-Crosse School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the top priorities of this government is to provide the financial and manpower 

resources needed to develop strong, autonomous, local governments with the capability to assume 

control over local affairs so they can cope with the new economic developments now on their doorsteps. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that all political parties in this province have a responsibility to be patient with 

these local governments still in their infancy. The development of local government is a long process. 

May I remind the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) and the hon. member for Meadow Lake 

(Mr. McLeod) if he were here, that it took the local improvement districts 75 years to elevate their status 

to that of a rural 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 605 

municipality. 

 

The new local governments of the North can well be spared unnecessary and unwarranted criticism as 

they tackle the tough tasks of establishing assessment and tax roles, drafting community development 

plans, and at the same time, providing new services such as fire protection and ambulance programs, 

which long established local governments in southern Saskatchewan are today establishing in many 

cases, on a regional basis for the first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has certainly demonstrated its faith and confidence in the willingness and 

the ability of northern people to design and determine their own destiny. When we set up the 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan in 1972, northern Saskatchewan certainly possessed many of the 

characteristics of an underdeveloped area. We were convinced that if we were ever to eliminate the vast 

disparities in economic and social living conditions that existed between the northern population and the 

rest of the province, it would require, contrary to the thinking of the hon. member of Moosomin (Mr. 

Birkbeck), direct infusion of capital through the newly created Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We built new schools, the gyms, the teacherages, the community access roads, the firehalls, the 

community halls, the wells with pure drinking water, the airfields, the housing and recreational facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, permit me to caution the new members of the opposition on two counts: 

 

1. The former DNS critics in this legislature who suggested that proper accounting systems should 

always precede the carpenter's hammer and who suggested that money was being stored in shoe boxes, 

are now members of the 'Where are They now Club'; 

 

2. The people of northern Saskatchewan strongly endorsed the initiatives of this government through the 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan by electing Fred Thompson and Norman MacAuley in 1975 and 

again on October 18, with overwhelming majorities. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS:—I want to comment on some of the specific provisions in this budget designed to further 

the development of local government in Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Grants to the northern local governments in 1979-80 will be $4,008,210 compared to $3,294,000 for 

1978-79. That is an increase of 21.7 per cent. This increase is required to maintain the existing and 

unconditional grant formula. It will also fund a number of new additional programs such as the 

Municipal Road Ambulance Program, Municipal On-the-job Training program and Business 

Improvement District Program. 

 

In addition, the grants to northern communities for recreational facilities will be $1,160,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — This program is the northern counterpart of the cultural and recreational facilities 

grant program in the Department of Youth and Culture. In the five-year period 1977 to 1982, this 

program will provide a total of $7 million. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 606 

Mr. Speaker, there are 36 local government bodies in the North — three incorporated municipalities, 

eight local community authorities, northern municipal councils, 24 local advisory councils. We are 

making good progress in several areas in developing more viable local governments. The LCAs (Local 

Advisory Councils) are the most rapidly developing group of communities in the North. 

 

Last year, this government, gave the LCAs the option to operate independently of the northern 

municipal councils. Six LCAs exercised this option. One result is that the role on the level of funding to 

the northern municipal council has been substantially reduced. The Municipal Services Branch of DNS 

has conducted formal workshops, training sessions to assist the staff and the councils of these eight 

LCAs, or in fact, the newest local governments in Saskatchewan if not in all of Canada. 

 

In addition to the community responsibilities they shoulder, while they earn their own living in the harsh 

northern climate, the elected LCA council members are involving the citizens of the community in the 

new town development plans, they are preparing their assessment roles; they are coping with the 

problems of operating their water and sewer systems; they are working with DNS staff on fire 

prevention programs and ambulance programs. The list is endless. 

 

But most of all, Mr. Speaker, there is a desire and there is a determination of these northern communities 

to use the financial and human resources available to build a society in which they are both the builders 

and the beneficiaries. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — This generation and future generations in northern Saskatchewan will not be content 

to be the forgotten people. Northern people are prepared to be active partners in the development of 

Saskatchewan's resources but they are not content to be silent partners when the fruits of the earth are 

distributed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — They will claim (and we in the New Democratic Party will ensure) that they will 

receive their fair and proper share. 

 

Now I want to comment in more specific terms, Mr. Speaker, on how some of the wealth of this 

resource-rich province will be distributed to local governments in northern Saskatchewan for the fiscal 

year 1979-80. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government developed the system for distributing grants to local governments in 

northern Saskatchewan, we made a conscious decision that we would not hobble and handcuff these new 

governments with a multitude of conditional grants — a grant for this and a grant for that and a grant for 

something else — the way the Tories give them (if they ever did). It was our position then and it is our 

position now, that . . . well I invite you to come out and try to explain conditional grants to Tories, 

because they are the slowest learners in that respect. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — It was our position then and it is our position now that if local governments are to be 

truly autonomous, then for the most part, grants from the 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 607 

province should be provided on an unconditional basis so that each locally elected council can plan its 

community's future and establish its own priorities. 

 

Now it is true that conditional grants are a means for the province to assist communities with specific 

problems. As I stated earlier, the grants to local governments for 1979-80 will be $4,008,210. Grants 

that can be classified as unconditional grants in this budget are as follows: (1) per capita grants — 

$1,153,110, (2) equalization grant — $1,833,090, (3) urban capital — $500,000, total unconditional — 

$3,486,200. 

 

Now the urban capital grant is actually an unconditional grant because all the town has to do to get the 

grant is to carry out some capital construction. There are no conditions what is built. So counting the 

urban capital grant as an unconditional grant and excluding the transitional grants to $102,000 as being 

one time grants, 88 per cent of grants to local governments in 1979-80 will be paid on an unconditional 

basis. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — . . . and only 12 per cent or $420,000 will be paid on a conditional basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the urban capital grants program was established to assist the three urban centres of La 

Ronge, Creighton and Uranium City with a limited tax base in providing capital facilities. The urban 

capital grant is actually an unconditional grant as all the town has to do, as I said, to get the grant is carry 

out some capital construction. There is no condition on what is built. The grant is calculated on 40 per 

cent of the first $500,000 and 30 per cent on the next $250,000. The maximum grant is $275,000 per 

municipality. Assuming capital expenditures in 1978-79 — and I will tell the good people in Creighton 

on Friday that the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) thinks they are mortgaging the future — 

by the three urban municipalities of $1.5 million, we have allocated $600,000 for this purpose. The level 

of funding represents $95 per capita compared with the $92 per capita approved for 1978-79. 

 

The sewer and water maintenance grant pays up to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well there is that new 

song going around, 'I want to sleep all day.' At least the Tories want to sleep all day and they sleep all 

night. The sewer and water maintenance grant pays up to 80 per cent of the actual sewer and water 

maintenance costs to a maximum of $15,000 per LCA and $20,000 for the urban municipalities. This 

conditional grant will increase from $150,000 to $180,000 in 1979 as the communities of Weyakwin and 

Ile-a-la-Crosse will be eligible for the grants. I am sure the hon. member for Moosomin will not want 

them to get that. 

 

In 1979-80, the urban municipalities qualified for $50,000 in police grants under the former municipal 

affairs program. This program will be terminated on March 31, 1979, and in its place we will provide for 

1979-80 a one-time transitional payment of $40,000 to the urban municipalities to give them time to 

adjust their financial planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the operating funds of the Northern Municipal Council (NMC) could have been reduced 

from $880,000 to $229,000 in 1978-79 as a result of several LCAs' opting to operate independent of the 

Northern Municipal Council. 

 

In 1978-79 a transitional grant of $24,000 was paid to the Northern Municipal Council so that its 

operating budget was not less than $253,000. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 608 

Now, in the event that an LAC requests LCA status and subsequently withdraws their financial support 

from the Northern Municipal Council, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan will make a one-time 

payment to the Northern Municipal Council of $5,000 for each community that goes independent. In 

addition, the LAC that assumes LCA status will be entitled to a $5 increase in their per capita grant. 

 

At this time we cannot predict the number of communities that will seek and obtain LCA status this 

year. We have provided sufficient funds in the budget for communities seeking LCA status and at the 

same time insured that the NMC has sufficient funds to discharge its responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Mainstreet Development Program initiated and administered by the Department of 

Municipal Affairs will be transferred to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan for businesses and 

communities in the Northern Administration District. We have allocated sufficient funds for 32 grants of 

$500 for the northern businesses, and $8,600 in incentive grants for the improvement of public areas. 

 

I want to advise the House that we are prepared to launch an ambulance program in the North this year, 

modelled along similar lines and principles similar to the South. We have allocated over $70,000 for this 

project and we will be making the details of this available to the northern communities in the near 

future. 

 

To help the three incorporated municipalities employ a staff person in a training position within their 

municipal administration, we are prepared to pay up to $400 a month towards the trainee's salary. 

 

I just have one brief point, Mr. Speaker, that may take another few minutes or so before I conclude. I 

want to turn to the Saskatchewan Northlands Agreement. The Northlands branch of the department is 

responsible for the negotiation and the administration of the Canada-Saskatchewan Northlands 

Agreement. This agreement provides for a 60 per cent federal, 40 per cent provincial-cost sharing of 

certain DNS, Department of Highways and transportation programs in the northern administration 

district. This agreement which was signed last August 28 in La Ronge, provides for a $100 million 

five-year federal-provincial cost-sharing arrangement to help with the development of the northern part 

of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am happy to indicate that the province of Saskatchewan will contribute $40 million, 

DREE, $48 million, and the Ministry of Transport, $12 million. 

 

Funding for actual program delivery is contained within the budgets of those branches actually 

responsible for program delivery. The Northlands budget provides for agreement administration, public 

consultation, program review and assessment and planning. 

 

As the hon. members may note, this year's estimates provides the Northlands branch with about 

$150,000 increase over last year. This increased funding will be used for two new activities — the 

Northlands program Review Committee. This is the public consultation mechanism employed for the 

development of the annual Northlands Work program. The second is for program review and 

assessment. Under the agreement, the department must review the effectiveness of those programs, 

cost-shared, and this year the department will be laying the ground work for this process. 



 

March 13, 1979 
 

 609 

Mr. Speaker, the most interesting aspect of this funding increase, and I believe, the agreement, is the 

creation of the Northlands Program Review Committee, many of whom were in the gallery the other 

day. This group represents all sectors of northern society. made up of two representatives from each of 

the following organizations: the Northern Municipal Council, Saskatchewan Association of Northern 

Communities, local community authorities, the Association of Metis and non-status Indians, and the 

ministers' consulting committee. The Northern Saskatchewan Labour and Trades Council and the 

Northern Outfitters' Association are also on the Program Review Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these ten individuals have, over the past four months, held five two-day sessions in which 

they have prepared their recommendations to which programs should be cost-shared under the 

agreement. I am happy to report that their recommendations were accepted by the Northlands 

management group which signed the $17,838,000 1979 Northlands Work Program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure I am speaking not only for the government but this House, to 

thank these individuals for a job well done and wishing them all the best for their future deliberations. 

This committee is a sound example of our government's commitment to carry out the mandate that was 

bestowed upon us by the Premier in 1972 when he said, and I quote: 

 

We look to the new department to provide a new focus for building government services in the 

North, with the involvement of the people living in northern communities. This means involvement, 

not only in an advisory capacity but also in a developing capacity of self-government and local 

decision-making. It will require readiness to abandon the safe, standardized approaches to the 

delivery of government services and it will take an equal dedication on the part of the people living 

in northern communities to develop their interest in self-government and their skills in 

decision-making. 

 

I am sure that we will all agree that the development of the $17 million work program by the people of 

northern Saskatchewan and for the people of northern Saskatchewan clearly indicates public 

involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other things I would like to say about the budget and other issues. I have 

presented some of the thrusts that we will be taking in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan which 

in many respects, is typical of the initiatives that are being undertaken in every department of this 

government. I have indicated earlier that I will be unavoidably absent on Friday when the vote is taken 

but if I were here, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly be standing in my place and voting for the budget. I 

would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:02 p.m. 

 


