



















































Hansard: March 20, 1979


825 

 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 20, 1979 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, I direct your attention and the attention of other 

members of the House to the west gallery, where we have a very fine group of 70 students from Mabel 

Brown School in the Regina Rosemont constituency. I might also point out to the House that Mabel Brown 

School is in the neighborhood in which I live, so many of the children who are with us today are also my 

neighbors. I want to express a special word of welcome to them today. 

 

I am sure that all members will join with me in hoping that their stay here is both interesting and 

informative. I look forward to meeting with you all a little later in the afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, again today, I would like to introduce to you and through 

you a group of, I believe, 60 Grade 8 students from the Weyburn Junior High School. Along with yesterday’s 

80 students, that makes a total of 140 from the Weyburn Junior High School. 

 

These students today, are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Jim Nedelcov and Mr. Clint Giene, I believe. 

Their bus driver is Mr. Delbert Foote, and Mrs. Carl Borys. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the Assembly again join with me as I say welcome to the Grade 

8 students from Weyburn, because these students are the students of today and all students are the citizens of 

tomorrow. We welcome them here very heartily. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEPPER: — I look forward to meeting with them a little later and I am sure we wish them a safe 

journey home. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. R. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to this Assembly, five special guests who are seated up in the Speaker’s Gallery. These girls 

won the Saskatchewan provincial High School curling championship last weekend at Eastend. 

 

I would like to ask the team to stand and be recognized as I call their names. The spare on the team, Linda 

Austin; lead, Karen Dmuchowsky; second, Mary Jo Diekrager; third, Maureen Schmidt, and the skip, 

Rhonda Williams. 

 

They are accompanied here by the parents of the skip, Mr. and Mrs. Art Williams. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

826 

At the start of the competition, throughout the province, there were approximately 500 teams. You will 

notice that they are wearing their gold medals and of course, Bob Pickering sweaters. 

 

I am sure all members will join with me in congratulating them and wishing them good luck in the future. 

Also an enjoyable afternoon and a pleasant journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.G. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

government benches I would like to join my colleague in extending a warm welcome to these athletes and in 

extending as well very warm congratulation. I think it is fair to say that all the people of Saskatchewan share 

the sense of pride which their community must have in them. Thank you. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Council of Anti-Poverty Organizations Program 

 

MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services (Mr. 

Rolfes). Mr. Minister, on July 1, 1978 an agreement was drawn up between your department and the 

Saskatchewan Council of Anti-Poverty Organizations, better known as SCAPO, concerning job training and 

job placement of lower income groups. Since you have cut off this funding for this organization as of March 

31 of this year, could you please tell this Assembly who will be continuing this program? 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, those decisions have not been made at 

this particular time and as soon as we have an agreement either with the present group or with some other 

group the announcements will be made. 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you aware that a 30-day written notice is required by 

this agreement? Since you have sent no such notice to SCAPO to this date, how do you expect them to 

perform their end of the bargain if you don’t keep up with yours? 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I was not aware that a 30-day notice was given but I assume that my 

officials are aware and that they will be taking that into consideration and will see to it that something is 

done in the interim to take care of that 30-day notice which must be given. 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. How can you cut off a program without having 

something to replace it? It seems to me that would indicate you really are not concerned about job training 

and job placement of the poor. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is rather a facetious question to ask. I think all we have to do is 

have a look at other provinces. Programs are being cut every day by Conservative governments in Ontario, 

by Conservative governments in Manitoba particularly, and they are being cut off by the federal government. 

I did indicate to the member that I would have a look at the 30-day notice which must be given and I can 

assure her that something will be done to make sure that the program does not lapse 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

827 

entirely. 

 

Budget Decreases for Low Income Groups 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — New question, Mr. Speaker. If you are so concerned with these low income groups, 

Mr. Minister, perhaps you can advise this House why the budgets have been slashed drastically for such 

groups as Citizen Advisory Council, Interval House, Community Switchboard, the Native Project Society, 

just to name but a few? 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, first of all the member is wrong in saying that the Community Switchboard 

budget has been cut. No decision has been made on the Community Switchboard. The Citizen Advisory 

Council budget has not been slashed, as she said, as the Citizen Advisory Council is no longer in existence 

as of April 1 and I think that it’s good for the government to have a look at and examine those agencies 

which we are funding to see whether there is a need for those agencies at this particular time. We certainly 

felt when we established them, I believe in 1974, that there was need. Government is re-examining whether 

or not we can become more efficient, whether there are other groups serving the same purpose as present 

agencies are doing. I think it is good, in this time of examining how the services are provided, that the 

government take a very hard look at whether or not there could be some umbrella group throughout the 

province that could provide those same kinds of services, cut out some of the duplication that has existed 

and meet the demands of those poverty groups who have said to us, look there are a lot of gaps, there is a lot 

of overlapping. We would like you to have a look at it. We want to work with you to make sure that we have 

an efficient organization to provide services to the poor. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard a lot in the last two or three weeks with 

regard to your benevolent government, in particular how you help Mr. Faris along and how you help Mr. 

McNeil along. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? 
 

MR. ANDREW: — Yes I do have a question, Mr. Speaker. The fact that this program was cut, would it 

have any bearing on the fact that the head of the organization, Andy Sheppard, was a candidate for the 

Progressive Conservative Party in the last provincial election campaign? 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been waiting with bated breath for this question for some time. I knew 

it would have to be asked sometime in the House. 
 

Dr. James Albert was appointed, I believe, in 1977 to examine SCAPO and other organizations. The 

agreement was made between the Department of Social Services and SCAPO. Dr. James Albert made a 

number of recommendations. We have asked SCAPO to put those recommendations into effect. They have 

not been put into effect on the whole. 
 

MR. COLLVER: — They did. Every one. 

 

MR. ROLFES: — In June of last year . . . if the Leader of the Opposition has a question to ask, let him get 

on his feet and ask that question and I’ll answer it. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

828 

Mr. Speaker, last June, I met with Andy Sheppard and at that time Andy Sheppard was not a declared 

member of the PC Party. I didn’t know what his politics were and I don’t care what his politics were at that 

time and I don’t care now. We had a frank discussion at that time about SCAPO and what we would like to 

do and how it could meet some of the recommendations made by Dr. James Albert. Other poverty groups 

have made presentations to me over the last two or three years asking me to take some action to make sure 

that the anti-poverty groups were representative groups and that they were speaking for poverty groups. They 

were concerned, we were concerned and I think action had to be taken. We took that action. 

 

4-H Council 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Question to the Minister of Agriculture. A year ago there was an 

agreement between your department, the University of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 4-H Council 

whereby the 4-H Council would incorporate itself so it can independently administer the grants that the 

government gives it. Then my question is, why last Friday was this decision reversed and the autonomy of 

the 4-H Council destroyed and the administration moved to the agriculture department? 

 

HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member has a distorted 

version of what really happened. It’s true that last year the university made the decision that they were not 

going to continue to operate the 4-H program, and some questioning was done as to how it should best be 

handled. We made the decision that we didn’t want the 4-H program to disappear — we wanted it to 

continue, and so we did have some discussion with the Council as to how that could best be done. The 

decision which we came to was that we should attempt to give them more autonomy than they presently have 

and we have done that. We have decided that in the interim until we can come to a better resolution the 

administration of the funds would be done through the Department of Agriculture. Of course they have 

requested that they have total autonomy. I think it’s fair to say that in our discussion with them we discussed 

the possibility of what would happen if they got total autonomy. They would have to set up an entire 

administrative structure for a small program and we could very well provide a lot of that administrative 

capacity and the background, the office equipment and so on without attracting the extra cost. We proposed 

to them a program whereby they would basically run the program but we would provide some of the 

administrative staff and some of the administration to that program. They have met with us only last week 

and we have come to some fair agreement as to exactly where the program should be going — and we have 

ongoing discussion with them. 

 

They opposed the idea that we should move the office to Regina. We have agreed with them, okay, we can 

leave the office in Saskatoon. We’ve agreed with that, and we are still having ongoing discussions with 

them. One should not assume that we are not talking to these people and not trying to get the best possible 4-

H program we can get. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, are you not really just 

trying to take over the 4-H, run it the way you people want, the same as you did with the cattle checkoff? As 

you know, 4-H is mostly run by volunteers which includes the Council which are volunteers. By your people 

running the program as you indicated they are going to do now, I do not believe you that it will be temporary 

because you people say things are temporary and they are forever when you take them over. Will you not 

reconsider your decision as the presentation made to you on Friday 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

829 

asked for straight independence from the government and let them run their own affairs? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member opposite that I’ve got a fair bit of experience 

with 4-H movements. I was a 4-H leader for many years and my children were in the 4-H Club for a long 

time. I was involved in the regional councils. Just last week after I had discussion with the Council, had 

some discussions with our own 4-H leaders in our own community, and I asked them what their concept was 

and whether they didn’t think that this was a fairly good way of running it. They were quite in agreement that 

although they would like to have a 4-H Council have total autonomy, they have some real concerns about 

that. We are not taking away any of the autonomy of the 4-H movement, the Council. They can still design 

their own programs. All we’re saying is that we are providing some of the staffing and that is simply 

because, if we don’t provide the staffing, they’re going to have to hire a lot people and they will have that 

much less money to run their program. We’re trying to give them more money to run the program. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, did you not just point-blank blackmail them into doing 

. . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I’ll take a new question. 

 

Experience with 4-H 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of Agriculture. I 

recognize that you’ve had lots of experience with the 4-H. You would think in the time you’ve had that 

experience you’d get to know that these volunteers respect their autonomy. They resent your . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take the member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham). Order. I’ll take a new 

question, Swift Current. 

 

Contaminated Fish Being Given to Needy Families 

 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Tourism 

(Mr. Matsalla). In light of the announcement of Dr. Rick Mathias, Provincial Epidemiologist, that the lakes 

in the Qu’Appelle chain are now also designed as fish for fun category, have you now taken steps to stop the 

practice of allowing contaminated fish to be given to needy families? 

 

HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I think I 

indicated at that time that we are providing supervision with respect to any game fish which may be caught 

in the nets of the commercial fishermen. Any of the game fish that is there, the commercial fishermen are 

required to surrender this fish to our department or to our officers, and we proceed to dispose of the fish. 

 

MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. When you say the commercial fishermen will surrender these 

fish to your officials, can you guarantee that they are? Are you taking steps to make certain that they are, 

because obviously they haven’t been? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to do the best we can in enforcing the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

830 

regulations. I don’t think that we should have an enforcement officer standing along side a commercial 

fisherman 24 hours a day. 

 

MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think the minister should know, at least until this day, the 

regulations haven’t been followed and I think you’d better take steps to make sure they are. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Financial Support for Project Health 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Social 

Services (Mr. Rolfes). Mr. Minister, you’ve refused to indicate financial support to the program Project 

Health, which is home enrichment and learning for pre-schoolers. You are undoubtedly aware that this 

program will have to be discontinued as of March 31, 1979, without your support. Is this, Mr. Minister, an 

example of your government’s attitude toward the services for retarded youngsters in this International Year 

of the Child? 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Chairman, I will have to take that question 

under advisement. There are literally hundreds of grants that are made by the Department of Social Services. 

I am not aware that we are not funding that particular program. It may well be that we are not. I would take 

that question under advisement and bring the answer to the House for the member. I can’t just recall whether 

or not we are funding that one. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. You are indicating to me that you are not familiar with Project Health, 

Mr. Minister, but you will be looking into this and you will be bringing an answer to this Assembly? Would 

I have that answer tomorrow, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated to the member that I will bring an answer to the 

House for him. I can’t guarantee it will be tomorrow but if I have the answer tomorrow it will be brought to 

this House tomorrow. 

 

MR. LANE: — Supplementary question. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Next question. 

 

Cutback in Social Services Programs 

 

MR. LANE: — A new question to the Minister of Social Services. There seems to be a series of cutbacks in 

various volunteer programs or training programs. Did you make representations to your cabinet colleagues 

about the contradiction in government policy between cutting back on social service programs while 

enhancing and expanding the ‘higher the defeated NDP candidate programs’ which seem to be the new . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — In answer to the member, let me first of all indicate that the Department of Social 

Services’ budget has increased 2.5 per cent, the day care program increased 39 per cent. Not only that but 

grants to poor people’s groups have increased 11 per cent and they will total $4.3 million this year. Certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, I made 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

831 

representation to my colleagues and the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) has been very generous. 

 

4-H Program 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding). The Minister of Agriculture has made statements in this House today about the 

meetings that they had with the 4-H. Is the minister aware that the 4-H executives and the people with whom 

the Department of Agriculture met are not in the same consensus as the Minister of Agriculture? They do not 

believe, for example, that the office will remain in Saskatoon; they do not believe, for example, that the 

administration is not going to be taken out of the hands of their volunteers; and they do not believe, for 

example, that their total programs are not going to come under the control of the Saskatchewan Department 

of Agriculture. Is the minister aware of this divergence of opinion? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I am aware that the 4-H Council was not totally happy with the 

way the program was brought down. But I want to advise the Leader of the Opposition that with the program 

they have now, the existing program they are going to have this year, they’ll have more local autonomy, 

more autonomy for the 4-H council than they had under the university . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

they have. They were run last year from the university. This year the administration is being done by the 

Department of Agriculture. The administration is being done by the Department of Agriculture, not the 

program. 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. I 

wonder if you would undertake to communicate this increased autonomy to the 4-H people because they 

don’t believe it. My question is, would you not agree that the whole 4-H program could well be jeopardized 

by your imposition of this program from the Department of Agriculture because of resentment at your 

imposition and a threatened resignation of all the volunteer people in the 4-H movement? Further, would you 

not agree that your department was acting in gross negligence when it threatened to withdraw funding if they 

didn’t agree with your department? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where you guys are getting all that gobbledygook from. 

Frankly, we have had discussions with the board. We had a meeting with them; my staff had a meeting with 

them last week. They met with me after they met with the staff. We discussed some of their problems. We 

said that we would get back to them with some possible changes. We are in the process of doing that. 

 

I want to tell you that we didn’t ask to have the 4-H program brought to the Department of Agriculture. What 

happened was the university said it was no longer going to continue the program so there had to be a 

decision made of who was going to run the program or how it was going to be funded. Either we were going 

to let it drop completely, which is obviously what you guys are saying, or we had to take it over to the 

Department of Agriculture and fund it. This is exactly what we are doing. 

 

We may have some difficulty until we get it entirely smoothed out in terms of administration but certainly 

the program, as we are setting it up, gives them more autonomy than they had last year. 

 

MR. LANE: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Will the Minister not admit that 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

832 

the reason the universities (to use your phrase) didn’t want to do it anymore, is because you cut back . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I will take the Minister of Finance. 

 

Answer to Question re Average Wages 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — During the question period last Tuesday the hon. 

member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) asked a question about the average provincial or government 

wage as compared to the average wage as reported by Statistics Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on checking the two figures that he had quoted, we find that the Statistics Canada publication 

does not include wages earned by the people in educational institutions, such as the universities, all our 

teachers and technical institutes, etc. It does not include health and welfare institutions and does not include 

all the public administration, that is, provincial government, civic governments or the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the survey only considers about 25 per cent of the labor force. I don’t think anybody can say 

that a survey is very valid when it excludes 75 per cent of the labor force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member gave a figure of $18,740. I do not know where he gets the figure because our 

study reveals that for the Saskatchewan Public Service, the average wage is $15,500 as compared to the 

figure that was reported. 

 

4-H Movement 

 

MR. COLLVER: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture, with reference to the 4-H movement in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Is the minister aware and has he made any effort to calculate the value of the 

contribution made by the volunteer workers of the 4-H movement in Saskatchewan, in the light of his 

attempt to jeopardize those volunteers with his actions of last Friday? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that there is no one in this House 

more dedicated to the 4-H movement than I am. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that there is nothing in the proposition which we 

have which takes any autonomy away from the local 4-H councils. I ask him to go out and ask the 4-H 

people in the province whether they think we are jeopardizing their program. I know that all that has been 

done here is the administration has been taken from the university and taken over by the Department of 

Agriculture, not at our request, but because the university was no longer going to do it. That’s really the only 

difference there is in the program. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Final supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. In the light of the minister’s response, 

would the minister not agree that when a government in Saskatchewan cuts the funding to one organization 

by $93,000 (that is the University of Saskatchewan) for purposes of 4-H, then tries to tell 4-H that they have 

to take over 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

833 

the administration because the university has backed out, that this might have a tendency (given the fact that 

the minister says he wants to support 4-H) to cause the 4-H directors to believe . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I will take a new question. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Well, you would prefer this kind of question. When, Mr. Minister, will you find out 

about the valuable contribution made by the volunteers and when will you learn that your actions of last 

Friday . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I will take a new question. 

 

Control of 4-H in the Province of Saskatchewan 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. I give 

you the following background, Mr. Minister. Last week your department indicated to the university that there 

was going to be a cutback of approximately $90,000 to the university for 4-H. 4-H then came back and said 

that we will try to work on the restrictive budget and one of your senior officials, Mr. Miller, told them point 

blank that you might as well give up — the Department of Agriculture has taken it over. Do you deny that 

and do you deny again that in fact what we are seeing is a concerted effort on the part of the government to 

take control of 4-H in this province? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell you what some member of my department said or didn’t say 

but I do know that we didn’t take any funding away from the university. The university makes their own 

decision on how they run their programs. We don’t tell them how many dollars to put into 4-H or anything 

else. They simply said to us, we think that 4-H is not a program we should be running out of the university. 

They said, we think it should be run either independently or out of the department. That’s a fact. I can assure 

you that the $93,000 which you are quoting (and I don’t know whether that’s an accurate figure) is probably 

the difference between what the council wanted and what they got in the budget. I can tell you that what they 

are getting in the budget now and the kind of program they can run with what they have, is just as good, in 

fact better, with more autonomy than they had before. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I will take a new question. 

 

Volunteer Organizations 

 

MR. LANE: — Will the Minister of Agriculture not admit that in fact whenever a volunteer organization 

has paid administrative staff from the government or somewhere else, that that full time paid staff running 

the day to day operation has a tremendous influence on that volunteer organization and an influence in many 

cases which allows them . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 

 

4-H Movement 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

834 

MR. COLLVER: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Will the Minister of Agriculture not agree that the 4-H 

movement is in jeopardy because of his . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 

 

High Energy Equipment — Pasqua Hospital 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Tchorzewski). My question arises out of a news release which the Minister of Health sent out just the other 

day. He announced several things for which I compliment him. The one that bothers me is the one that says 

he is putting high energy equipment in the Pasqua Hospital at a cost of $800,000, $450,000 over and above 

that for the cost of the housing of that equipment. On May 17, 1978, that same minister when questioned as 

to whether this new facility at Pasqua would house this equipment, (it was also told to him that it would cost 

$500,000 to put it in later and $00,000 now.) He said Dr. Mallik is wrong. 

 

. . . In that expansion, all considerations and provisions are being made for the installation of the new 

equipment which may be necessary at a future point in time. I want to assure the member, that is not 

a problem, all that has been looked after . . . 

 

The letter of Dr. Mallik is wrong. 

 

Will the minister indicate to this House whether in fact he was deliberately misleading the House at that 

time, whether he was misinformed and while he is doing that, will he also indicate whether he is going to 

simply apologize or tender his resignation? 

 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I can recall the debate last May on 

the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic. I can recall the reply I made to the member’s questions. I stand by what I 

said. Whether that relates directly to the issue at hand in the establishment of the linear accelerator is 

something I will have to pursue and get clarified. Then I shall inform the member with the information that 

he wants to know. I do not have any intention of resigning at all. I want him to know that as well. 

 

Point of Order on Question Period 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I want to 

rise on a point of order with reference to a question by the member for Qu’Appelle today. The member for 

Qu’Appelle issued a question to the Minister responsible for Social Services and in the course of his 

questioning when he was about three-quarters of the way through, you rose as though to rule the member out 

of order. Being a good member, the member immediately sat down. You then recognized a minister who was 

allowed to give an answer to a question which you were in the middle of ruling out of order and I’d like to 

know, Mr. Speaker, under what authority do you hold that kind of action is appropriate during question 

period in this legislature. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The member for Qu’Appelle rose and was putting a question before the House. I 

judged the question to be debate. The rules governing the question period say: 

 

Questions must be stated without pre-amble or speech or be in the nature of debate. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

835 

Therefore the member for Qu’Appelle was out of order. I moved on to the next person who was available. It 

was the Minister of Finance who was responding to a question which was put at an earlier time. 

 

MR. LANE: — On that particular point of order that’s not quite the way the events happened, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’d just like to refresh your memory. You rose in your place to rule me out of order. I sat down. The 

minister to whom I was directing my question at that point then gave up and gave an interminable answer 

prior to you recognizing the Minister of Finance and I would like to ask, Mr. Speaker, why the minister was 

able to reply as I say, at great length, when you ruled the question out of order? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I didn’t rule the question that the member for or . . . the Minister of 

Finance was not responding to the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane). His answer was to a previous 

question on another day. The member for Qu’Appelle was out of order because his question was in the 

nature of a debate. Therefore, he was out of order, according to the rules, not allowed to proceed with his 

question which I judge to be debate. I think if the members would have a look at the record, the verbatim 

transcript of the House for that particular question, they will find that the member for Qu’Appelle was, in 

fact, debating the issue. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — . . . point of order, I arise on a new point of order then, Mr. . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I can’t have interminable debate about rulings I’ve given. I think the members have . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Order. The members have to accept the ruling. The members have to be aware of 

the fact that I have to make a judgment quickly and if a member is debating the issue, I think an examination 

of the record will show, one way or another, whether the member was in fact debating the issue. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with what you say. What I’m asking you to do is to review the 

record yourself on the question asked by the member for Qu’Appelle to which the Minister of Social 

Services replied, on which you ruled him out of order because it was debate, but then you allowed the 

Minister of Social Services to reply. I’m asking you to review the record and, Mr. Speaker, if you find the 

record according to what we are suggesting then perhaps tomorrow, or when the record is available perhaps 

you could make an appropriate ruling at that time. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I assumed that the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) was raising the point of 

order with regard to the question raised by the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) immediately before the 

Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) rose . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it’s difficult to know which 

question the member was referring to from my records here. I have the member for Qu’Appelle on his feet 

several times and he was on his feet four times during the question period. I have marginal notes here and in 

each case the member for Qu’Appelle was out of order because of debate in every instance. So my ruling is 

consistent with the member for Qu’Appelle, and he is consistent and I am consistent and I think the record 

will clearly show that every question the member for Qu’Appelle asked was debatable. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. That covers all the questions the member for Qu’Appelle asked so I think 

that takes care of the issue. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

836 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 2 — Migratory Waterfowl Depredation Claims 

 

MR. J.R. KOWALCHUK (Melville) moved, seconded by Mr. D.G. Banda (Redberry). 

 

That this Assembly deplores the federal government’s disregard of its obligation and responsibility to 

the farmers of Western Canada shown by its refusal to share fully the cost of 1978 migratory 

waterfowl depredation claims. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I stand up to introduce this resolution, but it is with a very 

strong sense of disappointment and frustration that I do this. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is the third time in 

three years that I have sponsored the same type of resolution, always with the hope that the federal 

government will accept the suggested solution arising out of the debate and settle, once and for all, on a 

formula for waterfowl depredation that satisfies the farmers who have suffered substantial losses to their 

income through no fault of their own making, and accept, once and for all, the fact that the waterfowl 

depredation is a federal responsibility. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, I had a resolution made out making out the case of the farmer as well and let me 

repeat that resolution which I introduced: 

 

That this Assembly urges the federal government to fully accept the responsibilities under the 

Migratory Birds Convention Act, and demands that the federal government take immediate action to 

initiate a program to compensate for migratory bird damage to Saskatchewan farmers’ crops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the theme of this resolution is the same as this year’s, asking the federal government to carry 

out its responsibility in the area of waterfowl depredation of Saskatchewan crops, causing damages — untold 

damages — to the Saskatchewan farmers’ crops. And that is all it does and nothing more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Year after year, the federal government continues to attempt to wriggle out of its responsibilities even after 

making commitments. This last year, 1978, was no different. 

 

This resolution is timely. The question of full federal participation in migratory bird depredation is of great 

importance to western Canadian farmers, who yearly find their crop losses substantially increasing. This 

year, 1978, the loss claims in Saskatchewan alone were nearly $2 million. And it is the same farmers, year 

after year, in the traditional flyways of these migratory birds, who are affected. 

 

The losses for the 1978 crop season in Saskatchewan amounted to, as I said a moment ago, nearly $2 

million. The federal government’s contribution was $625,000, matched by Saskatchewan as per agreement 

coming to $1,350,000. The Saskatchewan government agreed to share the cost on a 50-50 basis to the full 

extent of all approved claims. After many discussions with the federal government the net result was a 

steadfast refusal by that government to increase the amount of the funding to cover these net losses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another $275,000 from the feds matched by the Saskatchewan Government, which we agreed 

to do, would have compensated all claims 100 per cent, but the federal government has refused. Not another 

nickel, they said. So the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

837 

compensation paid instead of dollar for dollar loss, resulted in a 68 per cent dollar paid out to the loss 

claimants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been acknowledged many times in the past that migratory birds are the responsibility of 

the federal government. Let me repeat to you, Sir, what I said last year in debating the same question: 

 

That the Migratory Birds Convention Act and the International Treaty with the United States places 

the responsibility of migratory birds squarely on the shoulders of the federal government. 

 

We know that the migratory birds are protected, and so they should be. We also know that this Saskatchewan 

government has made a valiant attempt through crop insurance, through lure crop programs and so on, to do 

all within its power to alleviate the great loss to the farmer. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let us not forget that this province also has the added responsibility of losses as a result of 

all the other creatures of the Crown — elk, deer, bears and so on. The depredations of these animals and 

birds are a costly item which is totally borne by the province. The Minister of Tourism (Mr. Matsalla), has 

just recently announced the rate of payments that this province will be paying for such losses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, migratory bird losses are first and foremost, as I have said, a federal responsibility. They issue 

the licenses for hunting these birds. In fact they increased the cost from $3 to $3.50 in 1974, saying, only 

after federal-provincial discussion, that the increase was to pay extra compensation for crop losses — a real 

turnabout, Mr. Speaker, once again assessing the Saskatchewan people, while all the while before in the 

negotiations, not once claiming that this extra charge was as originally stated, and I quote: ‘to ensure that it 

became an effective sampling to the universe for the purpose of getting information from the hunter’. That 

purpose is still valid now as it was then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The federal government has increased its income, yes, increased its income from the hunting permits, but has 

made a complete turnabout. It is still charging the fee but is ignoring the farmers’ total losses and is saying 

that the agreement between them and the province is at an end as of 1979, and in fact might be totally 

stopped in the name of government spending cutbacks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan hunter does not mind paying for his share of the crop 

losses, providing the farmer gets it. There is more to it than meets the eye. The hunters’ limited benefit of a 

few days hunting is in no way comparable to that of the benefits of the hunters of the United States and 

Mexico who probably benefit tenfold from these game birds. The Saskatchewan farmer who suffers these 

tremendous losses benefits none at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From any angle that you look at the problem of migratory birds, it is a federal responsibility — a federal 

problem which can be dealt with only by the federal government and not by their opting out, as has been 

intimated time and time again. 

 

Let me quote from my statement of last year in debate on this very same question, Mr. Speaker. I said last 

year: 

 

For too long the farmers of Saskatchewan and the province have borne the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

838 

brunt of the depredation carried on by the waterfowl of the North American continent. More than 60 

per cent of all wild ducks, geese and other waterfowl use the western flyway, and prey upon the 

farmers’ crops in the southern half of Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta, causing millions of 

dollars of uncollectible crop damage. 

 

As far back as one can remember, this picture has always been the same, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1953, the provincial Government of Saskatchewan, under the Department of Natural Resources, initiated a 

program and made funds available through the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office (SGIO) to 

administer a program designed to assist in the wildlife damage but in no way could a province stand the cost 

of the total coverage program. 

 

The Migratory Birds Convention Act places squarely the responsibility of waterfowl depredation on the 

federal government and so it should be, Mr. Speaker. Waterfowl are creatures that have no domicile 

residence. Their habitat and residence change with the seasons. They’re continental without any border 

restrictions. Their hunting license is under the federal government. In every way, it is the federal authorities, 

Mr. Speaker, that should be totally responsible for losses under the crop depredation, since it’s all of North 

America that benefits. The damages, however, caused by the waterfowl, is borne to the greatest degree by 

farmers with almost no compensation, except that provided by the province under crop insurance and 

subsidized to a very limited degree by Ottawa. Only in 1974, Mr. Speaker, after a prolonged and protracted 

negotiation did the federal government finally recognize its obligations and responsibilities. We considered it 

then a breakthrough for the province. An agreement was signed in 1974, retroactive to 1973, a four-year 

agreement which last year was extended for another year in the form of a letter. The agreement called for $1 

million yearly divided between the cost of projects such as lure crops, which is a preventative measure, and 

in compensation only contributed to premium cost of all crop insurance and also half of administration costs, 

Mr. Speaker. Where the loss is the greatest and not recoverable to the greatest extent under the All Risk Co-

op Insurance, the federal government has contributed nothing nor does it seem that it intends to. In other 

words, there is no protection for the individual farmers’ coverage for specific fields which were damaged or 

totally destroyed by migratory birds. That is where all the losses are, Mr. Speaker. That is the weakness in 

the federal government’s participation. 

 

As I’ve already stated, Mr. Speaker, there was a $10 million crop loss last year and possibly a bit of recovery 

through the crop insurance but to the greatest degree the farmers are the losers. This was said by me last year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I go further on, Mr. Speaker, to say the federal government continues to display that kind of irresponsible 

attitude. I say it is irresponsible. I said it last year and I’ll say it again this year and I continue to read. 

 

This isn’t the program that was first inaugurated by the province and so interpreted as indirectly being forced 

on the federal government 

 

We didn’t force this on the federal government. It isn’t the program that can be branded as some sort of a 

welfare scheme. It isn’t the program that could be interpreted as a socialist brain wave. It is a problem, Mr. 

Speaker, that became a problem when the first settlers came to this province to farm. It’s a problem that has 

had continuous, 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

839 

disastrous consequences for the farmers for many years. It’s distinctly and definitely a national problem and 

in no way should be sloughed off on the Canadian government on to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this is the attitude of the federal government, then I believe that our Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Kaeding) and our Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) indicated to the SARM delegates at Saskatoon 

that we drop out of the federal-provincial agreements is a good one, that either the federal government face 

up to the situation as it is and increase the payments for crop damage or we drop the whole problem into 

their lap to deal with as their problem, which it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fight for compensation to each farmer began earnest in 1971, as I have already stated, when 

the Hon. Eiling Kramer was Minister of Natural Resources. From then on there has been a sharing of costs of 

crop damages with changes coming on as the years went by, with the federal government under Jack Davis, 

Minister of Environment and Juanne Sauve accepting the responsibility of crop depredation by migratory 

birds as a federal responsibility for the first time. In 1974 when I had the honor of being the minister in 

charge after a long and protracted negotiation, as I have already said before, an agreement was signed 

retroactive to 1973 — a four-year agreement as stated just a few moments ago in last year’s debate. And here 

we are today, Mr. Speaker, almost where we were five years ago back at square one — not that it is the fault 

of this government at all. Both the ministers, we pressured them, both the Minister of Agriculture of 

Saskatchewan and the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources (Mr. Matsalla) have fought a valiant 

fight to build up and approve the depredation agreement but to no avail . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

You’ll have your chance — the member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) if he contributes as much to this 

debate as he did last year he could have stayed home. 

 

May I say that both these ministers, Mr. Speaker, have fought and so have the provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba fought along side with them. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition members will give 

their full support to the resolution and not condemn this government for not implementing and signing a 

further agreement. We would have implemented and signed it a long time ago if we could have reached a 

conclusion with the federal government. This government has made every attempt to deal with the federal 

government on this issue in particular and deserves a great deal of credit, not condemnation. Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s a smaller issue than crowrates or prairie rail line abandonment does not make it less needful of a 

united approach for western farmers, be they in Alberta, Saskatchewan or Manitoba. We need a united front 

to place this question of crop depredation once again squarely to the federal government as a matter of being 

under their jurisdiction and their responsibility. I am hoping that all members of this House will support this 

resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move this resolution. 

 

MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to support the very important resolution that has 

just been moved by my colleague and I want to commend the member for Melville on his persistence in 

regard to this resolution. 

 

The resolution deplores the federal government’s disregard of its responsibility to the farmers of western 

Canada by its refusal to share fully the cost of the 1978 waterfowl depredation claims. I wouldn’t go so far as 

to say this is Ottawa’s year to get the West, Mr. Speaker, as every year is the year to get the West, but it does 

appear that they are trying harder. Just a spot list will show cutbacks and attacks by the Prairie Rail Action 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

840 

Committee on our rail lines, attacks on the crowrate, weather forecast stations, RCMP training, the 

cancellation of rail line relocation for Regina, just to list a few, Mr. Speaker. Now the latest in the continuing 

saga of withdrawals is the waterfowl depredation payments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1978 nearly 1,900 Saskatchewan farmers submitted claims that came to about $1.8 million. 

In addition, the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation spent about $100,000 to administer the program. 

This brought the total cost for the program to $1.9 million. The federal and the matching provincial grants 

came to $1.35 million, as my colleague has stated. This made the fund about $550,000 short of the verified 

claims. Mr. Speaker, because the federal government refused to live up to their responsibilities, 

Saskatchewan farmers will receive only 68 cents on each dollar. Now, Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand why 

Saskatchewan farmers must pay to feed the Crown’s birds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let no one doubt that these birds and the damage they cause belong to the federal government. 

This was first established in 1916 by the Migratory Bird Convention Act and has been fortified several times 

since. We do not need a history lesson on migratory bird legislation. We have been through this, 

unfortunately, before — year in and year out. To further establish its domain over migratory birds, Canada 

collects $3.50 a year from each waterfowl hunter and maintains the right to arbitrarily set bag limits for all 

game species. And yet, Mr. Speaker, they have the audacity to withdraw after collecting the money that was 

originally promised to grain producers for losses suffered due to the waterfowl. They pay less than what 

adequately compensates the unfortunate farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunate, indeed, is the farmer whose crop is ravaged by feeding waterfowl. Although Ottawa may say 

crop damage by waterfowl is only slight compared to the whole harvest, it can be ruinous for the individual 

farmer that lives on the migratory flight path. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to state that Saskatchewan has 

more than lived up to its responsibility for wildlife. We have recognized that society deems wildlife as 

important. We have spent millions of dollars on consultation with concerned citizens and agencies. We also 

believe these are society’s birds, not the farmer’s birds; therefore society should pay for them. Now, in 1979, 

after some 63 years, Ottawa says we will not honor our obligations. We will not pay the outstanding debt of 

$550,000 which we owe Saskatchewan farmers for feeding our birds in 1978, and furthermore, they say we 

will not pay anything at all for feeding birds in 1979. We want to cut back on the West so we can make the 

bankers in Toronto happy, because we need Toronto; we don’t need the West. 

 

Members opposite say we should sign a binding agreement — look at Resolution No. 19. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

a program with one year’s life expectancy shows no long term federal commitment, as was the case in the 

1973 agreement. The one year agreement creates a crisis situation each spring for administration of the 

program and does not give the landowner an opportunity to plan ahead. Thus public confidence is lost. 

Secondly, the one year program provides no indication of a continuing federal involvement, and we found 

that out. The proposal also does not contain any mention of a mutual promise to develop a long term spot 

loss compensation scheme. This was contained in the just expired agreement of 1978. The federal 

government has done nothing in this agreement to live up to this obligation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we strongly support a long term approach, and we recognize the responsibility to have such a 

program in place this last year, as well as in the future, and 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

841 

a minimum five year agreement is required. The fact that separate programs were proposed for compensation 

and prevention is also totally unacceptable to us as it will reduce the efficiency of the program and creates 

the potential danger of one portion of the program being played against the other, and this is exactly what is 

happening. By separating the two programs, heavy public pressure is placed on the compensation portion of 

the program and escalating cost tremendously. I suggest that either the two programs remain together, or that 

Canada completely take over the compensation portion of the program, and Saskatchewan run the prevention 

program, with 50 per cent federal funds. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been picking up the bill for conservation. We have been picking up 

half the bill for crop depredation when it is not our responsibility . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . when we 

have not been able to make decisions on waterfowl management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite would read their speech from last year, they wouldn’t be harping over 

there. Whatever they contributed, all they said was that farmers in Saskatchewan should pay the whole shot. 

That’s what the member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) said. 

 

We have given all this support for our farmers. Now we, and our farmers, are left stranded, Mr. Speaker. It 

makes one wonder if we should continue with agreements with the federal government to protect and 

encourage the breeding of game birds, if the federal government is not going to pay for the feeding of the 

birds. The Migratory Game Bird Act is a federal law and a federal responsibility. With the present attitude of 

the federal government, one would be tempted to say that we in Saskatchewan should never have accepted 

any responsibility for wild game damage to crops. It’s not fair that Saskatchewan farmers should suffer 

economic setbacks from a resource which benefits all of society. The negligence of the federal government is 

jeopardizing any chance of implementing habitat conservation programs for waterfowl on the prairies . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . squeak it over there. Mr. Speaker, this places the entire waterfowl resource in 

danger. Mr. Speaker, it seems highly hypocritical of Ottawa to draw money from waterfowl hunters, to insist 

that migratory birds have been their responsibility for over half a century, and then to refuse to give 

compensation to the very people who are suffering the most because of the waterfowl, Saskatchewan 

farmers. Mr. Speaker, this is a discriminatory and shabby policy brought to bear against the farmers of 

Western Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must say that we have not received much encouragement from opposition members on this 

issue. I would like to address myself to a suggestion made by some of the members of last year’s opposition, 

that is, that some form of crop insurance be set up to compensate landowners for losses caused by migratory 

waterfowl. Others said that Saskatchewan should pay the whole shot. Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members 

opposite if they can justify telling the landowners in their constituencies that in order to get compensation for 

losses due to depredation they should have to pay the premiums on insurance themselves. I would like to ask 

them if they can explain to their constituents that they will have to support at their own expenses a resource 

which is enjoyed by every person in Canada and, indeed, out of Canada, in North America — a resource 

which through revenue from hunting licenses puts money into federal coffers. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that 

crop insurance is not the answer to the problem of depredation by waterfowl. As my colleague, the hon. 

member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) stated in his remarks, the farmers of Saskatchewan have carried the 

brunt of depredation caused by waterfowl for too long. Mr. Speaker, it is time the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

842 

federal government paid up and quit welching on responsibilities they have committed themselves to in 

writing and in deed. It is time they properly funded a compensation for crop loss program for farmers who 

have suffered crop depredation due to migratory waterfowl. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has demonstrated that it more than meets its responsibilities for wildlife 

protection and farm protection. It is now time for the federal government to stop the foot dragging and pay 

their bills. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I second Resolution No. 2, and that I strongly 

recommend everyone in this legislature support this resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to address the legislature on this motion this 

afternoon. It’s very amusing to sit here and listen to members opposite condemn the federal government and 

only the federal government, stating that it is just the federal government’s fault because there was not 

enough money to pay all the claims in ‘78 for crop loss due to migratory game birds. I believe very strongly 

that it is not only the federal government that is to blame but the provincial government as well. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address my remarks to the federal government that is so arrogant 

when it comes communicating not only to the people of Saskatchewan, but started out not even co-operating 

with the Government of Saskatchewan. After reading a headline in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix dated 

Saturday, March 18, 1978, Saskatchewan Still is Waiting for Word on a Press Announcement Made a Week 

Ago by two Federal Cabinet Ministers, Agriculture Minister, Eugene Whelan and Environment Minister, 

Len Marchand sent out a joint press release, date lined Brandon, Manitoba, in which they announced a new 

program of help in covering farm losses due to duck depredation. But the entire scheme was announced 

without consultation with the Saskatchewan government, the one most affected by duck damage to grain 

crops. This just helps to prove what I was saying about a very arrogant federal government that does not even 

try to communicate with the provincial governments. Saskatchewan first offered compensation for losses due 

to ducks back in 1956. But it was not until 1972 that the federal government woke up and finally decided 

that they should maybe get involved and accept their legal responsibility for waterfowl damage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very evident that the people of Saskatchewan are fed up with the present 

federal Liberal government and the two dictators we have running the federal Liberal government, those two 

dictators being Mr. Trudeau and Mr. Lang. Every time these two individuals turn around, something happens 

to our wonderful Canada and it’s not good. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Think Joe Clark would be better? 

 

MR. GARNER: — Just hang tough, guys. Whenever Mr. Trudeau calls a federal election, I’m very 

confident that the people will pull the rug out from underneath him and the rest of the Liberal Party. With 

Joe Clark as our Prime Minister . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARNER: — . . . we will get back to a government that will listen to the people and not dictate to 

them. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

843 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Right on, right on, Jim. 

 

MR. GARNER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the provincial government that seems to be 

wearing a white cloak over a black one. Mr. Speaker, another heading from a press clipping reads: Damage 

Fund Ceiling Irks Province on August 17, 1978. Saskatchewan will drop out of a federal wildlife 

preservation program if the federal government does not recognize its responsibility for waterfowl damage to 

crops. Are these not your words, Mr. Minister of Agriculture? This to me sounds like a real socialist 

approach to a problem. Instead of indicating a solution, just dump the ducks on the Saskatchewan farmer and 

run away in those white cloaks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you were a farmer, having just read a statement like that from the Minister of Agriculture in 

your province of Saskatchewan, knowing that you might have a wet fall with lots of migratory game birds 

around, it wouldn’t be long before you would start dreaming about ducks, knowing that your provincial 

government could care less what happens to your grain crops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a news release put out by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) on January 16, 1979 reads 

as follows: 

 

Waterfowl Crop Depredation Insurance in Jeopardy, Nineteen hundred Saskatchewan farmers 

submitted claims totalling about $1.8 million. In addition the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Board 

spent about $100,000 to administer the program bringing the total cost to about $1.9 million ( . . . 

inaudible interjection . . . Oh, you read your own newspaper, Cody). Since the federal grant and 

matching provincial grant came to about $1.35 million, the fund is about $500,000 short of verified 

claims. If the federal government’s contribution is not increased there will be enough money to 

provide only 68 cents on each dollar of verified claim, Mr. Kaeding said. Mr. Kaeding said, he 

intends to wait until January 31 before making a final decision on payment of 1978 claims. If we 

haven’t heard from Mr. Whalen by then we will have no alternative but to go ahead and pay the 

claims on a pro-rated basis, he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to point out to this Assembly what a lacklustre and weak government we have 

in Saskatchewan. The Minister of Agriculture has just stated that he wasn’t going to mail out any money to 

the farmers on their crop loses until 1978 at the end of January. By delaying and waiting this long to pay 

money owed to the Saskatchewan farmers it has already put a large burden on them as they have bills to pay 

like anyone else, Mr. Speaker. The farmers of Saskatchewan entered into this agreement with the 

government in good faith but the government was once again playing games with the farmer of 

Saskatchewan. In the first part of February I was in touch with the minister’s office asking when the money 

was to be sent out to the farmers. I was given no direct answer or no date so, on February 6, after receiving 

many calls from farmers all over Saskatchewan, I issued a news release calling on the government to mail 

out money that was already in the fund. If more money was to come from the feds later, send that out later. 

So, the very next day the minister stated that payment would start going into the mail. Mr. Speaker, I would 

now like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Agriculture for taking my advice and mailing those 

cheques out to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

844 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARNER: — In the cheques, Mr. Speaker, that were mailed out to the farmers of Saskatchewan, one 

little paragraph I would like to read to you, dated February 5, 1979: 

 

I sincerely regret that the enclosed cheque under the Canada-Saskatchewan Waterfowl Crop Damage 

Compensation program represents only 68.3 per cent of your approved claim. It has been reduced 

because the federal government has limited expenditures on this program in Saskatchewan to 

$675,000. Saskatchewan has matched this amount by agreement for a total of $1,350,000 which will 

only pay 68.3 per cent of the total approved claims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a copy here of the agreement between the federal and provincial government, signed by 

the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well I suppose you should be told because after all you signed it. I don’t imagine you know 

what you signed, but I can tell you if you want to know. 

 

I’ll quote two parts in here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

5(a) Canada and Saskatchewan shall share equally compensation payments to Saskatchewan grain 

producers made in accordance with this agreement and the following costs and expenses of 

administering the said program, namely, salary, wages, travelling and other out-of-pocket expenses 

of personnel engaged in the actual adjusting and processing of claims under this program and 

stationery and printing supplies, public information costs and other miscellaneous expenditures 

directly attributable to the administration of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I ask my members opposite to listen, and listen closely: 

 

. . . provided, however, that payment by Canada under this agreement shall not exceed $675,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, what Minister of Agriculture, what Minister of Tourism and Renewable 

Resources for any province in Canada would sit down and even start negotiating an agreement like this with 

a set price in there? How do they know, unless they have some little magic wand or a crystal ball, what 

claims are going to be coming in, in the year 1978? One other little point, Mr. Speaker, under number 16: 

 

Nothing contained in this agreement shall commit either party to any obligation, either financial or 

jurisdictional, beyond the term of this agreement. Nor shall this agreement form the basis for the 

negotiation of any subsequent agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another point that disturbs me and I hope the Saskatchewan farmers can see what kind 

of a government they have running their province. Negotiations started on this agreement last year. I am sure 

I have read in different press clippings and so on, that the provincial government, last year, was telling the 

people of Saskatchewan it had already signed this agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this agreement was signed March 1, 1979. Now, how do you explain that? 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

845 

Last year the farmers of Saskatchewan were going on a crop depredation program and the agreement wasn’t 

signed until March 1 of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this just helps to prove my point that we not only have an arrogant government in Ottawa. This 

just helps to prove my point that we not only have an arrogant government in Ottawa but just as arrogant a 

government here in Saskatchewan and it is very weak. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move an amendment to the motion and it shall read: 

 

That Resolution No. 2 be amended and the following words added: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government for not pressuring the federal government 

to signing a binding substantial agreement with the federal Liberal government in 1978. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . Farmers in Manitoba? 

 

MR. GARNER: — I am not concerned about the farmers of Manitoba. I’m concerned about the farmers of 

Saskatchewan and so should this government be! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add one more remark. I can see why no action has been 

taken . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I can’t say anymore? Okay. Mr. Speaker, my motion is seconded by Mr. 

Birkbeck (Moosomin). 

 

Debate continues concurrently on the motion and the amendment. 

 

MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise to second the 

amendment by my hon. colleague the member for Wilkie (Mr. Garner). It also makes it very difficult to 

speak at any length or in any detail on this main motion or the amendment in light of the superb and 

admirable job that has been done by the member for Wilkie on this very motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — As usual, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of members there who seem to be rather 

lost in their ideals and their goals. Let us just very quickly recap what we have. We have a motion by the 

member for Melville (incidentally which he had on the order paper last year as well) and it just simply says 

that this Assembly deplores the federal government’s disregard of its obligation and responsibility to the 

farmers of western Canada shown by its refusal to share fully the cost of 1978 migratory waterfowl 

depredation claims. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a bad motion, that is really not a bad motion. But, Mr. Speaker, what the 

members opposite seem to do, as they are doing throughout the province and they set that example right here 

in the Legislative Chambers, is that rather than getting up and presenting the motion honestly, sincerely and 

attempting to get the support of the opposite side of this House (the opposition members), they make 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

846 

statements and make charges which will divide this Assembly, which is the institution and which surely 

should set an example for the rest of the province. Then they continue that on outside of this Legislative 

Chambers throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s where I take objection with the member (Mr. Kowalchuk). He comes in (again today) 

and says that my comments on his original motion last year were not valid. Well very simply, what were 

they? 

 

He is suggesting that the cost sharing program between the federal government and the provincial 

government, should be handled by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. Now surely, I don’t feel 

that’s the appropriate way to handle the funds. My statements were very simple. The SGIO should not handle 

the distribution of those funds. I think that’s a reasonable assessment. I suggested, partly, crop insurance 

could cover some of these losses. I think that’s a reasonable suggestion. I agreed that the feds should share 

part of the losses here in Saskatchewan, but, Mr. Speaker, I also made the statements when I replied to the 

member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) that it was not just Saskatchewan’s problem and it was not just a 

federal problem, but it included both the federal government and the provincial government and as well the 

United States of America. I made those statements as well in my comments. The Migratory Bird Convention 

Act is an international act. You don’t speak of that particular aspect in this motion whatsoever. 

 

Now your failure, as the member for Wilkie (Mr. Garner) has adequately pointed out, to negotiate reasonable 

terms with Ottawa to get sufficient funds, is just, Mr. Speaker, another example of this government’s failure 

to negotiate at any time on any subject with Ottawa. You failed with the weather office and you have failed 

now with this migratory bird situation and it just goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Wilkie has pointed these things out. If they don’t agree then I condemn 

them for putting the motion in the way that they do. The amendment that we have added to the original 

motion will provide that you accept your responsibilities as well. You can’t always slough everything off on 

Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s all I have to say on this motion and the amendment and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 6 — Cable Television 

 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South) moved, seconded by Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its cable television policies 

which have cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan millions of dollars and which have deprived the 

people of rural Saskatchewan cable television. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to speak on this motion. It has been less than two years since 

this government introduced and passed the act respecting community cablecasters in this House, one of the 

most controversial bills that was ever introduced. They drafted this legislation under the guise of the 

communities and the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

847 

people, by way of co-ops, having complete control over it. What they in fact wanted is control by the 

politicians and the bureaucrats. The minister who was then responsible for cable said, and I quote: 

 

Cable television should be harnessed to serve the needs of the community, the province, and the 

people who live here. The service ought to be available to as many people in Saskatchewan as 

possible. 

 

Today we have, according to recent reports, only 17,000 subscribers in the three major cities of the province, 

and this figure is probably grossly exaggerated. Once again, in their greed for power and control, they least 

of all consider the people of the province. 

 

Saskatchewan was the last province in Canada to be considered by the CRTTC (Canadian Radio-Television 

and Telecommunications Commission) for cable television and yet, in spite of this affront by the CRTTC, 

this government proceeded to delay delivery of cable to its residents even more. Licences were issued in July 

of 1976 to four groups in Saskatchewan and more than one year later, this government had still refused to 

negotiate with these groups for hardware leasing or allow any of them to install their own. You’ll probably 

never know how much these delays have cost these four licensees, but it is no doubt in the hundreds of 

thousands of dollars. 

 

Why did this government feel that they could accomplish what no other city in Canada could — having both 

cable TV and closed-circuit TV at the same time in a very limited market? 

 

They were told by this opposition that it was economically unattainable. This government has the habit of 

not listening to the people or of hearing only what they want to hear. Again, I quote from Hansard, where the 

minister said: 

 

Shortly after the election of this government in 1971, it was clear that some communities in this 

province might enjoy cable television. The government then began to formulate its policy as to what 

cable TV should be. 

 

He then quoted Pierre Juneau as saying that cable TV is really, in a sense, an evil. It brings into Canada three 

of the American networks, the worst of a foreign culture. Then he said, and again I quote, ‘We in essence 

agreed with that statement that in any by itself it wasn’t serving much of a purpose’. Now, this is an example 

of partial hearing. They listened to the people who said they wanted cable television. They listened to Pierre 

Juneau, who said they didn’t want American television. However, if they had been listening intently to the 

people, what they would have heard was they wanted American TV on cable to be able to tune in to more 

sports such as football, golf and baseball. 

 

Is the present closed-circuit TV giving the people Canadian content? Of course not. The four channels 

provide almost total American content, with the exception of maybe one hour per day for local 

programming. What they have managed to do is bring to the people of Saskatchewan American content, not 

free but at a very high cost. Why were they so anxious to support a non-viable or economically unattainable 

venture? Was it to eventually have the political propaganda machine not otherwise available to them? Why 

did they set co-op against co-op? 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the February, 1976, CRTTC (Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications 

Commission) hearings in Regina, there were five or six groups 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

848 

that applied for cable in Regina alone. Cable Regina was the successful applicant. All of the other 

applications, no doubt, were very disappointed in not being successful. However, Mr. Speaker, I can assure 

you that a year later, when it became apparent that this government would stop at nothing to gain control of 

cable television, they were all quite happy that they had not invested any more than their initial cost of 

applying for the licence. When the minister failed in his initial attempt to force their ideologies on the federal 

government, they demoted him and brought in their heavyweight, the Attorney General. 

 

I find it ironic that the federal socialists and provincial socialists were not able to negotiate satisfactory 

terms. This government has also spent a considerable amount of money in applying for the same licence for 

cable television. However, because of their unlimited resources, our taxpayers’ money, they acted like school 

boys — pouting school boys, and decided that they would teach CRTTC or the federal government, that they 

would not be allowed to interfere within this province. They then proceeded to go after the closed circuit 

market. Surely, with the resources available to this government and the surveys they conducted, they knew it 

was impossible. I am sure their attitude had to be that they could do the impossible when it was the 

taxpayers’ money anyway, so it didn’t matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister at the time suggested that only with their bill, would the community have control 

over community programming. Who did he think would control it, for example, on Cable Regina? In their 

submission to the CRTTC, not only did all of the other groups of committees established for this purpose 

offer community input (?) but provided at least 10 per cent of their revenue to local programming and 

provided anywhere from 40 hours to 60 hours per week for community programming. Through their 

stubbornness, this government tried in every way to break the licensees of Cable TV. They have spent at 

least $5 million and now have forced CPN (Co-operative Programming Network) into receivership. 

 

Let us take a look at some of those costs. First of all, there is the $2.6 million guaranteed by the government. 

Then there are the 10,000 converters that Sask Tel ordered at a cost of probably somewhere around $100 per 

converter. It totals to about $1 million. The member asks if it has all been spent. If it hasn’t all be spent, then 

why haven’t you paid the Sask Tel telephone bill of $600,000? I would venture to guess that it has been all 

spent and probably more. Then we have the Department of Finance officials who spent several months 

assisting this white elephant, and of course the hidden cost of Sask Tel employees who spent much of their 

time on it. No doubt, as is the tradition of this government, they will blame the mismanagement of CPN (Co-

operative Programming Network) for its failure. The member, the hon. minister, I suggest that I am calling 

the Co-op a white elephant — your interfering with that department, or that company, that co-op, a white 

elephant. 

 

Again they will have a scapegoat. Again they will prove to the people of Saskatchewan their ministerial 

irresponsibilities. It was the Premier’s own appointee who was instrumental in the original management of 

CPN, Jerry Parfeniuk, who was from the Premier’s office. And of course there was George Dyck, the 

prominent NDP from Saskatoon who was actively involved. So if they want to blame the management, as 

they no doubt will, then I suggest they blame themselves. It was their management team. 

 

During the third session of the 18th legislature the subject of cable television was discussed 15 times in this 

House. Both opposition parties tried to convince the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

849 

government of their foolhardiness but they wouldn’t be budged. It will be interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, 

what they intend to do now. After the persistent condemnation of the private sector in operating closed 

circuit TV, will they now sell it to business people? I understand several businessmen have already 

approached the government with offers to purchase it. The salvage value, I am told, is less than $250,000. 

Will they attempt to recover as much of the loss as possible or give some of their friends a new windfall? 

Will they eventually admit that it is economically not feasible to have two cable companies in the same area? 

 

The Premier recently in this House criticized this opposition for submitting 17 motions condemning this 

government. What would you have me do — congratulate you for costing the taxpayers $5 million or more, 

for mucking up cable television in Saskatchewan, for antagonizing our co-operatives and private firms, for 

delaying delivery of cable television to the citizens of this province? No, Mr. Speaker, because I do condemn 

this government I move this resolution. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is certainly not with pleasure that I enter this 

particular debate because this debate should not have been brought before the floor of the Assembly if the 

government opposite had not embarked upon a financial bungle, which is costing the Premier himself some 

loss of prestige and is certainly an embarrassment to the government members opposite. 

 

Let me indicate the CPN mess that we have in Saskatchewan is an indication of what happens when a 

government policy becomes a partisan political force rather than an attempt to attain the policy as set out by 

the government. If we go back to the cable television in Saskatchewan, a presentation of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to the CRTTC (Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission) dated 

February 9, 1976, the government sets out most clearly its policy on cable television. 

 

The government policy at that time was basically to foster the construction of an integrated provincial 

telecommunications system, which delivers all forms of signals and services including telephone, television, 

business information and educational services to as many people as possible at a reasonable cost to all users. 

 

Such a system is best regarded not as an end in itself, but as a means by which the social and cultural fabric 

of the community is preserved and strengthened. 

 

In pursuing this fundamental objective (and those are the words of the government) the statement of policy 

indicates that CPN has nothing to do with the original government policy. Very precisely, that original policy 

was designed to allow Sask Tel to become the transportation vehicle of the cable system in Saskatchewan. If 

we all go back to the original dispute that existed between the government opposite, and I say at that 

particular juncture, all the people of Saskatchewan and the federal government, it was a question as to who 

was going to deliver cable television to the people of Saskatchewan. I happen to agree and I think the 

government was quite right that in this province it should be Sask Tel. That is what the government’s white 

paper says; that was going to be its major goal. 

 

What has CPN got to do with that? Absolutely nothing! The government said at that outset that CPN was to 

be the vehicle, the weapon in our fight with Ottawa. If that is the case then the question should be asked — 

why was CPN not dropped when, in fact, the CRTTC ruled that Sask Tel would be the common carrier of 

cable television in the 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

850 

province of Saskatchewan. Why at that point after victory was attained was CPN not dropped? The reason is 

that at that point, if not sooner, CPN then developed into a political vehicle for the government opposite, a 

political vehicle instead of an adjunct to attaining government stated policies. In fact, the political vehicle 

instituted by the Premier of Saskatchewan’s office when they parachuted and directed a Mr. Gerry Parfeniuk 

out of the Premier’s office in to run CPN. At that point, at that very point, CPN became a political tool, a 

partisan political tool of the government opposite at great cost to the people of this province. It became 

irrelevant and unnecessary when CRTTC ruled in favour of the government and became a political adjunct 

to the government once CRTC had ruled. 

 

There became all sorts then of justification, Mr. Speaker, of CPN. We had the fact that CPN was going to be 

the vehicle to get cable television to all the small towns — which was frankly hogwash. The Premier knew it 

wasn’t true. Members opposite knew it wasn’t true. In fact, we have tabled in this House — and that’s two 

years ago and I know there’s a significant increase since — the fact that 18 small communities in the 

province of Manitoba had conventional cable, not government controlled CPN or closed circuit television, 

under the existing system. There were seven or eight in the province of Alberta two years ago, small towns 

that had conventional cable under the existing system without the need of a government controlled closed 

circuit network. We had as well, a political cost which has run — the estimates are well over $5 million. 

Some of them have been detailed by the mover of the motion, the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau). 

First of all, we had the total loss to the people of Saskatchewan of $2.6 million. Then we had the roughly — 

and we can’t get an accurate figure on how many subscribers there are. (CPN says 17,000 but Sask Tel only 

takes 8,000 many converters or 10,000 converters). We can’t get an accurate figure because the government 

opposite is embarrassed and won’t give the information at $60 to $80 each. We say $100 or $130 but the 

government says $60 to $80. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What do you say, Doc? 

 

MR. LANE: — You’re afraid to tell us. I challenge the member responsible for telephones who is afraid to 

give us the information on CPN to stand up in this House and come clean and tell the public what the 

financial cost of this economic debacle was to the people of this province. I’ll bet you, Mr. Speaker, he 

doesn’t have the political fortitude to come clean on CPN. He doesn’t have the political fortitude to tell the 

people the true cost of CPN because I’m going to detail some other costs. 

 

First of all, CPN may be the only outfit in this whole province that doesn’t have to pay its Sask Tel bill and 

some months ago it was $600,000. I bet you now it is up in the $700,000 or $800,000 range. Let me tell you 

what would happen to any individual in this province if they didn’t pay their telephone bill for a couple of 

months — they would be cut off and we say that CPN should be cut off. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — We say, as well, that the individuals who are responsible for CPN should be run out of the 

government and that those government ministers who are, in fact, responsible for this error in judgment 

should be made accountable to the public of Saskatchewan. We know what the public would do if they 

found out the true cost of CPN. They would run them right out of the province. The fact is the government 

can’t give the true information because the political embarrassment and the political ramifications would be 

too great. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

851 

We’ve got some additional costs as well that had to be incurred because of CPN. That was the matter that 

Sask Tel had to embark on a policy of inserting filters for each hookup so that, in fact, the CPN would be 

screened out of the conventional cable. The government estimates opposite were approximately $100 and, in 

fact, we all know that they are relatively ineffective. All of these costs are paid by the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. We had some other costs. We had the situation where Sask Tel employees were made to 

promote CPN in the Sask Tel exhibits at exhibitions and events across this province. It happened in Regina 

and in Saskatoon, as a couple of examples, where Sask Tel employees against their wishes were made to put 

on the CPN display in the Sask Tel exhibit for the people of this province. We had the hidden cost as well of 

Sask Tel employees having to go out and hook up CPN when it was unnecessary. We had the hidden cost 

(and the minister that’s responsible for this debacle, the Attorney General, may be able to give us the true 

cost if he has the political fortitude) of government employees having to go into CPN, the Department of 

Finance officials, to run it because it was such a mess, to try and find out the government’s position and run 

it and operate it and keep it going. 

 

If you want to know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not CPN was a good idea all you have to do is watch the 

government opposite. Because, if it was a good idea, the government opposite would be the first ones to go 

and tell the public how great it is, would be the first ones to go out and tell the exact cost to the public. They 

would be the first ones to go out and have the Sask Tel employees tell people how great it is. We would be 

having advertisements on standard TV of this family of Crown corporations, and how great the government 

program is and how great the involvement is. The fact is they have been silent and that silence is proof that 

this thing is an economic fiasco, a financial disaster and shouldn’t have been started in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we got subsequent justifications, as I say. We started out and once the battle with CRTTC had 

been fought and won, the justification then became as to the small towns. That’s been proven false and a 

blatant untruth on the part of the government opposite because in every other province small towns are 

getting conventional cable, except for Saskatchewan. 

 

The government said that CPN Co-operative Programming Network was going to be great for local 

programming. I just called for debate today so that the government opposite can go and check it. Let me tell 

you some of the great local programs that are on CPN. We have the Fabulous Talking Time Machine. Now 

that could be one of the government members opposite or it could be the Attorney General, but I haven’t 

seen this program so I don’t know if it is talking about the Attorney General or one of the other members 

opposite. In fact, if it is, I give him credit for having one program. Then we have that great local program 

(not Who Has Seen the Wind or some of the other government movies), we’ve got the great one — Jolson 

Sings Again. Now I can’t see how, by any stretch of the imagination, anyone over there is going to take 

credit for that movie. But I have seen some strange things before, Mr. Speaker, and it wouldn’t be the first 

time that happened. 

 

Perhaps Death Race 2,000 could be local programming, but I wonder if any members opposite are going to 

stand up and take credit for that particular movie? C. C. and Company — now, Mr. Speaker, we know the 

contributions of the booze companies to the government opposite, but I don’t think C. C. and Company is 

what they had in mind when they are talking about local programming. C. C. may be their contributors, but I 

don’t think that’s what they had in mind when they were talking about local 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

852 

programming. 

 

Then we have Looking for Mr. Goodbar (I’m just passing over some of them) and that raises a secondary 

issue. The government opposite talks about doing away with the booze ads and the liquor ads from 

conventional cable when they are allowing category X movies on CPN. It strikes me as a pretty strange 

choice of priorities when in fact you are allowing the category X movies on TV but you figure the beer ads 

are damaging to the social fabric of this province. That’s why the people of this province are questioning 

your choice. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — They are questioning your choice of priorities in many other issues. Let me tell you, they are 

questioning your choice of priorities when it comes to conventional TV in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CPN got into a great advertising campaign. They probably used up half of that $2.6 million. 

They talk about the fact that this is going to be community programming. Well, that turned out to be just 

absolutely untrue. As a matter of fact, I am sure that the minister responsible for Consumer Affairs would be 

quite happy to take this false and misleading advertising up with the relevant departments. He’s anxious in 

other areas to jump on people. I don’t know why he hasn’t done it to CPN. They try to pass themselves off as 

conventional cable. The only true statement in this whole ad, Mr. Speaker, is that CPN was going to be a 

non-profit organization. Let me tell you that is an understatement. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — That’s an absolute understatement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is going to attack the Opposition as being anti-co-ops. Let me tell you 

that if you embark on another financial mess and stupid project like this, you are doing a greater disservice to 

the co-op movement in this province than anybody could do deliberately attacking them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LANE: — The co-op movement itself is embarrassed by CPN. The interesting thing about CPN is that 

CPN a supposed co-op (a government arm we think it is) goes out and attacks and challenges Cable Regina, 

another co-op, for the same market and costs Cable Regina money. You’re pitting co-op against co-op in 

your attack. That’s a strange position for the government opposite to find itself in. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) is also going to say that the hon. member for 

Qu’Appelle is known for his opposition to CPN, has attacked CPN and has probably done more to destroy 

CPN. I will say, Mr. Speaker, I hope he does because I accept that statement as truth and I accept that attack 

proudly, because I may be the only opposition member who can stand up in this House and say that I 

attempted to save the public $5 million. That is precisely what I am trying to do. 

 

You want to attack the people of Saskatchewan who oppose CPN. The fact is you made an error. You made 

a bad error in judgment. You attempted to convert it. You converted it to a political arm. You made it a 

political football. You pitted co-op against co-op. You cost the people at least $5 million. You thoroughly 

disrupted Sask Tel that wanted to 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

853 

get on with the job of installing conventional cable as the people wanted. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they say they 

know what they are doing. There is not one thing in the actions of your work with CPN which indicates you 

do know what you are doing. In fact, it indicates just the opposite — you don’t know what you are doing. In 

fact you are quite prepared to take $5 million of the public’s money and throw it out the window for your 

own partisan political purposes. 

 

The people of this province and the co-op movement don’t like what you’ve done, don’t agree with what 

you’ve done. We say cut your losses; get out of this mess. You have done yourself a disservice. You have 

made a fundamental error in judgment. I think if the government opposite were to bow to their conscience, 

know what they are talking about in support of good government, would endorse this particular motion from 

the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) as I do. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says that I must be on the 

television show called the Fabulous Talking Machine. That may or may not be but I want to tell the hon. 

member that based on his performance this afternoon he’ll never get an offer for a television show based on 

that kind of a choice. In fact, Mr. Speaker, not only will he not get that kind of an offer, I think that he will 

find that the television companies of Saskatchewan, the television companies of this country, would be 

absolutely appalled at what I find is a contradictory and confused argument on the question of cable 

television in the province of Saskatchewan, in the Dominion of Canada. Let me just give you an example. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and members of the press gallery and the public, I ask you to take note of this. 

 

The member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) said words to this effect. I challenge him at the end of my 

remarks, if he wants, or subsequently when he wraps up the debate to correct me — it’s in Hansard. He says 

that Saskatchewan, because of the position of the provincial government on cable ownership, was virtually 

the last province in Canada to get cable television, the last province to get cable television in the Dominion 

of Canada, because of our policies when we ought to have known that the people of this province wanted to 

get on with the job with American television — and we were holding them up. That was the substance of the 

words — not the exact words, that’s the message. And he nods his head in approval behind here saying that’s 

true. What’s the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) just finished saying? He says that CPN (Co-operative 

Programming Network) was set up as a bargaining weapon for the Dominion of Canada with the DOC and 

the CRTTC for cable ownership hardware because of the policies of the province of Saskatchewan. He read 

to us that little portion of the brief; he says I’m all for it. Now, Mr. Speaker, not only does he say that he’s all 

for it but then he advances this remarkable contradictory position. He says, Mr. Speaker, I’m all for CPN as a 

bargaining tool. You should have used it, you should have used it to its fullest tilt. You should have done 

everything that you could have done to get control of the cable hardware for the province of Saskatchewan 

— but don’t let it cost you a penny in doing it. 

 

Set it up, use it as a negotiating tool, do everything you can to get the cable hardware ownership resolved, he 

says, but don’t you spend a penny in the process of doing it. On the one hand, he says, Mr. Speaker, we 

should be putting CPN forward in order to advocate the policies of communications for the province of 

Saskatchewan, but on the other hand we shouldn’t be spending any money keeping CPN afloat. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan have seen this kind of a performance from the Progressive 

Conservative Party not only from day one since the election was 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

854 

over, but since the Progressive Conservative Party was elected to the legislature, the Assembly of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, confused and contradictory throughout. We see it every day in 

question period. Members get up and they say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . now look, I know the member 

for Moosomin (Mr. Berntson) doesn’t like a good dose of truth, but just sit tight and listen to it for half a 

second because the member for . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Progressive Conservative Party takes the position 

— I’m having difficulty being heard. Mr. Speaker, I think I’m making a very good speech right now, but I 

am having difficulty hearing it. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of position, in all seriousness for a moment, I think has put the PC 

Party, this contradictory position as is symbolized in the cable television argument, into the dire political 

straits that they are in currently in the province of Saskatchewan, provincially as a provincial party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this very point that I have made, with the members for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) and 

Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane), was the provincial government’s position on cable ownership a good one or a bad 

one, I think the people of Saskatchewan are entitled to have a united voice coming forward from the PC 

Opposition, but they don’t have. 

 

On the question of whether or not CPN ought to have been used as an negotiating tool and as a result of 

having been used as an negotiating tool gotten the hardware concessions, they ought to have been speaking 

with a united voice, but they haven’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say quite a bit more on this at a later date and I am going to adjourn the debate, but I 

just want to make a couple of comments about the member for Regina South and his speech. I have already 

pointed out what I think is the major contradiction which exists between him, his remarks and the member 

for Qu’Appelle, but he did ask the question. He said that we were the last province in Canada to be 

considered by cable television, and he is right, or almost right. I think the question has to be asked, why? Mr. 

Speaker, the answer is because the policy of the province of Saskatchewan was twofold. 

 

1. We were not going to agree as the province of Saskatchewan, through Sask Tel, to allow the ownership of 

cable hardware to fall into the hands of the private cable entrepreneurs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — May I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a position which has been advocated by Sask Tel 

every since the issue or the technological spectre, of cable television arose in Canada. That was the position 

taken by Sask Tel back in 1968, when the member for Qu’Appelle was on the Liberal Party side of the fence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we were to adopt the Regina South position we would have rushed in our haste to have 

allowed the licensing of any kind of person out of the cable television system giving up the vital element of 

control of the cable hardware for Sask Tel. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

855 

Why is cable hardware so important? Why is the control of cable hardware so important? Mr. Speaker, cable 

is going to be used by and be serving the people of Saskatchewan for services over and above the simple 

provision of television. Cable is going to be used for security systems, or banking systems, or a variety of 

other technological systems, something akin to say, the use of a telephone 30 years or 40 years ago, 

whenever it was introduced in the province of Saskatchewan. That kind of service is going to be developing 

technologically throughout the world and in Saskatchewan. This province was based on the fundamental 

premise that the Crown corporation owned by the people of the province of Saskatchewan should have 

control of the cable distribution system in order to provide the services equally to rural Saskatchewan and 

throughout, for everybody and not just at peculiar positions. The second aspect of this policy was the 

question of community controlled co-ops, if at all possible. Now I know that rubs the member for Regina 

South (Mr. Rousseau) particularly negatively. He doesn’t like community controlled organizations, and he 

doesn’t like co-op community controlled organizations in particular. I realize that but, Mr. Speaker, a basic 

fundamental tenet of this government is the belief that such things as communications and co-operative 

endeavors in a variety of areas ought to be in the hands of the communities, and not in the hands of private 

entrepreneurs or the government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the motion from the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) says 

that our policies have deprived rural Saskatchewan. Those are the two cornerstones of our policy — 

community hardware control and community ownership. I ask the member for Regina South to just consider 

that for a moment. If we had given up the hardware ownership to private entrepreneurs, as you have 

suggested and advocated today, would rural Saskatchewan stand a chance of getting either conventional 

cable or closed-circuit? The simple fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, it would not have done that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the remarks made by the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. 

Lane). The member for Qu’Appelle says the Government of Saskatchewan has not said that this is a good 

idea. Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member for Qu’Appelle now, lest he lie awake at night tonight, I think 

CPN (Co-operative Programming Network) was, is and will be an excellent idea in communications and 

community controlled endeavors in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — The hon. member for Qu’Appelle says that I’m going to get up and say that he has 

been one of the main antagonists, the main attacker, of CPN. You know something; he’s right. Mr. Speaker, 

the member for Qu’Appelle has been one of the main attackers of the concept of closed CPN community 

controlled services. And not only that, but he and the PCs take credit for it. When I adjourn the debate and 

resume it next week, I’m going to run through for the hon. members a list of the organizations, not 

individuals but organizations, that belong to CPN, organizations that the member for Qu’Appelle has 

committed himself to attacking, and has taken pride in so doing, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I will do that too. But you’re attacking CPN and that’s the position you’re taking; you and your caucus are 

opposed to CPN. You say you’re opposed to it and you’re going to take the main credit for doing CPN in. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m going to get this list 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

856 

and I’m going to recite it next week, if I can, for the hon. members, both lists. You can do that yourself, but 

I’ll bring it forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the position of the PC caucus. Was CPN a vehicle to fight Ottawa with? It may have 

been. Was that the reason that CPN was created? The answer is an emphatic no, Mr. Speaker. It was not 

created with that object in mind. 

 

CPN is a new form of entertainment medium, not only in Saskatchewan and Canada but it is still on a 

pioneering edge in all of North America. CPN was inevitable, is inevitable. Either through CPN or through 

some other carrier agency — hopefully community controlled if the opposition was with us in backing it as 

opposed to private control — is the leading technological edge of the communications and entertainment 

industry. Paid television, Mr. Speaker, is a phenomenon which is now getting established in many parts of 

the United States. 

 

Look at what the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) says. The member for Regina South says, you 

shouldn’t have gotten into CPN. He says, you knew from the start that it was going to lose you a bundle of 

money. He says it was a loser right from the start, then he turns around and he says, this is a bad deal but I 

understand there are several businessmen who are trying to buy it. That’s the position that he says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the truth of the matter apart from a minor contradiction again? The fact of the matter is 

that the member for Regina South is dead right. Several businessmen are very interested in buying CPN. Co-

ops are interested in CPN, I want to tell the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane). CPN is interested in CPN, 

Mr. Speaker. I ask the hon. member for Qu’Appelle who says, sell it, is he telling this House that he would 

support closed circuit television in the hands of private entrepreneurs? That’s what he is saying, sell it. If the 

answer is yes, that he favors it in the hands of private entrepreneurs, the converse is true. He is opposed to 

leaving CPN in the hands of the community co-op controlled people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Is the member saying that there are several businessmen interested? Is the member 

saying that we should be selling it to the businessmen? Is the hon. member saying I take credit — as he said 

in those words — for attacking the closed circuit community controlled co-operative concept behind this 

new entertainment form of closed-circuit television? Is that what the PC Party is saying? Mr. Speaker, the 

hon. member says am I saying that we are going to keep it going. I’m saying that I am committed to doing 

everything reasonably possible to keep CPN going. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I say to the hon. member for Qu’Appelle that I am behind the community 

organizations that are in CPN and you are against the community organizations that are in CPN. I am saying 

when the receiver manager gives his report on the financial viability and the financial position of CPN, 

keeping in mind what the hon. member for Qu’Appelle today has said on the issue of CPN, the answer to 

you I say again is yes. I am for CPN and the PC caucus is against the concept of community controlled co-

operative operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I relish this kind of a fundamental cleavage. I relish it because, Mr. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

857 

Speaker, the Conservatives opposite don’t understand the first principles of a co-op organization. The 

member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) is applauding the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) on his attack on 

co-ops. This is the kind of argument you know, Mr. Speaker, that the PCs are very famous for. Oh, I’m for 

co-ops; I’m a member of the co-ops but I won’t give those co-ops a penny; I’m a member of the co-ops is 

what the PCs say. But don’t let them ever make any mistakes because I’m going to jump on them and I’m 

going to attack them with all of the vigor that I’ve got. The PC party says, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. LANE: — A little mistake, eh? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — . . . we’ll see how much of a mistake it is in a few weeks when the Strang report is 

opened. We’ll see how much it is. But, Mr. Speaker, what the PCs are saying is that they’re against this kind 

of a concept. 

 

MR. LANE: — Do you know what’s in that report? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I say to the hon. member for Qu’Appelle you’ve had your chance to speak today, let 

me try and get a word in if I can just to outline the Saskatchewan line. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Qu’Appelle says there’s no Canadian TV content 

on CPN. 

 

MR. LANE: — Oh, no, I said . . . 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — He says he takes a list of four or five shows. He says Looking for Mr. Goodbar, I 

think is what he said, an American show which of course he and the members of the PC caucus, the movie 

being X-rated, would never dare dream of seeing. That’s why therefore the position of doing away with 

Playboy and Penthouse — the member for Qu’Appelle of course, would never allow Playboy to cross his 

eyes. I’m sure that’s the case. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that position is sheer political hypocrisy. It results in a lack of political 

credibility not only on the CPN issue, Mr. Speaker, but generally. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says that 

there is no Canadian TV content. He takes four or five programs and says these are American programs and 

not only that, they’re X-rated programs to boot. Mr. Speaker, I say that the Canadian content level of CPN is 

in the neighborhood of 40 per cent of the total programming that’s available on CPN now, when you look at 

the totality of the picture. About 40 per cent. I’ll provide the details to that next week. And I invite the hon. 

member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) to challenge me on that because I say there is a Canadian content 

of significant importance on CPN. Not as much as I’d like. Perhaps not even as much as the hon. members 

of the PCs would like, although I doubt that. But there is a Canadian content. But then he follows through on 

this kind of an argument; he says, you know, why, they have these X-rated movies on television, he says, and 

they’re fighting against liquor ads. He says why, if you’re going to allow Looking for Mr. Goodbar to 

continue, why in the world don’t you allow liquor advertising on conventional cable. That’s the argument 

and there was loud applause by the PC caucus at that particular point, Mr. Speaker. I noted it. Their 

argument is that because CPN or Cable Regina on conventional cable or any other agency should put on a 

movie which offends the sense of decency of the hon. member for Qu’Appelle that that should justify liquor 

advertising on conventional cable, Mr. Speaker. I say that’s hogwash! It is no justification for liquor 

advertising 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

858 

notwithstanding what the PC caucus says should be the position on liquor advertising. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

say to the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) and the new member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead) who I know 

is interested in this, that this government is unalterably opposed to the concept of liquor advertising, be it on 

conventional television or cable television and it’s going to do its best to stop it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Not the member for Qu’Appelle though. He says if you’re going to allow X-rated 

movies, you might as well be able to open up a can of beer to watch those X-rated movies, or turn off the 

television set. Not the member for Qu’Appelle, not the PC caucus. They think liquor advertising seems to be 

O.K. on television. Isn’t that right, Leader of the PC Party (Mr. Collver)? He’s here. I’d like him to tell us if 

he, in fact, confirms the position of the member for Qu’Appelle when you have the floor on the debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, you know this debate will continue for a little while. I can guarantee 

the PC opposition that. This debate will go for a little while on closed-circuit television, community co-ops 

and liquor advertising. I’m glad to see that the Leader of the PCs will tell us clearly and unequivocally, when 

that debate resumes, exactly what his position is on liquor advertising, because I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a 

duplicitous position. I say that there are some who profess to have a moral concern in our life (like the desk 

mate of the member for Qu’Appelle), who profess to have that concern but who don’t back it by words and 

statements when it comes to this particular legislative action in the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I hope that I’m wrong. I hope that the leader of the PCs will get up on this point. The 

point is, nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, that the member for Qu’Appelle took this position and, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You’d like him to, wouldn’t you? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I want to conclude my remarks today by just making one or two general comments 

about closed-circuit. (Yes, I’m going to adjourn debate.) I listened to two very stimulating speeches from two 

very stimulating potential . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — . . . two very stimulating potential leaders of the PC provincial Party and I think that 

I’m entitled to put forward my one position here. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I don’t agree with the PC 

Party in their opposition to closed-circuit television. I want to say that I don’t agree with the member for 

Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) when he sort of says that somehow we should be rushing to allow American 

television to come in. The words you used were that it was clearly contrary to the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan (that our policy was) when they clearly wanted American television, words to that effect. I 

think the member will agree that that’s roughly what he said and I’m translating that to say that a 

communications policy, based on more and better American advertising is the right communications policy 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, he is not saying that. I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, that kind of a 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

859 

policy, I oppose. I say that in Canada, we have been struggling to build an identity. In Canada, we have been 

struggling to build a culture. We are 22 million people, a small little ribbon of people within 100 miles of the 

United States border and we are flooded culturally by American periodicals and American newspapers and 

American radio and American television, and we are struggling to establish a Canadian cultural aspect. 

 

The CRTTC in Ottawa, I think, made a good policy. They said you had to have 60 per cent Canadian content 

on broadcasting. What do we have with conventional cable? We don’t have 60 per cent Canadian content, or 

putting it the other way around, 40 per cent American content like we now have on our own Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation TV. Now we have 100 per cent American culture flooding through the gates on 

conventional cable — 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, I let the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) talk about Tony Merchant. I 

think he is eminently qualified to understand the workings of the mind of Tony Merchant. But I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that is basically a very fundamental question. The question is, whether or not closed-circuit 

television is an attempt to develop a Canadian culture policy in this country of ours and in the province of 

ours. 

 

I am not against those who want to watch 100 per cent American television, morning, noon, night and day, 

but I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it does precious little to develop an identity, a Saskatchewan identity. Maybe 

CPN is not the vehicle to do it, but I tell you one thing that CPN is. It is an attempt by people, supported by 

the government, to use closed-circuit, which is an alternate medium, as a mechanism of establishing a form 

of Canadian culture and Saskatchewan culture . . . in this country. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — It is not surprising that that attempt should be challenged by basically, the 

broadcasting industry. I think it has been challenged by the conventional television and radio broadcasting 

industry in this province of ours, for which I think the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) and the 

Progressive Conservative Party are the leading political spokesmen. I think it has been challenged by the 

private television networks, right from day one, in court, outside court, in this legislature and outside this 

legislature. Why wouldn’t they challenge the concept, Mr. Speaker? There is big money involved. 

Advertising dollars are involved. It’s a comfortable way of living with a semi-American lifestyle which we 

have now culturally, nothing against it. It simply is not a development of a Canadian lifestyle. The 

Saskatchewan government says, here is a concept where we can at least develop, not overnight but develop 

over a few years. Sask Tel didn’t develop overnight into a province-wide or a nation-wide telephone 

company utility, but over a period of time, will develop an entertainment industry or a communications 

medium, whereby there will be at least, to the community controlled side, a chance to develop a 

Saskatchewan-Canadian aspect of the cultural scene. That’s what CPN is all about. Mr. Speaker, the hon. 

members opposite oppose that vision every step of the way. They are doomed to their petty views and their 

petty thoughts. They have no concepts or visions of culture or of the economy. That’s why we see the goings 

on that we see at question period day in and day out. That’s why we see these contradictory operations. They 

have no idea of the sense of the cultural Canadian worth of this country and, furthermore, Mr. Speaker, have 

no idea of how they’d like to fashion it. Well, I say, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t belong, thankfully, to that class 

of politician or person who is not going to give it a try. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

860 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — I’m not going to be party to a political party which just simply says turn it over to the 

CKCK-TV’s of this world, turn it over to the CTV’s, turn it over to the ABC’s and the CBS’s. Let those 

boys advertise the liquor advertising. Do everything to allow this country which is already struggling for its 

survival economically and culturally — do everything that you can to not help it along in that cultural 

determination. I am not going to be a party to that kind of a position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Do you know something, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan on October 18 

when CPN was still an issue by the member for Qu’Appelle he tried to make it in his riding and he did. The 

people of Saskatchewan with resounding votes showed that they aren’t prepared to support that position 

either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few more words to say on this issue. I’ll take any questions that the hon. member puts 

to me upon resuming my place and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF CADETS 

 

HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity, and I thank the 

members of the House as well. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the legislature 

50 young men and women. Of this group 20 are from Canora and 30 are from Ottawa. You will note that 

they are cadets. Accompanying the cadets we have Captain Victor Shigal (?), Captain Dennis Legaul (?), and 

Lieutenant Kathy Zremiak (?). 

 

The cadets from Ottawa are visiting Saskatchewan on a cadet exchange program. I want to wish our guests a 

very warm welcome to the capital city and to the legislature, and I do hope they have an interesting and 

enjoyable stay here. I will be meeting with the group following their stay here in the Chamber. I want to say 

to the cadets that we appreciate your coming here and hope that your visit here is going to be a memorable 

one. I am sure that all members of the House will join with me in expressing our appreciation to them. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Resolutions 19 and 23 out of Order 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I have a statement here which I possibly should have made after item No. 2, under 

motions, was dealt with. I will make it now because it relates to that particular point and we should get it out 

of the way. 

 

Members will note that Resolution No. 23 standing in the name of the member for Morse (Mr. Gross) deals 

with the same subject matter as that of a government motion which has already been moved by the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy) 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

861 

and on which debate has been adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 19 standing in the name of the member for Wilkie (Mr. Garner) deals with the same subject 

matter as that of Resolution No. 2 which has already been moved by the member for Melville (Mr. 

Kowalchuk). 

 

I rule both resolutions, No. 23 and No. 19 out of order on the grounds of anticipation and refer all hon. 

members to Sir Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 19th edition, page 371, Beauchesne’s Parliamentary 

Rules and Forms, 5th edition, page 119 and a ruling of the Chair dated March 22, 1977, Journals of 

Saskatchewan 1976-77, page 103. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 8 — Road Maintenance Areas. 

 

MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose) moved, seconded by Mr. Muirhead (Arm River): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for imposing road maintenance 

areas on the rural municipalities of the province, thus promoting the county system through a 

backdoor method. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity today to share with you some of my concerns as registered 

under Resolution No. 8. I would like, first, to share with you the reasons for bringing forth this resolution. I 

have had numerous phone calls from around the province and numerous contacts with people in municipal 

work. They express a fear that the Government of the province of Saskatchewan is trying in an unfair manner 

to bring about the issue that they have long spoke of, a county system or something along that line for the 

municipal boundaries of the province. 

 

I think that municipalities are a strong group, a group that is very capable of making decisions. If the 

government wants to have county systems then they should go back to the people with that type of proposal, 

not come at it in the method of introducing road maintenance areas, forcing amalgamations between 

municipalities. If they do not agree to the amalgamations then they just don’t get grant funding under the 

super grid program. Some of the R.M.s because of different interests find it very difficult to amalgamate. I 

would like to use, just as an example, some that are very close to my area. Take the municipality of Snipe 

Lake. When they build roads they have in mind the centre in their district as the town of Eston and other 

services which are provided within their boundaries. For that reason they build roads that are going to lead to 

the main centres within their communities. They were asked to amalgamate with Monet and Lacadena. Now 

the Monet R.M. would sooner be building roads that would lead into Elrose than Eston and for that reason 

they find it very difficult to work together and come up with a reasonable solution. Lacadena again has 

different centres. They like to build towards Kyle and in some cases towards Elrose. So these R.M.s are 

finding it very difficult to agree that the maintenance area is a good proposal. They might agree with the 

proposal had they been asked in a different manner — if they had been asked first if they would agree to this 

type of proposal, not to have the grants withheld if they didn’t agree, but rather if they agreed then proceed. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this has been a major concern in our province and this remains a major concern 

today. Now the government has long talked of local control and local autonomy. I don’t believe that this is 

showing they are interested in local control or local 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

862 

autonomy when they force amalgamations of municipal groups in this manner. I would just like to read to 

you a short statement made by T.C. Douglas back in 1956 when the municipal boundary realignment 

committee had a meeting here in Regina. The same quotation was also made in this legislature in 1958 by 

T.C. Douglas. The statement reads like this: 

 

The government itself believes that some kind of basic reorganization, at least in the rural areas, is an 

essential and inevitable step in meeting with the problems of local government today. I want to make 

it abundantly clear that the government will not embark upon a program of municipal reorganization 

unless this program is assured of the co-operation of the local governing bodies and has the 

widespread support of the general public. 

 

Then a further statement was made in 1958 and on the same day, again by T.C. Douglas: 

 

Once we are started upon the creation of a basically sound structure of local government, the way 

will then be opened for a sound and realistic strengthening of local financial resources. 

 

It seems that each time he spoke of reorganization he was not willing to go ahead until he had the general 

public with him. The government today is apparently willing to go ahead without having the general public 

with them. 

 

During the debate on the county or the modified county system, the public in this province made their 

position abundantly clear. They were not ready to proceed with a county system and they voiced that concern 

loud and strong. I’m sure that every government in this province then and later remembers some of the 

debate that took place. For that reason, I see this government, then, moving to do it in a different manner, not 

coming forward, straight forward, and saying, we think you should have a county system. But rather, calling 

it a road maintenance area and causing quite a bit of concern and disruption in the thinking of local people. 

 

The former president of SARM suggested at their convention that he thought there should be some 

amalgamation of municipalities, that the municipalities were too small to function effectively. Even though 

that dedicated president spoke from his heart and was convinced of what he was saying, when the election 

was held later on during the convention, that man found that he didn’t have the support of the SARM people. 

He lost his position as president and has not been able to regain it. 

 

Another concern I have with the method that has been used to coerce the municipalities into amalgamating is 

that some of the R.M.s in this province were very prudent operators and they built up a small surplus that 

would tide them over the tougher times in our province. But when they see this forced amalgamation taking 

place, they lose confidence that they’re going to continue to have the right to operate as a free operating 

municipality, they cease to see the advantage of maintaining surpluses. They say we’re going to lose it if we 

don’t spend it, so we better spend it quick before the government takes it. That’s exactly what has been 

happening. They have spent much of their surplus. Today, many of those municipalities are operating on a 

day to day basis financially and that is not a good way for anyone to operate. 

 

Because of the concerns that I have found around the province, I put forward this resolution. I make no 

apologies for condemning the province of Saskatchewan 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

863 

because I believe the province of Saskatchewan needed to be condemned for its action in this regard. Mr. 

Speaker, I so move. 

 

MR. G. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, on speaking to this resolution I would like to point out 

that in the process of setting up these road maintenance areas, the government sent out representatives from 

the Department of Municipal Affairs explaining to all the municipalities involved the importance of these 

super grids. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, I as a councillor for the R.M. of Craik, along with the other members of the 

council, agreed with the government proposals, but must add, with serious reservations. When I say 

reservations, Mr. Speaker, I mean the proposal was such that either we went along with the Department of 

Municipal Affairs or else found ourselves in the position of not being able to rebuild roads which were prime 

arteries for our rural population. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would hasten to add that in the case of the Craik municipality we have approval granted 

by the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs to build the portion within two miles of easterly border of the 

Craik municipality. I would, at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to thank the Minister for Last Mountain-

Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy) for his co-operation and his consideration to the Craik R.M. 222. It has been 

very much appreciated by the local council. However, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to advise this House that the 

portion of the road remaining to join Highway No. 2 is in limbo and it is quite apparent to me, and many 

others, the reasons are: 

 

(a) rail line abandonment, (b) federal election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that possibly (b) is the most important obstacle in the completion of this road. 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the government at one point in time says, we must build a super-grid road, then 

in midstream says, we have changed our mind, because at this particular moment it is not politically sound to 

the NDP with the federal election in the offing. 

 

It is the old story, Mr. Speaker. The NDP says to the local governments look, we know better than you 

where, when and how you should build your roads. Mr. Speaker, that is just the first step of the abolition of 

local autonomy. The next step is the county system operating from the Department of Municipal Affairs in 

Regina. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if we have problems now with super-grid plans, under the present conditions, I 

presume under the county system we will have no say whatsoever. 

 

It would appear that the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy) in his wisdom, or due to political 

pressure, has decided this road should not be completed until after the federal election and until he is sure of 

what the hon. Mr. Lang is going to do in respect to rail-line abandonment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my position on rail-line abandonment is the same as it always has been, and that is, I urge the 

local people in any area, be it Arm River or otherwise, to band together to fight whatever they feel is their 

right to roads, railways, schools and whatever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe in self-determination, not state determination. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 

strongly urge the government to reconsider imposing restrictions in 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

864 

respect to the building of municipal roads as far as grants are concerned. It would appear to many that the 

present system is a proposition based on, do as we say or do without. Which, Mr. Speaker, could be 

interpreted as a form of blackmail. Our way is right, says the NDP. You, the local governments, have little or 

no say, if you want we, the government’s assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I second this motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to the 

motion moved by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) and seconded by the member for Arm River 

(Mr. Muirhead). 

 

Let me make it abundantly clear to them, to the members opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan, that 

this government has no plans for a county system, this government has no thoughts for a county system, this 

government has no plans for regional municipal government and no thoughts of regional municipal 

government. I think it would be clear, Mr. Speaker, that if we had had we would not have introduced the 

revenue sharing program with the kind of funding attached to it that we did. Now, it is no question, Mr. 

Speaker, if the hon. members observe the approach of this government it is obviously an approach of 

encouraging co-operation between local government. A major component of revenue sharing and a future 

major component of revenue sharing is, in fact, the co-operative approach. The formation of ambulance 

districts, the formation of fire districts, the formation of agreements for provision of recreation, which we 

will be announcing as a component of revenue sharing very shortly, is the co-operative encouragement by 

this government. So there are no plans. I make that clear. I used to — and the hon. members who are in the 

House during the previous three years, 1975 to 1978, will recall that I had to rise to my feet and respond to 

similar questions and similar arguments put forward. My response at that time, on behalf of the government, 

was the same as it is now. So, that’s our approach to encourage co-operation and I think we’re being very 

successful with that approach. This applies, Mr. Speaker, to the super-grid program. We encourage the co-

operative approach in establishing this particular program. I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for the hon. 

members opposite to get some understanding of the road system and the development of our rural municipal 

road system in this province. 

 

Hon. members will know that when rural municipalities were formed back there in 1905, there really wasn’t 

much of a road system. There was only horseback trail and oxcart trail. As the railways came and the 

population grew, there grew a demand for roads and equipment to be made available to construct those roads 

and we began the construction of our municipal road system. Most of it was done with the old horses and 

fresnoes and some of the members will remember those days; the horses and the fresnos grading the grades, 

filling up the low spots. During the ‘20s the power equipment began to appear. Now, during the ‘30s 

everything shot down and the poor old Bennett buggies had to manage on what was there. I can recall, we 

had a very special Bennett buggy at my home. It was a Maxwell cut down. It was a pretty good Maxwell 

since it had the top on and we even had side curtains, pretty snappy team on that Bennett buggy. As a matter 

of fact, we could go to town about as fast with a Bennett buggy as we could, I recall, with the Maxwell. 

That’s back in the days of a Conservative government in Saskatchewan and a Conservative government in 

Ottawa. Those were good times, Bennett buggy days, good Maxwell. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

865 

Now, during the ’40s, the equipment developed rapidly and the municipalities began to work on the roads 

and it became clear though, that the municipalities alone could not fund any systematic network of roads. So 

in 1956, the CCF government at the time, under Mr. MacIntosh introduced a cost sharing program to build a 

major network of all weather roads throughout the province, the grid system. Now, the grid system started 

out as a ten year program involving 10,000 miles of all weather roads. That system went from 10 years, to 20 

years and was extended to including about 15,000 miles of road. I think, when you add in the abandoned 

highways, many of which go into the grid system, will find a system of 15,000 to 16,000 miles. Those roads 

are the most travelled secondary roads in the province, no question. I suspect many of the grid roads have 

more traffic than some of our secondary highways. With the grid system, you could get to town after the 

storm; the ploughs didn’t have to come out. You could get out to the highway. All in all, it was a high quality 

system of road and it put Saskatchewan on the map in Canada as having the best municipal road system. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — By the 1960s, Mr. Speaker, farmers were beginning to press for roads right up to 

the farm so they could get to the grid in the spring and in the winter. So was born the main farm access 

system — a road below the standard of grid but sufficient to meet reasonable all-weather conditions to 

farms. Now the municipalities are still working on the network of roads — the target of 18,000 miles in the 

main farm access system. About 11,500 of those miles are complete. We hope to complete that system by 

1985-1986 but grid, Mr. Speaker, and main farm access have resulted in the best network of roads per capita 

municipal roads anywhere in the country . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — . . . and government cost sharing and responsible municipal construction and 

maintenance by the municipalities have made that possible. 

 

Main farm access and grid have been conditional programs. By the late ‘60s, some municipalities had 

completed their grid system and were well into their main farm access system. They were thinking about 

further upgrading. Pressure began to develop from both individual municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and from 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities (SARM) to build a system of dust free roads. 

Municipalities felt that they’d ease the demand for grave and be very popular with the public. It had spread 

so much by the early ‘70s that in 1973, the Hon. Edward Wood, then Minister of Municipal Affairs, 

appointed a committee of SARM to review the whole question of municipal surface roads in Saskatchewan 

and to make some recommendations to the government. Now the committee was named the Municipal Road 

Surfacing Commission. It was made up of the then president of SARM, Charlie Mitchell, the past president, 

F. Ward Murphy and one of their directors, Norman Allen from out in the Swift Current country. Now the 

Commission consulted with the municipalities. They held 24 meetings around the province. All of the reeves 

and secretary treasurers were invited to attend. As a matter of fact, 71 per cent of all reeves and councillors 

and secretary-treasurers did attend. The interest in the program was high. The committee did its studies, not 

only as to the type and nature of construction that would be undertaken, but also to the extent and the 

location of the roads that would be necessary in a surfaced system of roads for the province. Many of the 

members will have seen the report. This is the report of the Municipal Roads Surfacing Commission. If all of 

the members haven’t a report and would like a report, just give my office a call. We will be glad to provide a 

report. 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

866 

The report recommended 5,000 miles of primary surfaced road and 3,500 miles of secondary surfaced road. 

The 5,000 miles of primary grid, as they call it, would have a 28 foot subgrade, an inch and one-half, 20 foot 

asphalt mat. That would provide for shoulders. The right of way would be up to 150 feet. Secondary super 

grids would be the low volume traffic roads, probably under 150 cars per day and these roads would have a 

26 foot top with still, a 22 foot asphalt mat. 

 

The committee recommended that any roads that were worn out would be fully reconstructed before 

surfacing. Some roads would need work to bring them up to the appropriate drainage, snow clearance, safety 

standards. Our government accepted the recommendations of the commission and our government agreed to 

put $100 million, plus inflation costs, on the table over a 15-year period to share in the construction, 

surfacing and maintenance of primary surface road system. The government would cost share with the 

municipalities, an average of 60 per cent government, 40 per cent municipal on construction and surfacing 

and 50-50 per cent on maintenance. 

 

We said that the location of the roads would be a matter of negotiation between the municipalities and the 

supervising engineers from rural affairs. The Road Surfacing Commission had developed a tentative map of 

5,000 miles but we were prepared to be flexible in the location of these roads, based on traffic volumes, 

connecting links, and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commission had strong words about the maintenance of these roads in its reports. They had 

done studies. Each one of them had had experience, as each one of us has had, on an oiled secondary 

highway which is often much worse to drive on than a gravelled road, some of those old roads that were 

oiled, in the 1960s, I quote the report, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The maintenance of astro surfaced roads is very important. The holes and broken areas in the road 

surface must be repaired as soon as they are noticed thus preventing moisture being absorbed in the 

subgrade which would cause large areas and possibly the whole road surface to soften and 

deteriorate, making proper maintenance very costly and time consuming, if not impossible. As cracks 

appear in the road surface, a seal coat must be applied. This not only prohibits the penetration of 

moisture but also provides a new driving surface, and if repeated as needed, extends the life of the 

road almost indefinitely. When seal coating is required, the municipalities must see that it is done at 

the earliest possible date. Because of the importance of proper timing, it is essential that equipment 

be available at all times. The life of the asphalt surface roads will depend completely on proper and 

timely maintenance. The investment of both the government and the municipalities must be 

protected by insisting that the required maintenance be done. 

 

The report suggests, Mr. Speaker, that the payment of government assistance be withheld until there is 

evidence that proper maintenance is provided for. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because of the importance of 

timing, the report recommends that municipalities own their own equipment, either individually or in groups. 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to accepting the recommendations as to the nature and cost sharing of the 

commission, the government accepted the view that having the necessary maintenance equipment 

immediately at hand and hence available at a moment’s notice, was the only way to guarantee effective 

maintenance. Necessary maintenance equipment, according to the commission, consists of a heavy gravel 

truck with a sand 



 

March 20, 1979 

 

 

867 

spreader, an oil truck, power brooms and an oil tank spray bar. Tools and an oil heater, pressure spray 

brooms and an available supply of mix and oil would also be necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most municipalities have found over the last decade that a construction and maintenance crew 

is too expensive to maintain for the amount of work that is undertaken in any one year. There is simply not 

enough work in one municipality, they argue, to justify the expense and management time of maintaining 

their own crew. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal more to say on this resolution put forward by the hon. members opposite, I 

therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 


