



















































Hansard: March 27, 1979


1061 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 27, 1979 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Mr. Swan, the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose, who is unable to be with us today because of a school trustees meeting, I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to this legislature, 25 Grade 8 students from the Rosetown school. They are 

accompanied today by Mr. Jake Wiebe and my very charming and lovely aunt, Mrs. Isabel Berntson and Mr. 

Norman Berntson. I might add that one of the reasons we have such a terrific and effective opposition is that 

Mr. and Mrs. Berntson both had something to do with the structuring of the education of our member for 

Kindersley (Mr. Andrew). I am very, very pleased that they are here to view the activities in the House today. 

I am sure that the House will join me in wishing them a warm welcome. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you and to members of this House a group of 47 students in the Speaker’s gallery 

from Division III from Ross Elementary School in Moose Jaw North. 

 

With these students we have Mr. Garry Olafson, the principal, Mr. Ed. Segall, the vice-principal and Mr. 

Richard Forberg, the teacher. I might just say in welcoming these students and the teachers here from Ross 

school this afternoon, that Mr. Segall has made a practice over the years of bringing students down to this 

Legislative Assembly to see true democracy at work. I believe that Mr. Segall is to be sincerely congratulated 

for his continuing dedication in this particular area. I would ask for all members, Mr. Speaker, and yourself 

to join with me in welcoming the students from Ross school. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and the Assembly some 35 

Grades 7 and 8 students from Bert Fox High School in Fort Qu’Appelle. They are accompanied by Mr. 

Klisowski and Mr. Dick Rathgerber, the principal. Mr. Rathgerber has attained some degree of prominence 

in Fort Qu’Appelle as a curler I have noticed this winter. We wish them, hopefully, an interesting and 

enjoyable afternoon. I will have the pleasure of meeting with them later. We wish them a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

Neglected Indian Children 

 

MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services (Mr. 

Rolfes). With your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, I will have to present certain  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1062 

facts in order to ask my question. 

 

Last August it was reported to social services that eight Indian children on the Nikaneek Reserve, aging from 

nine months to 10 years, had been regularly abandoned by their mothers and had been abused and neglected. 

It was reported in August that they were scavenging in garbage cans on the reserve. Social services replied to 

Mrs. Crawshaw of our community centre that it was not their jurisdiction and they had in turn turned it over 

to Indian Affairs. She subsequently got a letter from Indian Affairs saying it was not their responsibility; it 

was in fact the provincial social services responsibility. 

 

Nothing was done and in February the children were left alone, the house was burnt and it was a miracle that 

the children did not die. My question to the minister is simply, who is going to take responsibility for this 

deplorable, tragic situation? 

 

MR. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, I can agree with the member if her 

facts are accurate. I have no evidence to say that they are not but I think that the situation, as it pertains to 

treaty Indians on reservations, is one which has not been resolved across Canada. I think it is a fact that the 

first ministers, for a number of years under various governments, whether they were Conservative 

governments under John Diefenbaker, Liberal governments under Pierre Elliot Trudeau, or provincial 

governments (NDP, Liberal or Conservative) have discussed this situation and have not been able to come to 

any mutual agreement. Let me also say, Mr. Speaker, that there is no agreement between treaty Indians 

across Canada, as to who has jurisdiction in this particular area. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, it has always been the position of the NDP government (and I believe it was 

true under the T.C. Douglas government as it was true under the Lloyd government as it is true under our 

government) that we will intervene in a crisis. That is the agreement that I think has existed between this 

province under our government and I also believe under the Thatcher government; the province would come 

into play only in so far as a crisis situation would occur, or if we were invited by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians to intervene. 

 

Other than that, I think section 93 of the BNA Act — I may be wrong on the section but I think it is 93 — in 

our opinion at least, says that the primary responsibility for treaty Indians, when they are on the reserve, must 

rest with the federal government. In my discussions with the former chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indians, that is what he led me to believe was also their position, that they did not want the provincial 

government to intervene and thereby take away their bargaining rights with the federal government, rights 

that they had been promised when the British North America Act was put into effect and rights that they 

wanted to preserve. But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the province will pick up its responsibility in crises 

situations. 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary. On March 15, a meeting was held in Maple Creek with representatives 

of your department, Indian Affairs, the local police, the ministerial association and other interested parties. 

The Indian Chief, Gordon Oakes, had asked that those children be removed. A week after the fire, Mrs. 

Crawshaw went out to the reserve and the children were found abandoned again. (It might be pointed out 

there are three single mothers involved and they are all pregnant again). She found them padlocked in the 

bedroom and burners on the stove set on high and that was what was heating the house. I just feel, how much 

more of a crisis do you need before you step in there? Do you have to wait until one of the mothers who has 

threatened to kill those children, kills them and then you are going to step in? 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1063 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate again the seriousness of the problem and the concern that 

the member’s expressing. I will give the member the assurance I will personally look into the matter. I am 

not familiar with the details of the particular incident she is relating to. I do want to again say to the member 

that the chief may well have asked that the children be removed but I would assume that the chief would 

have asked that of the Indian Affairs people and not have asked the Department of Social Services to do so. 

If he agrees with the chief of the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians, then I think he would have asked the 

Indian Affairs Department to intervene and remove those children. As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, I will 

personally look into it and will bring an answer back to the member as to what our responsibilities are at this 

moment in that particular incident. 

 

Competition Policy — CP Air to Extend Services 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the minister responsible for 

tourism. In a recent announcement the federal government has changed its competition policy as it pertains 

to Air Canada thus allowing CP (Canadian Pacific) Air to extend its competition beyond the previously 

limited 25 per cent. The indication is that this would now mean that CP Air is intending to extend its service 

to the city of Regina. Is it your government’s policy to support that position and support the fact that now CP 

Air will be able to come to Regina or is it your intention to oppose that policy? 

 

HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, on the 

information that I have, I, personally, feel that we should be supporting that policy. 

 

MR. LANE: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. minister has communicated his support of that policy to 

the Hon. Les Benjamin, Member of Parliament for Regina West, who is quoted as saying that it will be like a 

gas war and that he felt that this competition should not be allowed and that they, in fact, oppose that 

particular policy. Have you communicated your government’s policy to the federal New Democratic member 

for Regina who opposed CP Air coming to Regina? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, no, I have had no discussions with the hon. member. 

 

MR. LANE: — Final supplementary. Do you not think it incumbent upon yourself on behalf of the citizens 

of Regina to communicate in the strongest possible terms your dissatisfaction with — and Saskatoon — your 

federal government’s and your federal colleagues’ policy which is harmful to Saskatchewan and detrimental 

to the travelling public and the tourist industry in Saskatchewan? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to have my discussions with the member that the hon. 

member is referring to and with any other people that are concerned and interested. 

 

Land Bank Price Offer Policy 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1064 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. Kaeding). Is it the policy of the land bank to make offers on all lands offered to them or just what is the 

criteria for making an offer on a parcel of land? 

 

MR. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, the policy is that we 

do not make offers on land unless someone indicates to us that they want to sell to the land bank. Generally 

speaking, then, the commission will go out and do an evaluation. Now, there may or may not be reasons why 

they may not wish to buy a particular piece of land. If it’s in an area where it’s above what we call our 

productive value rate, then we may say to that person, sorry, your land values in this area are too high. We’re 

not prepared to buy in this area. So, in those sorts of circumstances, we would not buy. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. What would you say if farmer A offered his land to 

land bank, and land bank did not make an offer to purchase, but farmer A then sold his land to farmer B who 

within 3 months sold his land to land bank at a $12,000 profit — would you indicate to this House whether 

or not that falls within the criteria of making an offer on land bank land? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want to comment particularly on that, unless I had a specific 

case to relate to. But I would be fairly certain that if the request to purchase was not undertaken in the first 

case, there must have been a reason and I don’t know what that reason would be. If it was undertaken in 

another case, I wouldn’t know. But the price on that farm would be based on the average market value of 

land in that area. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I will be laying a case out in Resolution No. 7, I 

think, later this afternoon. But, Mr. Speaker, how many of these sorts of things do we have to lay before you 

before you will admit that your land bank is an administrative mess and you’ll take a look at it and clean it 

up? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Before you make charges, as you fellows have done all during the session, you had 

better get your facts straight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Air Service in Smaller Cities 

 

MR. J. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 

Is the minister aware that there are smaller cities in Saskatchewan struggling to try to obtain air service for 

their communities, and what is his department, or the government, planning on doing about this? 

 

HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, it is very 

difficult for me to answer the hon. member’s question because he doesn’t make any reference to any specific 

urban areas that he might be referring to. If it is North Battleford, I think that I have already indicated to him 

what the answer is. Now, if it is Yorkton, all right then, we will have to talk about Yorkton, and certainly, for 

the city of Yorkton there has been a lot of representation made by the city council, by our government, and 

by the minister in charge of transportation. For the hon. members to say that the government is not doing 

anything is absolutely incorrect. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1065 

MR. GARNER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In July, 1978, the Canadian Transport Commission approved a 

NorCan Air proposal to link Yorkton with Saskatoon and Regina. Now, 8 months later, city officials have 

had no word from anyone. 

 

Will the minister please assure this Assembly that some immediate action will be taken and you will 

correspond with the officials from Yorkton, please? 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, the area that the hon. member is referring to is under the jurisdiction of 

the minister in charge of transportation. Now I will certainly pass that information on to him. 

 

Purchase of City Property by Sask Tel 

 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of Sask Tel. Mr. 

Minister, has Sask Tel engaged a Regina real estate firm to purchase properties on the west side of Hamilton 

Street between 11th Avenue and South Railway? 

 

HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer that question because of the 

fact that Sask Tel is not directly the agency involved in making the purchases. We pay for the land, true, but 

there is a committee of Cabinet which oversees the downtown project, and my colleague, Hon. Walter 

Smishek, is the minister in charge of that area. 

 

As far as I am aware, there may well not be one. I haven’t heard of it if there is. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, before I get back to the minister of Sask Tel, I will ask the same question of the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware that there has been anybody 

engaged but I am prepared to check with the officials and let the member know. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, is it possible that some of your department heads or your departments 

are acting on this matter without your knowledge? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — No. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I am advised that there have already been two pieces of property purchased on 

Hamilton Street by Sask Tel and that a date of July 1 has been given as a deadline for vacating these 

premises. Are you aware of that fact? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, if the member was more specific as to what particular properties they are 

. . . because we are acquiring property through Sask-Tel, and I know there have been acquisitions that have 

been made as well as notice given during the period of negotiations of when we want to take possession of 

the property. But I can’t be answering the question when not knowing the precise parcel of land, the lot 

number, because it’s just impossible to answer it. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I indicated in my first question the exact property I was 

referring to. I’m referring to the property north of the new Royal Bank building on the west side of Hamilton 

Street between 11th Avenue and 12th all the way down. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1066 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member perhaps is aware — maybe he is not — every lot has 

a number and now there are a number of parcels of land that are between Railway and 11th Avenue, and the 

land is not owned, or the property isn’t owned, by a single person. 

 

Purchase of Property to sell to Simpsons 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — The property that I’ve been referring to — I’ll ask about it to you in this way. Is it 

perhaps the property that you’ve been negotiating to purchase to sell to Simpsons for them to build a store on 

at the expense of the small businesses on that street? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware that we’ve been negotiating for any property to sell to 

Simpsons at any time. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . or to lease. 

 

Local Libraries no say in Selection of Books 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education 

(Mr. Shillington). 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — To lease to Simpsons. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — It has been brought to my attention that there is considerable concern in the Wheatland 

Regional Library regarding the type of books which are available to juveniles. The content of these books are 

described: ‘As it should never have been printed, or pictures and literature which come straight out of hell 

and no place else.’ 

 

Is it the policy of this government and the regional library system that local libraries have no say in 

determining what books and magazines will be available in their libraries? 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education): — We are all aware, Mr. Speaker, that there are 

books in existence which should never have been printed. I think the member may be aware that what books 

are used in the regional library is the decision of the board, and not the decision of the provincial library. The 

provincial library is simply a resource centre for those boards, so I would think the member should direct his 

question to the board. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Is there no control in the regional library system to prevent such material? Does the 

government have no responsibility in this regard whatsoever, that’s my question, Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, the member must be aware that there are sections of the Criminal 

Code which prohibit obscenity. Apart from those rules we rely on the good judgment of the boards, and I 

think by and large that reliance has been well justified. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, supplementary question. Will you give me some  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1067 

assurance that you will look into this situation? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a matter of local autonomy. This government 

believes in local autonomy. Hon. members opposite may not. They may believe that the world should be run 

out of an office building in Regina. That is not the philosophy of this government and we are prepared to 

leave it to the board. 

 

Engaging of Crown Real Estate 

 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question to one of the two ministers whoever 

wants to answer it. Has Sask Tel engaged Crown Real Estate of Regina to purchase property that I referred to 

earlier, to lease to Simpsons, or to any other department store, for that matter? 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I am rather curious about the questions that 

are being raised. I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, where the member for Regina South and also the 

member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) stand on the Cornwall Centre. If they are opposed to that project let them 

tell us so. Let them tell the people of Regina; let them tell the downtown merchants. If they are opposed to 

the redevelopment of Regina downtown then let them come out, clearly, and state so, because I am sure the 

people of Regina are very interested. 

 

We are acquiring property through Sask Tel in that area for the purpose of redevelopment of that area to 

upgrade it. As the hon. members know that area is in bad need for redevelopment. It has the approval of the 

city of Regina. It has the approval of the Chamber of Commerce in Regina, has the approval of the Regina 

downtown merchants. We are using certain people to try and help us in this area, using the private sector to 

help us redevelop that area. That is a policy of this government. We are interested in seeing Regina’s core 

upgraded. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question or a supplementary for the Minister of Finance. 

 

What right does your government have to interject to assist multinational corporations at the expense of the 

small businesses? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes reference to Simpsons. Simpsons have a store 

downtown and as far as I know they intend to maintain that store downtown. We are not negotiating for the 

acquisition of property for Simpsons in a downtown area. 

 

Cornwall Centre 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for the Cornwall 

Development. Would the minister indicate, further to our questioning last week on the expropriation, 

amendments to The Expropriation Procedure Act. Would you confirm what the Premier has indicated that 

you made mistakes in your acquisition of property and that, perhaps, you didn’t do it properly? Are you now 

prepared to advise us whether or not you intend to bring in the expropriation procedure amendments to 

correct your errors in acquiring property in downtown Regina? 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1068 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to admit that mistakes were made. 

 

MR. LANE: — The Premier did. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, maybe he did. The Premier isn’t here and he can speak for himself. We used, 

among the best legal counsel to give us advice. There were certain judgments and court proceedings that 

have taken place. Apparently, there is some flaw in the legislation and in due course you will find out 

whether there is legislation introduced. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Finance aware of the implications of what he has said 

today, because Sask Tel, a Crown corporation, has the right of expropriation to acquire this land. Private 

owners, private organizations such as Simpsons, Eaton’s and others, do not have the right of expropriation. 

Is the minister aware that if Sask Tel interjects itself into the market place it is using the power of 

expropriation to acquire land for private sector purposes? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the hon. member is not aware of the agreements and the terms 

that have been arrived at. What we are trying to do in the downtown core, or in the Cornwall Centre is to 

assemble land for the purpose of rebuilding or rejuvenating that area. The city of Regina, for a number of 

years, has been concerned about that part of the city. We had need for a telephone building; we had need for 

a government insurance building. We concluded with the city that it would be desirable, in the interest of the 

city and the citizens of Regina, to help revitalize that area. The result is that we are assembling land. 

 

We have also invited Eaton’s and Chartwood to help in the redevelopment. They will put up the buildings. 

They will lease the land at economic rental. We are not acquiring land for Eaton’s. We are not acquiring land 

for Chartwood. It is land that is being acquired for leasing purposes on a long-term basis. It is true that those 

people will put up the stores. The land will be owned by the Crown corporation. 

 

Cornwall Centre 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek), 

why didn’t the government approach the co-operatives instead of the multinationals to develop this area? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — We did, Mr. Speaker, we did. I have a letter to prove that. 

 

Reservations in Parks 

 

HON. A. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. 

member for Wilkie (Mr. Garner) asked a question of me, as the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 

Resources, and it was left to me to provide an answer. His question is and I quote: 

 

Will the minister please tell this Assembly if this is government policy to let the people know 

reservations have already been accepted? 

 

I would like to reply to the hon. member by saying that we do not advertise the availability of 

accommodation in provincial parks. It is not customary practice to do this  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1069 

as there is the private sector and I am sure he will agree that we should not interfere with private sector 

accommodation. Therefore, we do not advertise. Nevertheless, we will let the people know that reservations 

for accommodations take place. It is the policy of the department not to take accommodation reservations 

before March 15. Anybody who writes for accommodation prior to March 9 has their letter returned to them. 

We indicate that if they are unable to write again before the 15th, they should phone. Any letters received 

after March 9 are held by the park office and opened on the 15 of March. On the morning of the 15th, one 

staff member opens all the letters. We have two staff members taking phone calls on different numbers, also 

one staff member at the desk for personal contacts. There is no requirement they have to absolutely have a 

deposit, but if they phone we give them two weeks to get the deposit in. The important feature is what 

procedure we go through. Any letters received prior to March 9 are returned, and after the 9th we accept 

them. We do not feel that much would be gained by advising people in advance. On March 15 quite a 

number of people come into the office and book for other people. For every weekend during July and August 

the weekends are all used up. 

 

Nevertheless, for the information part, for example in Kenosee Provincial Park we have 16 modern cabins. 

All these are reserved for July to August 25, leaving May, June 3 to 7, 27 and 28 still open. Mr. Speaker, 29 

modern cabins, May, June, July to August 11 are fairly well open. The motel is also open. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Rent Control 

 

HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, as the minister in charge of The 

Residential Tenancies Act, I would like to report to you and to all members of the Assembly that effective 

April 1, 1979, the cities of Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert and Weyburn will be decontrolled and 

placed under rent review. With the decontrol of these cities, only Regina and Saskatoon remain under rent 

control. 

 

Recent departmental studies and continuous monitoring of the rental situations in Regina and Saskatoon 

show clearly that decontrol in these two cities would cause undue hardship. The 29 cities and municipalities 

that are now covered by rent review are: Weyburn, Lloydminster, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, North 

Battleford, Battleford, Yorkton, Melville, Estevan, Swift Current, Assiniboia, Biggar, Canora, Humboldt, 

Kamsack, Kindersley, Maple Creek, Meadow Lake, Melfort, Moosomin, Nipawin, Rosetown, Shaunavon, 

Tisdale, Unity, Wynyard and Uranium City. In these centres, landlords will now be required to give tenants 

at least three months written notice of any increase in rents. Tenants who feel a proposed increase is not fair 

and reasonable may, within 30 days of receiving written notice, apply to the Provincial Mediation Board for 

a review of their rent. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — We welcome, of course, the first start of the removal of rent controls. 

We hope that it’s a rapid process to remove them. We would like to have heard some commitment from the 

minister that the bureaucracy that was established will in fact be dismantled and not just integrated back into 

the rest of the government service, because it was set up for that particular purpose. The function is over, 

now the bureaucracy as I say should be dismantled. We do suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the minister that the 

government, in fact, follow the Premier’s leadership and invest some of that money and give tax credits to 

those involved in rental housing as the Premier has done, 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1070 

rather than get into rent control because an expansion of the number of rental accommodation units would 

have done more to keep the price of rental accommodation down than rent control. I suggest that the 

Premier, himself, although not following government policy, in fact did show some leadership by tapping 

that vast store of funds and putting them into the rental accommodation market. I would hope that the 

government would have some tax policies for those involved in the rental accommodation industry to 

increase the number of units available and thus keep the price down. We think it is a more efficient and 

effective way of supplying adequate rental accommodation at reasonable rates. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 1 — Re-institution of Capital Punishment. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) moved, seconded by Mr. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to immediately hold a national referendum on 

the re-institution in Canada of capital punishment in order to give the people of Canada an 

opportunity to express their views on this issue. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, we have before this Assembly a resolution which I will 

move later which deals with the matter of capital punishment, a matter that this Assembly urge the 

Government of Canada to hold a referendum on the re-institution of capital punishment. I do not think, Mr. 

Speaker, that there has been an issue before the people of Canada that has had a greater emotional impact, 

that has created a belief that governments do not listen to them, an issue that has put politicians in low 

esteem. I say this stating to the hon. members opposite that that issue crosses party lines. It’s not an issue of 

any single political party and, as I say, proponents of all political parties have some deep concerns about the 

manner in which capital punishment was abolished in Canada. 

 

I would hope that one of the members opposite would be prepared to second this motion. We know on the 

federal level the position of the parties, including the party opposite. We also know the position of the 

federal government, and also of the leader of the Conservative Party in Ottawa. But in all cases, the 

statements of the leaders of those parties have been ones which do not reflect the true concerns and the 

desires of the vast majority of Canadians. 

 

The manner of abolition of capital punishment created deep concern in law enforcement agencies, but above 

all it has little, if any, public support, and that I believe to be a political wrong. I put this motion before this 

Assembly because I believe in an issue of that nature. The public does have a right to voice its opinion. 

 

We have some conflicting views, I think, in Canada on the use of the referendum. We have the position of 

the Prime Minister of Canada, who is adamantly opposed to a referendum on capital punishment, but very, 

very quickly decides that it’s in his political interest to have a referendum on the question of national unity, 

the question of Quebec’s separation. In other words, we have a situation where the leader of Canada has 

stated that for political purposes we will have a referendum, but when we have an issue that concerns every 

Canadian, an issue that disturbs every Canadian, there was a refusal to give the public a right to speak its 

opinion. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1071 

I believe that the form of a properly established and worded referendum would in fact do more to relieve the 

bitterness that now exists. I think it would do more to allow us to debate the matter of capital punishment in 

a reasonable and rational way. I think we’ve seen in Britain and I think we will see in Quebec, the 

advantages of a referendum with a yes or no answer, because it allows the two sides to articulate their 

positions, sell their positions, argue their positions, before the public. And I see absolutely no reason why we 

couldn’t give the people of Canada a voice on capital punishment. I have more confidence that I think the 

federal politicians have because I think that if the proponents of capital punishment and those that oppose 

capital punishment are given the opportunity to express their views to the public, their positions, in, as I say, 

reasonable and rational terms, that the public of Canada will give them a fair and unemotional hearing. I 

think it’s better to do it that way without regard to the partisan political process because as I say and as I said 

at the outset, the concerns about the manner of abolition of capital punishment cross all party lines. 

 

Why is capital punishment such an emotional issue? I think capital punishment became a symbol. It 

represents to the people of Canada their attitude to and their abhorrence of murder. I think it represented and 

reflected a concern by society of threats against the security of society. I think it symbolized a support for our 

law enforcement officers, prison guards and I think above all, Mr. Speaker, that it symbolized society’s 

rightful insistence that crime must be punished. And I believe that the removal of this symbol, without regard 

to the public’s position, caused this reaction in Canadians. 

 

You know, we use symbols daily in our political activity and I think, given the electronic media that symbols 

are probably the basis of our political activity. We take a look, whenever we have a public concern, we 

immediately establish a new department or agency so that we deal. The fact that if we analyze most of our 

symbols, departments that we have established that their actual effectiveness is not very great. I think we’ve 

established consumer affairs departments across Canada and across the United States and there are not too 

many consumers feel better represented as a result. We established environmental departments across 

Canada and across the United States and environmental groups don’t have the confidence in a lot of them. 

Public doesn’t have the confidence. But we have a symbol of concern established. We had a symbol, for 

example, on wage and price controls that proved to be ineffective. But we use symbols daily. We use them 

for partisan political purposes. We should not, nor do we have the right to criticize the public for insisting on 

its symbols, a symbol of some very basic beliefs in the justice system. I believe that a referendum will do 

much to restore public confidence in our political institutions. I think that a referendum will show support 

for our law enforcement people. I think it will do much to ease, what I feel, are the legitimate and valid 

concerns of our law enforcement agencies that they lack public support. Above all, Mr. Speaker, a 

referendum will convince people that our criminal law does, in fact, reflect the concepts and the ideas of the 

people of Canada. 

 

You know it is strange in the field of criminal law that we have great concerns about making the criminal 

law reflect the realities. We have made major changes in the gambling laws. We talk about changes for laws 

of prostitution. We make some actual changes in the law of rape to bring it into touch with reality. Why, in 

fact, did we fail to do this and why did our national politicians fail to do this in the area of capital 

punishment? 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, and I think all members believe, that a system of criminal law must, in fact, reflect 

the mores of the society it governs. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1072 

Capital punishment doesn’t mean revenge for most. I think it means a deep concern for the criminal justice 

system. I believe that capital punishment for the average Canadian citizen doesn’t mean revenge, but it 

means justice. I believe, as well, that for the average Canadian citizen, a vote on capital punishment doesn’t 

mean retribution, but in fact, means for him a respect for the criminal law of Canada. 

 

I would like to digress, for a minute, Mr. Speaker. We came up with what was supposedly a compromise 

position, a sop to the people, by insisting that rather than capital punishment a 25-year mandatory prison 

term be imposed. I think sociologists across Canada will indicate that that particular penalty may be the most 

barbaric that we could have come up with. I don’t think there is anyone in Canada who, for a moment, 

argues that our prison systems in Canada are, in fact, rehabilitative. I think that most sociologists will accept 

that the prison system of Canada is, in fact, a training ground for most criminals. I believe that that 25-year 

prison sentence, in lieu of capital punishment, will be a time bomb for future Canadians because I think the 

sociological data that we have in Canada indicates that a person going in for that length of time will in fact 

be a more dangerous person coming out 25 years later. How we deal with someone who comes out 25 years 

later — he has been out of touch with society for 25 years — I think is going to be a terrible problem in the 

future. I don’t envy people in the future having to deal with that particular problem. I don’t think it was the 

answer. I, for one, as members of this Assembly know, advocate capital punishment for murder of police and 

prison guards. I think that they deserve that protection. I think they deserve and need that deterrent. I’m 

prepared, after dealing with what I believe to be some very responsible people in the field of law 

enforcement, to state that they feel and believe that they don’t have support and that their risks are greater as 

a result of the actions of the Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a referendum would have, I think, the result of a cleansing of the political process in this 

regard. I think it would allow the politicians to forget about the partisanship and it would let the people of 

Canada speak and make their own decisions. As I say, Mr. Speaker, I believe that if a referendum is fairly 

stated I have every confidence in the people of Canada that they would make a decision that they believe to 

be right, morally right and I think that is the tragedy of the actions of the Federal House of Parliament in 

denying the people a referendum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be able to stand in this 

Assembly this afternoon and speak on a topic that I think is of extreme importance to the people of Canada. 

This is a very important topic in my view and I think all members in this House should give very careful 

consideration to the resolution to this motion which is calling for a referendum, by the people of Canada, on 

the important topic of capital punishment. 

 

As I was campaigning in the last while, as other members were during the months of September and 

October, this topic came up many times, and I’m sure it did in many of our campaign speeches. I found it 

was, in my constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley, perhaps one of the most important topics of the subjects 

discussed. I know that in the parliament of Canada, and throughout Canada, there have been good arguments 

placed for both abolition and retention; however, before I go further into this discussion, I would like to 

identify my stand which is similar to my seatmate’s stand (Mr. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1073 

Lane). I feel (and my words from this point on will probably be shaded by my bias) that although I wish with 

all my heart and sincerity that we as a people had progressed to a point where the taking of a man’s life was 

not a necessity, I do not see that we as a civilized society have come that far. Therefore, I would have to say 

that I believe that we should move to the re-introduction of capital punishment. 

 

Now I will ask the members on both sides of the House to just sit for a minute and think of the situation in 

our country today. Look at the growth of violence that is taking place. One only has to look at the weekly 

newspapers, listen to the radio on the weekend, go to the movies, or read some of the literature on our news 

stands and I think he must agree that for some reason, unknown to me and to many other people in this 

society, there seems to be a growth in what I call abnormal behavior and a growth in violence. 

 

I’d like to cite a couple of cases that come to our minds very readily if we read the paper; last week there was 

the case at Edenwold, which was a very bizarre and strange occurrence. I’d like to recall the incident of the 

RCMP in Brandon about a year ago, where the young RCMP Sergeant or Corporal (I forget his rank) was 

shot in the line of duty. What about the case of the RCMP in Saskatoon? I’m sure the members from 

Saskatoon will remember that very vividly, as will the people of Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

Coming to my constituency, there was a very, very sad case two or three years ago of the Sedley farmers. 

They were at the parish fowl supper doing their duty to their church and their society, and were taken out and 

slain in the ditch of the road outside of Sedley. 

 

I don’t want to see that type of society continue and I’m sure most of us in this House do not adhere to that 

kind of behaviour. I think we sincerely want to put an end to this type of behaviour in our society. 

 

This, my friends, is nothing more than out and out murder! I don’t think that we, as legislators, should allow 

this type of thing to continue; we must as elected leaders of this society in Saskatchewan stand up and be 

counted. I realize and we all do, that the matter of capital punishment is beyond our jurisdiction. As you 

heard the Leader of the Opposition say the other day in discussing PRAC (Prairie Rail Action Committee) 

and I’m going to say it to you now in discussing capital punishment, that there are times when we must bury 

our political differences and we must work together for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. I think 

that this is one of these occasions. 

 

I would like to go on to the situation of the policemen and the prison guards. I ask you, members of this 

Assembly, if we do not stand up and protect these men who are there protecting our society, who’s going to 

take this job? Let’s look down the road; our friend was talking about 25 years down the road. I don’t think it 

takes too much imagination to look further down the road from where we are now. We are all mature adults, 

somewhere between the ages of 30 and 60 in this House and I challenge you to look back into your days and 

compare the situation then as it is today. You must come to the realization that it is time that the leaders of 

this country stood up and fought for a cleaning up of our society with regard to murder. 

 

I would like to recall another case which comes to my mind (again I am not picking on the city of Saskatoon 

at all) the case of the young children. I think it was about three years ago, the young children were murdered 

and buried in a grave just outside of Saskatoon. A horrifying case, a case that everyone in Saskatchewan was 

alarmed 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1074 

about. I have a wife and two young daughters (I know many of you do) and I tell you one thing, I’m not 

going to stand in this legislature in Saskatchewan and allow these kinds of things to take place without 

giving my utmost to try to bring about a change. I don’t believe that our daughters and wives and ourselves, 

or anyone else should have to be walking our streets in fear, which is the situation which we are coming into 

in many of our urban centres in Saskatchewan today. 

 

I would like to go on a little further here. My seatmate said he believes in capital punishment for the murder 

of policemen and prison guards. I am afraid I have to go one step further. I believe that a life is a life and that 

we are not in a position to judge which life is the better. I think there is someone somewhere else in this 

universe who makes that kind of judgment. What I am concerned about in our society today is, who is being 

supported? Oftentimes you hear a lot about the criminal and how we must rehabilitate society, concerned 

about the families who are left? The heartache that is left there, perhaps the poverty, the broken home — 

these things are quickly forgotten. We are so concerned with being just to the criminal that I think that we 

are at a time in our society where in many things the tail is beginning to wag the dog. I think it’s time we 

took a look at this. I would like to ask the members here, is this the sample of the just society that the Prime 

Minister of Canada promised us some 11 years ago. To me, it isn’t a very good example of that. 

 

Now, I’d like to go on a little further on this topic, Mr. Speaker. I believe that I’m expressing the views of 

many people in Canada and I believe I’m expressing the views of many of the members on the other side as 

well. Once again, I would say that this is an issue that, I think, should be above political arguing or bantering 

or rewording or so on. I think we should come out of this as a group if we feel this way (the majority of us) 

and I ask you and charge each of you to use your own conscience as, I think, the people of Canada will do if 

they are given this opportunity of a referendum. I believe that we should insist that the people of Canada be 

given a chance to express their views on this personal problem. It’s a personal decision and I am proud to see 

that this motion has come from our party, the Progressive Conservative Party. I’m proud to lend support to 

my seatmate, the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) and I will be supporting this motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — In giving careful consideration to the resolution placed before this 

House by the hon. member for Qu’Appelle, I’m uncertain as to just what he and his colleague want. Since 

this Assembly opened, my observation of the gentlemen opposite has not led me to conclude that clarity of 

thought is one of their major characteristics. This resolution, Mr. Speaker, begins by calling on this House to 

urge the federal government to hold a referendum on capital punishment and ends in the fourth line by 

describing what occurs, not in a referendum, but in a plebiscite. That, Mr. Speaker, is scarcely clarity of 

thought. 

 

The resolution is also far too vague for this House to consider intelligently. If it is a call for a referendum and 

a genuine referendum, it should offer some guidance as to the types of crimes capital punishment should 

apply to and which, therefore, should be placed in a referendum and submitted to the people for their 

approval or rejection. We know only too well that people will answer different questions in different ways 

but I’ll say no more on that point, Mr. Speaker. There are other more important things about this resolution 

to be considered. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1075 

When I read the resolution, when I listed to the hon. members opposite speak to it and when I think about the 

distinctions that have been drawn between referenda and plebiscites in Canada and when I recall the 

application to referenda and plebiscites in this country, I can only conclude that the gentlemen opposite, if 

they would want anything perhaps aside from political mileage, really want a plebiscite and not a 

referendum. Permit me, Mr. Speaker, to place on the record of this House what certain informed people have 

had to say of distinctions drawn between referenda and plebiscites in this country of ours. W.L. Morton, in 

his work The Progressive Party in Canada, when writing about the campaign for prohibition had this to say: 

 

The politicians, and that means Liberals and Conservatives, sought persistently to avoid the issue by 

resort to local option, to plebiscites, and finally, seizing on the wide support direct legislation had 

obtained in the West, to the referendum. 

 

In short, Morton tells us, there were plebiscites in use in this country before referenda. For the benefit of the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, let me point out that the phrase ‘direct legislation’ refers to the referendum, 

the initiative, and sometimes, provisions for the recall or removal of elected legislators by their constituents. 

Some of the members opposite are lucky we do not have recall procedures in our constitution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHITE: — The distinction between the initiative and referenda and plebiscites is clearly set out by 

Cory and Hodges in Democratic Government and Politics. In their 1960 edition of their work, they state: 

 

The referendum is applied by requiring that particular laws enacted by the legislature shall be 

suspended until the whole electorate has voted on them. The initiative, similarly, enables some 

fraction of the voters to petition for a particular law to be drafted and submitted to the electorate for 

their decision. These two devices, which generally go together, were in use in several of the 

democracies of continental Europe, although Switzerland is now the only country in which they are 

still frequently used. In the first three decades of this century, some 20 states in the United States 

adopted them. The movement spilled over into western Canada. But the sole remnant today is the 

Direct Legislation Act of Alberta. Many Canadian provinces, however, made use of plebiscites for 

getting an expression of opinion on particular issues, particularly the liquor question. 

 

A Liberal attorney general of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, drew similar distinctions between referenda and 

plebiscites. J.A. Cross, speaking in this House, and that was in 1924, and since then we have not had a 

referendum in this country, said this concerning a plebiscite on liquor stores: 

 

The bill before us is to provide for the taking of a plebiscite as opposed to a referendum. A 

referendum is a submission of a proposed public measure or law which has been passed upon by a 

legislature or a convention to the vote of the people for their ratification or rejection. If ratified by the 

voters, it is bound to become law. The system of referendum is foreign to our constitutional form of 

government. The legislature must remain free and supreme. A plebiscite, on the other hand, is an 

expression of popular will on a given matter of public interest by means of a vote of the whole 

people. The  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1076 

result of a vote on a plebiscite does not place any obligation on the government to introduce or upon 

the legislature to enact any law as a result thereof. It merely is a means of gaining an expression of 

public opinion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on at length in a similar vein, but I think I’ve said enough to indicate that both 

governments and experts in Canada have viewed referenda as binding on them, binding them to particular 

courses of action, and plebiscites as merely devices for obtaining expressions of opinion on particular 

subjects. And, Mr. Speaker, the fact that there’s a difference between a referendum and a plebiscite is not the 

only reason I raise questions about this resolution. For this House to ask the federal government to hold the 

referendum is to request it to do something it has never done before. The federal government has never in its 

112 years held any vote which can be clearly classed as a nation-wide referendum. May I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that if we want federal politicians, either Liberal or Tory, to do something, ask them to do 

something they’ve done in the past. They are not known to be fast learners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government in 1920 was involved in what has been sometimes called a referendum 

on prohibition. But that affair was not a purely federal referendum since it involved only those provinces 

wishing to participate. The question or questions to be voted upon were framed by provincial governments 

and were not the same in all provinces where votes were taken. The question placed before the voters in 

Saskatchewan was this, ‘Shall the importation and bringing of intoxicating liquor into Saskatchewan be 

forbidden?’ B.C. voters, on the other hand, were presented with two questions. The day on which provincial 

votes were taken also varied. And, as I have already indicated, votes were not taken in all provinces. The 

reason for federal involvement in the affair arose from its control over interprovincial trade. It essentially 

acted to enable certain provinces to implement liquor policies they desired. 

 

In the two other instances when the federal government submitted questions to the people it provided for 

nation-wide voting and clearly stated that it was holding plebiscites. The first occasion was the 1898 

plebiscite on prohibition and the second involved conscription during the second world war. The latter event 

received some attention in the October election. Liberals then stated that the vote held in April of 1942 was a 

referendum on conscription. It was nothing of the sort except in some people’s minds. It was a plebiscite 

which asked the Canadian people to release the Mackenzie King government from promises that it made not 

to impose conscription. 

 

These two appeals by the federal government raise questions concerning the value of plebiscites and more so 

about the value of referendums. 

 

At the time of the 1898 vote there were 1,233,627 registered voters in the country. Of these, 543,029 or 44 

per cent turned out to vote. 278,487 voted for prohibition; 264,571 voted against prohibition. In short, there 

was a majority of only 13,916 for prohibition. The federal government concluded that in a case where over 

half of the eligible voters stayed at home and a majority of only 2.5 per cent of those participating favored a 

certain course of action, it was not justified in adopting that course of action. The federal government had 

asked for an expression of opinion — it concluded that it could not clearly assess public opinion on 

prohibition on the basis of the vote. I ask the members opposite, would they want the federal government to 

be bound through a referendum to a certain course of action on capital punishment on the basis of such a 

vote? Hence, I ask them, do you really want a referendum; do you not want a plebiscite? 

 

The second plebiscite is in some respects, even more interesting, Mr. Speaker. In  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1077 

1942, the King government asked the people of Saskatchewan to release it from its promise not to impose 

conscription. In this case, there were 6,502,234 voters on the list. Some 4,638,847 or roughly 71 per cent 

turned out to vote. Of those taking part, 64 per cent voted in the affirmative and about 36 per cent in the 

negative. Despite the fact that about 29 per cent of the electorate had not cast their vote, over 45 per cent of 

those eligible to vote cast affirmative ballots. From such figures, one might conclude that the plebiscite gave 

the government a very good expression of public opinion on the question at issue. One might go on from 

there to argue that plebiscites are a desirable form or desirable means to gauge public opinion. But such 

conclusions cannot be supported when all of the facts are known. And, Mr. Speaker, I would urge the 

gentlemen opposite to weigh carefully the facts I’m about to give them. 

 

A number of public opinion polls were held in the month or so preceding the voting in the 1942 plebiscite. 

The results indicated that people would cast their ballots this way or that way for a variety of reasons. When 

people were asked what they thought of the government’s decision to hold a plebiscite, 54 per cent said the 

government was wrong in doing so and 31 per cent said the government was acting properly. When asked 

what the plebiscite was all about, 45 per cent stated that it was related to freeing the government from its 

promises. An almost equal number — 42 per cent — said it was a vote for or against conscription. So there’s 

no unanimity on what the vote is about, even. When asked how they would vote on the question of 

conscription, for or against, 55 per cent said they would vote for conscription. But when asked how they 

would vote on the question of relieving the government of past promises, 62 per cent said they would let the 

government off the hook. Now, Mr. Speaker, I think you’ll agree when I say that there was massive 

confusion among the voters when they cast their ballots in 1942 and I think you’ll agree that such confusion 

was reflected in the voting. As Mackenzie King said of his policy, it was ‘conscription if necessary, but not 

necessarily conscription.’ 

 

The gentlemen opposite merely ask for a referendum on capital punishment. It would take no mental giant to 

frame a question on capital punishment which could be presented or interpreted by the voters as ‘capital 

punishment if necessary, but not necessarily capital punishment.’ Indeed, we’ve had such a policy in this 

country already and I ask the gentlemen opposite when requesting a referendum on capital punishment of the 

federal government, would they work to gain approval of a proposition placed before the public which is as 

vague as the resolution that they have placed before this House? I venture to say they would not, they’d do 

another Tory flip flop. 

 

Let me turn now to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Since 1905, governments here have held six 

referenda or plebiscites. Four of them dealt with liquor traffic; one was the 1920 referendum which I referred 

to a few minutes ago. A second referendum held in 1916 led to abolition of government liquor stores. The 

third was the 1924 plebiscite which led to the restoration of government liquor stores. The fourth, also a 

plebiscite in 1934, approved sale of beer by the glass in licensed premises. Of the two other appeals, one was 

the 1956 plebiscite on the time issue, and the other was a 1913 referendum on the question of whether 

referenda, together with the initiative, should become part of our system of government. 

 

I want to say a few words about some of these affairs, Mr. Speaker, and I will begin by taking up the 1956 

time plebiscite which some people may remember. My reason for doing so is, as I have just pointed out, 

voter confusion, when faced with a plebiscite on a matter, or for that matter, a referendum. The point I want 

to make is that not only the  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1078 

voters, but politicians, and the very best politicians, CCF-NDP politicians can wind up confused. 

 

The 1956 plebiscite might be called the great Saskatchewan time fiasco. Rather than speak at length about it 

I will simply read into the record of this House an analysis of it. It is from an article on Saskatchewan written 

about 1970, and entitled, The Referendum on Plebiscite, and it reads, in part, and I quote: 

 

The province’s east and west boundaries do not coincide with those of any time zone, and the 

question of which time zone should be used for setting the province’s clocks, has been a vexing one 

for many years. In 1956 the electorate was permitted to express its opinion on a confusing ballot 

which not only permitted voters to vote for or against Central Standard Time for the whole province, 

but also to indicate their personal preference for the time to be used locally. Only 34.1 per cent of the 

electorate voted. And on the first question 101,292 favored Central Standard Time and 67,950 

opposed it. 

 

Local time preferences substantially negated the first part of the ballot; 72,561 chose Central 

Standard Time; 19,380, Central Daylight Time and 83,267, Mountain Standard. The government, 

needless to say, encountered considerable difficulty in interpreting these results, but treating the 

whole matter as non-political, had a legislative committee consider it, and then accepted a 

recommendation that put the province on Mountain Standard Time during the winter months and 

Central Standard Time in the summer. The solution divided the cabinet and the Assembly and in due 

course the public. An extensive confusion developed in many parts of the province as communities 

chose their own time. The law was repealed in 1959. The time question was again sent to a 

legislative committee in 1962, and in 1966 following its report, the province was bisected roughly 

into an east and west time zone respectively employing Central Standard and Mountain Standard 

Time but allowing for many exceptions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s confusion for you and I think I can say, on the basis of personal experience, that 

confusion ran very deep. 

 

In the 1950s I was employed as a telegraph operator by the CNR at Humboldt. Humboldt was a divisional 

point on the railway and one of the communities where trains passed from one time zone to another. Each 

spring and fall as the time in use in the community changed, you could expect some extended conversations 

with members of the public concerning just when a particular train would arrive or leave. To avoid confusion 

I would often resort to saying it will be in in so many minutes or hours from now. One day when I informed 

a lady that No. 9 would arrive in exactly one hour she responded, "Is that slow time or fast time?’ 

Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House learned from experience; they do not see 

plebiscites and referenda as the be all and end all when it comes to handling ticklish questions. I hope the 

hon. members opposite will also learn from past experience. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I think it is incumbent upon me to say something about a true 

referendum. To do so will help the hon. members opposite clarify their thinking on referenda and plebiscites 

and aid them in deciding what, if anything, they want this House to do. For that purpose I will speak about 

the 1913 Saskatchewan referendum which asked the voters to approve or reject a bill which had already been 

drafted and debated and which provided for adoption of the initiative and referendum  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1079 

in this province. It was in every respect a true referenda on referenda. Recounting this portion of our 

province’s political history, Mr. Speaker, brought a good many laughs in the October election. Mr. Malone 

and his referendum gang were then criss-crossing the province promising people referenda on all sorts of 

things. They had evidently not examined the record of previous Liberal administrations on the subject. But 

we shouldn’t be too hard on them, the gentlemen opposite haven’t either and I will illustrate that in due 

course. 

 

The 1913 referendum was held under the auspices of a Liberal government headed by Walter Scott and one 

of the conditions this government laid down for passage of The Referendum Act was that 30 per cent of the 

electorate vote and that a majority of these vote in the affirmative or the referendum would be considered not 

to have passed. On voting day there were 161,531 voters on the list; only 31,593 or less than 20 per cent 

turned out and cast their ballots. To put it another way only 16.2 per cent of the voters, on the list, cast 

affirmative ballots. Premier Scott thereupon announced that due to insufficient interest the bill providing for 

direct legislation would be withdrawn. 

 

I don’t think you can blame my constituents for laughing at Liberal activities during the last election. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Malone and his colleagues were busily promising referendums and asserting that pretty well 

everything done by a government should be supported by 51 per cent of the electorate; 51 per cent is a far cry 

from the 16.2 per cent, who had when given the opportunity by a Liberal government, indicated a desire to 

use the referendum. And, Mr. Speaker, further laughter erupted when my constituents observed that Mr. 

Malone and his associates were proposing things which could only influence the way they desired the 

outcome of the voting on the proposed referendum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t see it as my duty or part of my duty to expedite the business of this House I could go 

on and on talking about particular plebiscites and referendums, which have been held in Saskatchewan and 

other provinces. But feeling as I do, I will content myself with a few remarks about certain of their aspects. 

 

First of all, a few words about voting in referendums and plebiscites. I have already given some indication of 

a wide variation in the proportion of voters participating. Such variations can be attributed to a number of 

things. Some of these factors demonstrate that the results of an appeal to the electorate do not necessarily tell 

us what they appear to on the surface. They illustrate better how governments can influence voting to obtain 

the results they want. 

 

The vote on the referendum, which I have just dealt with, is a case in point. The vote in that referendum was 

low because the Scott government wanted it to be low, thereby providing the excuse to drop the matter. The 

government publicized the referendum no more than was absolutely necessary. In fact, the advertising was so 

scanty that some people didn’t even know where they were to vote. Just why the government did this, is well 

illustrated in a letter by Premier Scott to a Liberal colleague in Moose Jaw and I want to read that letter. 

Here, in part, is what it says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

My view is that nothing ought to be done by the Liberal Party which will give anyone a chance to say 

that the party did not support the direct legislation principle. The labor element, as well as the 

average man, who considers himself independently-minded as regards public affairs and a close 

student of public affairs, and who, by the way, has information at hand which is at best very 

superficial are warm advocates of direct legislation and I think it  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1080 

would be detrimental to the interests of the Liberal Party if people obtained the idea that the Liberal 

Party had not stood by the legislation we framed last winter. 

 

At the same time the more I have been compelled to become acquainted with the whole question, the 

more honestly dubious I have become of the effects likely to be produced in relation to the public 

welfare. My innermost conviction is that it will be far better for the province if the principle is not 

sufficiently sustained at the polls to bring our direct legislation act into force. 

 

You will, of course, understand how necessary it is that the expression of opinion which I am giving 

you shall be kept entirely confidential between ourselves. In making use of the opinion with others I 

think it would be better to let no one know that I have expressed it but merely let it be understood as 

being the opinion come to by the leaders among our Liberal Moose Jaw Party friends themselves. 

 

The letter, Mr. Speaker, needs no further comment. Mackenzie King, on the other hand, obtained a high 

turnout and a strong affirmative vote in the 1942 plebiscite by extensive publicity and by careful selection of 

the question to be put to the population. 

 

An early Tory government in Manitoba took yet a different course to influence results. It provided no voters 

lists and set the stage for many irregularities in a vote on prohibition. In St. Boniface, for example, twice as 

many people voted as there were judged to be eligible voters in the community. The government doubtless 

was pleased with such occurrences. The people of St. Boniface, like members of the government, were 

opposed to prohibition. 

 

Results can also be influenced one way or another by when you hold a plebiscite or a referendum. If a low 

vote is desired hold the plebiscite by itself or in unseasonable weather. If you desire a heavy vote, hold it, for 

example, at the same time as a provincial election. I’m sure some members of this House would not mind 

my illustrating by example what I mean by that. There’s an example well worth bringing to the attention of 

all the hon. members — the 1934 plebiscite on the sale of beer by the glass in Saskatchewan. The number of 

people voting in that plebiscite was 382,823. That’s over 110,000 more people than voted in the 1942 

plebiscite. Why did the voters turn out in such numbers? They were just sick and tired of the one and only 

Tory government we ever had in this province and they went to the polls determined to get rid of it. While 

they were at the polling stations they also voted on the plebiscite. I need not remind members of this House 

of the 1934 election results — the election of the first CCF members even to sit in this House and 

annihilation of the Tories to the last man. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHITE: — And a similar fate awaits the members opposite, Mr. Speaker — some of them anyhow, 

unless they begin clarifying their thoughts and stop shooting from the lip. 

 

While I’m on the subject, Mr. Speaker, let me say something about what appears to have been a recent effort 

to predetermine the course of a proposed referendum. Ted Malone and his associates in the last election 

proposed to give the people of this province tax cuts by allowing them to vote to dispense with certain 

programs provided  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1081 

by government. It would probably have involved voting on certain health, educational, social services 

programs, and the like. In their platform published in the papers, this proposed referendum was called 

Proposition 1. The vote was to be held March 5, 1979. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, who might not have been able 

to get out and vote on March 5 last? Well-heeled Liberals and Tories? No. It goes without saying it would 

have been senior citizens, mothers with young children, and so forth — the very people who need and favor 

the types of programs which would have been voted upon. Mr. Speaker, I know from my contacts with 

people in my constituency that Mr. Malone underestimated the intelligence of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. They saw through his devious scheme and voted accordingly and they’ll have no difficulty 

seeing through similar schemes put forward by the opposition. 

 

I could also talk about costs of conducting referendums and plebiscites, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll say very little 

on that subject. Suffice it to say, that costs have varied widely depending on when votes were held and how 

much they were publicized. I sincerely hope the hon. members opposite who do a daily song and dance on 

economy in government will not support costly procedures which produce highly questionable, perhaps quite 

useless results. The referendum, such as they propose, would cost far more than the 1942 plebiscite and that 

was $1,385,508.43. 

 

While I won’t go into costs, Mr. Speaker, I do want to speak about something else. This resolution was 

placed before this House by Tories and I think members on both sides of the House should know what Tories 

have said of governments and individuals who resort to or advocate plebiscites and referendums. In doing so, 

I’ll refrain from mentioning what any member of this Assembly has said in the past couple of years on the 

subject; such critical comments as those by the Leader of the Opposition and the member for Moosomin are 

already well known. Rather, I want to tell you what other Tories have said. 

 

First, John George Diefenbaker, concerning Mackenzie King’s 1942 plebiscite, he said on the act providing 

for the plebiscite: 

 

This act unless amended — and it wasn’t amended — may well be just another milestone towards 

the destruction of that which we are fighting to preserve in these days of war . . . our free 

parliamentary institutions characterized by the principle of responsible government. 

 

On the wording of the plebiscite, he had this to say: 

 

It is a repudiation of government responsibility and just one more step along the road that leads to the 

derision of parliament and parliamentary institutions generally. 

 

On the same plebiscite, a Tory from Manitoba Souris, J.A. Ross stated ‘to me the taking of a plebiscite 

seems a most unwarranted evasion of government responsibility.’ 

 

The members opposite have also been doing a daily song and dance about responsibility in government. Let 

them practise what they preach or stand condemned in the words of other Tories. Other Tory spokesmen 

have been even more unkind to individuals making proposals specifically for referendums. Premier Hatfield, 

just the other night on the Sunday night TV program, The Referendum Power Play, referred to the holding of 

referendums as cop-out. Cheating! Dishonest, all this on the part of a 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1082 

government that does it. E.L. Taylor, a member for Gimli in the Manitoba legislature, a Tory, said direct 

legislation is favored by the crank, the fadist, who thought himself the people; and Rodman Roblin, the Tory 

Premier of Manitoba also spoke on the subject. Before telling you what he said, I should tell this House 

something about him. 

 

The other day reference was made to the NDP ‘group of five’. Mr. Roblin was nothing less than a member of 

a Tory ‘gang of four’. Mr. Roblin and three of his ministers were hauled before the courts in Manitoba 

charged with fraudulent conspiracy to obtain party funds. The people of Manitoba had been overcharged 

approximately 20 per cent on the cost of their legislative building. A goodly portion of the funds went into 

Conservative Party coffers. The affair practically destroyed the Tory party in Manitoba for many years — 

one of the worst political scandals in all of Canadian history. 

 

To return to what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Roblin described the referendum as ‘degenerate 

republicanism’ which he said was advocated by demagogues in order to pull the underpinning out from 

under the British Empire. 

 

On another occasion he said, advocating or adopting the initiative for referendum was (and get this) 

socialistic. The leader-in-waiting and the Tory member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. G. Taylor) are 

socialists. Their colleagues had better watch them. You know, the next thing, they will be bringing in a 

whole series of resolutions calling for purchase of the rest of the potash mines, nationalization of Mother 

Esso, more money for the land bank and confiscation of all property of the Conservative progressive railway. 

Direct legislation, Roblin said, was socialistic because it was so revolutionary as to destroy what had taken 

800 years to build up. Roblin, like Ross and Diefenbaker, described the use of the referendum and plebiscite 

as destructive to parliamentary democracy and a shirking of responsibilities by government. 

 

Let’s have some consistency on the part of the opposition in this House, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

may wish to speak on this subject later and I therefore beg to adjourn debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 9 — Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley) moved, seconded by Mr. E.A. Berntson (Souris-Cannington): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for allowing the Saskatchewan 

Land Bank Commission to become insensitive to the needs of the family farm. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity on private member’s day to pass a few comments on 

and give some of my thoughts on the Saskatchewan land bank program. I think we have to look at just what 

direction we are going to be taking in rural Saskatchewan in the decade of the 1980s. And that is not simply 

a question of land tenure, that’s a question of what is going to happen to our rural population. Are we going 

to allow the trend, the trend of the population to move to the larger centres of Saskatoon and Regina, are we 

going to allow that trend to continue? How are we going to approach the  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1083 

problem of increasing production in the field of agriculture? There is another problem that we face. The 

other problem is the total question of land tenure in Saskatchewan. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps we 

have five different categories of land tenure in the province of Saskatchewan and I wish to refer to those five 

categories and basically say a bit on each one of them, hopefully to draw the picture as to which direction we 

are going. 

 

I see the first category as the large corporate farm. I suppose it is epitomized by Credit Foncier . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . O.K. and I say about Credit Foncier and I’ll state our position very clearly about Credit 

Foncier. It is that we do not support that type of land holding and that we like to see that type of land holding 

phased out. In fairness to them and in fairness to anyone who wishes to really sit and look at this total 

problem, I believe the people who are farming the land owned by Credit Foncier have traditionally had very 

good lease agreements. If you people are interested in fairness, look at the type of lease agreements here and 

by and large they are one-third, two-third crop share lease agreements. I defy the members opposite to say 

that that is an unfair type of lease agreement; these agreements have held up in this province for 50 or 60 

years. By and large the lease agreements with Credit Foncier, in fairness to them, have been for a long term 

period of time and they have allowed tenants the right of first refusal in the event of a sale of that property. I 

think, statistically (and I am sure the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Kaeding, will have these figures).I’m sure 

statistically that type of farm-tenure holding is on the decrease and we support that decrease of that type of 

system. We support that the people of the province of Saskatchewan should be living on the farm and that is 

to be made clear. 

 

The second type of tenure system that I see is what I will call the small and medium size farmer. These are 

the people that built this province and they are still the backbone of our agriculture system. These are the 

people that buy their farm machinery in the local towns and support the local stores and the local merchants 

and play on the local hockey team and go to our local schools. That’s, Mr. Speaker, the people, the backbone 

of our agriculture industry. 

 

Now I said that I was glad to see the Credit Foncier’s of Saskatchewan on the decrease. But unfortunately the 

small, the middle-size farmer is also on the decrease in numbers and I think that’s wrong. That’s the problem 

— the fundamental problem facing rural Saskatchewan over the decade of the ’80s. 

 

The third type of land tenure system, I suggest, is the communal land system — the communal land tenure 

system — I suppose typified by the Hutterite system — which I suspect is really the only true socialist type 

farm land tenure system in this province. That is on the increase. 

 

Now number four is what I class as the big farmer, the four to ten section farmer, the six to ten section 

farmer. I have a lot of those people in my riding and I am not going to be critical of those people because 

either they or their families have contributed greatly to this province, have been good farmers, have allowed 

to expand their farming operation. I suggest one of the great problems facing that type of farmer in this 

province is basically this — by and large they are successful farmers and being successful farmers they, as a 

rule, have some excess capital. So you say to that farmer, what should I do with my excess capital? I see 

perhaps three ways they can spend their money. Situation number one — you can tell him to go and buy 

some Canada Savings Bonds, or invest in your local credit union or bank. The farmer says, yes, I have been 

successful in this farming business, but what type of return do I get for that? They are 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1084 

paying me a 9 per cent return on my investment; the inflation rate is 9 per cent; it has eaten up all my return. 

At the same time I am paying income tax on that money, so I am a net loser that way. Try to explain that to 

me! Is that a good system? 

 

Situation number two — should I go to the city and buy some real estate or some shares or get on to the 

stock market? And I say, the person from rural Saskatchewan, the person who built rural Saskatchewan, also 

says, oh, those fast talking people from the city never in the past have they ever done us any good. I will stay 

away from those. So what is he saying? The only system I have left is to buy more land and unfortunately 

that’s what happens. They do buy more land and they do push the price up. I say we must find a solution to 

that. You talk — as that’s our system. I’ll tell you that is not our system. I’ll tell you in my riding what 

people have that kind of land and maybe some of the people opposite have been involved in the New 

Democratic Party and the CCF and maybe you will hear some of these names and see if they are supporters 

of our party. The Dearborns, 18 sections — PCs? No, NDP all the way. The Johnson family, 36 sections. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Which ones? 

 

MR. ANDREW: — There are a whole bunch of them. They are all NDP. The 10-section socialists. That is 

number four. 

 

The fifth type of land tenure is your system. This is the fourth type of people. That is the land bank people. I 

say to you people opposite, you speak of the land bank program and its having two pluses, two things that it 

is supposed to do. 

 

Situation number one is to help the person retire in dignity. Quite frankly, there is no problem any more. 

Anyone that has a farm in Saskatchewan right now has very little trouble selling that farm land. 

 

The second solution, the members opposite say, is for the land bank program to help the young guy get 

started farming. I say to the people opposite and I say to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) in 

particular, is that the position of land bank? Is that the purpose of land bank, or does the land bank purpose 

go further? Does the land bank purpose go to the point that the fundamental purpose of it is for the 

government to acquire the equity in farm land? Is the real reason for the government to acquire the equity in 

the farm land, or is the real reason to help the small farmers? If it is the narrow one of simply trying to help 

the small farmer, then I say that what you have in mind and what we have in mind is basically the same 

objective. It is just a matter of how we are going to get to it. What I say, the type of system that we advocate, 

is to put the money, the expenditure of money the province of Saskatchewan contribute to the land bank 

program, to dove tail that to the federal Farm Credit Corporation grants. It will take that to the bottom end 

and help that small guy. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It won’t work. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — You say it won’t work. It is working in the province of Alberta, my friend, wherein, 

Mr. Speaker, the size of the farms in the province of Alberta are on the decrease. The size of the farms in the 

province of Saskatchewan are on the increase. I defy the minister to stand up and state his position. I say our 

position goes beyond that. We also must try to harness our taxing policies to our land use and to land tenure 

so that we can maintain that strong, viable, medium-sized farmer in rural Saskatchewan, who is the vitality 

of western Canada and the vitality of rural Saskatchewan. 

 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1085 

The other problem I see with the land bank is that, it seems to me, we’re going to bureaucratize the farming 

system. I had a chap in the other day who didn’t seem to have too much success with the government side. 

He seemed to be bothered by allergies and his doctor informed him that he should take two years off from 

farming. He had a land bank lease agreement. The first year, in fairness, the program allowed him to sublet 

his lease agreement because of his allergy problem. He came back this year and the doctor basically again 

said that the allergy problem had not been solved so he should give it perhaps one more year. 

 

It’s not the question of the rightness or the wrongness in this given situation, but here’s a case of a guy 

saying, if I can pass the medical tests then I’ll get through this. Where do we go next? Where do we go next, 

Mr. Speaker, if the guy says, well I can only work so many days on the farm? That’s what’s going to happen 

to the farming situation in this province and that’s where the danger of this whole system goes. 

 

Now, without belaboring, I would also at this point in time, like to make a few comments on what is called 

the appeal process of the land bank program. You’ll find that in section 59 to 63 of the act, for anybody 

who’s interested in looking it up. 

 

At the present time, I believe it’s a three-man appeal system. I call it an appeal court hesitantly because, by 

democratic standards, I wouldn’t clearly think it much of an appeal court. The appointment of the people on 

the appeal was either by the minister or through his advice to the Cabinet. The minister is to check with his 

land bank officials and then with any other organizations he considers to be important. 

 

NFU (National Farmers’ Union), a great organization — I see in yesterday’s paper that the minister is back 

to the annual contribution to the National Farmers’ Union. His press release sets out the reason for the 

contribution this year. It goes on to say that similar grants are available to any farm organization that can 

prove it has management capabilities. I read to you, Mr. Speaker, from The Western Producer of December 

14, 1978 and this is. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. The member is obliged to relate to the subject which is under discussion 

which is Resolution No. 9 which I expect the member . . . Order, order . . . which I expect the member is 

intending to move at the conclusion of his remarks. At this point, I don’t see the connection between what 

the member is talking about and the resolution which is proposed. If there is a connection, perhaps the 

member could assure me and hasten to get to the connection. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — The only connection, Mr. Speaker, was the reference which the minister considered 

important and my suggestion, Mr. Speaker, concerning the National Farmers’ Union because of the political 

connections with the members opposite. I simply wanted to make a passing comment with regard to that. 

Now surely the last speaker had a fair latitude in the speaking of his particular subject and for that reason. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. If the member had some objection to the last speaker, he should have raised it 

when the last speaker was speaking. I watched the last speaker quite closely and he stayed right on the 

subject and no one raised a point of order during the time the last speaker was speaking. I wish the member 

would (if he is trying to make a point of order) confine it to what is before us at this time. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1086 

MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll cover that subject again. It’s a touchy subject obviously over there. 

Getting back to the criteria of appointing the so-called judges of the land bank court and the question as to 

whom the minister considers important, can you imagine his deliberations on that point, Mr. Speaker? What 

do you suppose the criteria of the hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) would be to selecting these 

judges? Do you suppose it’s the question of fairness or the question of independence or the question of 

educational ability or would you think it’s more of a question as to whether he is a member or supporter of 

the New Democratic Party, whether he was a farmer maybe able to be influenced. So getting back, I’m just 

trying to speed it up and I’ll just take and expedite matters a bit, if you don’t mind? . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, I don’t. Who is the chief justice? Who is the chief justice of this great court and I 

suggest it’s the political hack, Lorne (inaudible). 

 

Going back, Mr. Speaker, to the concept of this appeal court, back to 1972-73, a young couple in the 

Kyle-Elrose area came to me and they had applied and were granted the right to a land bank lease under the 

land bank program. They were entitled to the lease agreement. They were quite happy about it. They were 

going to get their start in the farming business. Their father had a half section and he was going to rent that to 

them — they were going to get a start. Here was a fairly good system. Here was a person who could get a 

chance to go into the farming business. Lo and behold they got a notice that there was an appeal pending. So 

in they go. They came to me and asked how do we handle this total appeal problem? How do we handle this 

appeal question? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Buy a membership card. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — That’s right, buy a membership card. So they went, I believe, to Swift Current to 

determine who had this particular program. Do you think they had a right to so determine? Did they have the 

right to even be present when this appeal was heard? No chance! It was held behind closed doors, Mr. 

Minister. You know full well it was behind closed doors, everyone of them are behind closed doors . 

(inaudible interjection) . Garbage nothing! We were not allowed to go in to determine his point structure. So 

all I say to you, whether it is fair, whether it is not fair, why can’t you be open about it? Why can’t your 

appeal be open? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right! Why can’t you open your appeal hearing? It’s 

the same as a court. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It should be the same as a court, but it isn’t. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — That’s right. Courts are open, democratic and independent. Kaeding justice I call it. 

 

Recently there was a similar case in Ituna. A guy came into the office and again he was successful in being 

granted the land, followed by an appeal. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — No membership card! 

 

MR. ANDREW: — No membership card. It went to two other people. He was represented by counsel — 

the members opposite will be fully aware of who was representing them. I simply say to you, in the legal 

paternity and perhaps it’s not any different, there’s a great maxim that says, justice should not only be done 

but manifestly appear to be done. All I say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is why can’t we have a 

system in the land bank appeal where the same thing applies? Is that too much to ask, Mr. Minister? That 

justice should not only be done, but manifestly appear to be done? Now, surely, Mr. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1087 

Minister, you’ve heard this complaint a number of times before. I say to you in fairness, make it fair and 

make it appear to be fair and quite frankly, Mr. Minister, if you do that through your appeal system, you’re 

going to have a lot better feeling out there in the people. They will appreciate your program a lot more and 

they’ll trust your administration a lot more. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson), that this 

Assembly condemn the Government of Saskatchewan for allowing the Saskatchewan Land Bank 

Commission to be insensitive to the needs of the family farm. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the motion put on 

the order paper by my colleague, the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) and I do sincerely hope that I am 

not wasting my sweetness on the desert air. 

 

I would like to begin by reading from Hansard, April 24, 1972. Here we have the former member for 

Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) during the land bank debate, talking about the Liberals: 

 

I also want to point out they had seven years to do something about the depletion of the farm 

population in this province. I want to point out also that there were no constructive suggestions 

before. What we have been doing in the past is that bigger farms were able to get the money to buy 

more land and got bigger and bigger. The weaker ones were encouraged to sell. I had that develop in 

my district . . .  

 

.and so on. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that nothing has changed. From ’72 until ’76, in fact, during the 

time we had land bank in Saskatchewan, the family farm in number decreased in Saskatchewan by 6,000. 

During the same period, by comparison, in Alberta the number of farms actually increased and the number of 

farmers under age 35 in fact doubled. In Alberta . . . (inaudible interjection). . . My initial suspicions I think, 

are being confirmed and I am in fact wasting my sweetness on the desert air. The Alberta fact was 

accomplished by the government’s guaranteeing loans at regular financial institutions to help the young 

fellow get on the farm . . .  

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — . . . by government’s guaranteeing agreements for sale and, in some cases, by 

governments making direct loans as a bank of last resort. The only thing that increased in Saskatchewan 

during this same period was the rate of decline in the number of farms. One of the reasons that the number of 

family farms has decreased in Saskatchewan is it seems that land bank policy tends to discriminate in favor 

of the rich, the very fear that the hon. member for Kinistino put forth back in 1972. Nothing has changed. 

We’ve seen at least three brought up in the House: the Eston country . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . just wait 

a minute, the Argue case, the one where we have land bank policy defining the family farm as also including 

a $500,000 apartment building. The size of the farms in Saskatchewan has in fact increased. These aren’t my 

numbers; they’re from the federal Farm Credit Corporation. The size of farms in fact has increased in 

Saskatchewan; the size of farms in Alberta during the same period has decreased. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1088 

I’m going to send a little package over to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding). The reason I’m going to 

send it over to you is because I’d just as soon the names weren’t bandied around. Just to illustrate what has 

been happening, we’ve had a situation where a young farmer had five quarters of land, most of which he has 

owned since 1968. In August of ‘76 he bought another quarter or land which cost him $32,000, somewhere 

in there. It put some financial strain on him, bearing in mind the quotas, etc., at the time. He also had some 

land bank land. Because of the financial strain, poor quotas, etc. (and remember, this was back when the 

lease policy was considerably different than it is now), he found himself in arrears to the land bank. 

 

The land bank went out and hung a lock on the door. They sent the sheriff out and hung a lock on the door of 

the bins. The young fellow, realizing that he was behind the eight ball, offered his land for sale to the land 

bank. They refused to make an offer on the land so, in desperation he sold it to his neighbor — five quarters 

of land — on January 16, 1976, for $82,500. A funny thing happened on the way to the Land Titles Office, 

March 20, three months later, certificate of title — the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission, $97,700, a 

very tidy profit of $15,200 in two months. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the program has failed. This is but one example. I have more in the holding 

pattern and as I get them documented I will pass them over to you too, Mr. Minister. I would ask that you 

hand that to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

My point, quite simply is, that the land bank is not strengthening rural Saskatchewan. It is not helping the 

small family farm. Quite, frankly, I would urge the minister to seriously consider conducting an investigation 

into the activities of the land bank. I am very, very pleased to second the motion, Resolution No. 9. 

 

MR. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I really thought when we got into this 

debate I was going to hear some substantial arguments in favor of or in opposition to land bank. I thought I 

would probably hear of some serious criticisms, which I would really have some difficulty answering. I 

thought maybe there might be something that I didn’t know, that might have been in the operation of land 

bank, which they might have brought forward to me. I was somewhat disappointed, in fact, at the very, very 

shallow kind of argument which came forward this afternoon. 

 

In the mover’s remarks I tried to find something there to which I could reply. I had real difficulty finding 

anything of merit worthy of a reply. 

 

I suppose the only thing I really want to comment on is his criticism of our appeal procedure. The fact is that 

we have three people on there who are legitimate farmers, good farmers, people respected in the community. 

I have not yet, in the four years I have been in office, heard any criticism from anyone of those three people. 

If he has heard criticisms, I want to hear them, because I talk to all kinds of people all over the country and I 

have not heard criticism of our appeal board in terms of the personnel. Some people don’t like the decisions 

they make, because you can never make a popular decision when you are looking at five or six people; you 

are going to become unpopular. But no one has ever told me that they didn’t get a fair hearing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been somewhat saddened by the irresponsible statements, sniping and unsubstantiated 

accusations made by the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) and from the members opposite. He started 

the accusation a couple of weeks ago about lessees in his own constituency, trying to prove in his own 

distorted way that the land bank was working contrary to the intent of the act. He tried to make a case that 

the  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1089 

land bank was wrong in paying less for a farmer’s land than the farmer had paid from the neighbor. 

 

The fact was, Mr. Speaker, that we paid a fair price. But that doesn’t seem to enter into his thinking. The 

member for Kindersley then complained that we leased this land to the farmer’s son without competition. 

Even he knows that father to son transfers are part of our agreement and that part of the agreement is that the 

designated descendant be given the sole right to lease, providing he meets the standard criteria of the 

program, and in this case there was no question. 

 

The member for Kindersley insinuates that the father was a large operator. Well, I have checked into that and 

the father has a section of land, he is leasing a little extra, but the fact of the matter is that we were not 

setting up the father. The purpose of the land bank is to set up the son; we are interested in getting his son 

started, not the father. 

 

Now it may be possible that the father could have started the son up in some other way, but obviously, their 

decision was to sell to the land bank and lease back. If he chose to lose a few thousand dollars to do that, I 

am sure that’s not for us to judge. 

 

Then he drags in a farmer from Strasbourg who sold land to the land bank. He leased it back and then later 

used some of that money to purchase an apartment block. Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t necessarily approve 

of that kind of activity, but again, it was a matter of the personal choice of the individual involved. When his 

application for sale and lease back was approved, his financial statements showed him to be in a severe 

financial position and he chose the land bank route to help himself out of a difficulty with his outstanding 

accounts. We would have expected that he would have used his money to clear those accounts. However, we 

do not have the right or the responsibility to force him to do so. Possibly the members opposite feel that 

because he has a lease from the land bank, somehow we should be able to control his chequebook as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we said when we introduced the land bank program that we would not interfere with the 

personal lives of lessees, that they would be free to live their own lives so long as they lived up to the terms 

of the lease. The members opposite may think we should ride herd on them. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this 

party doesn’t believe that we should do so. 

 

Next, Mr. Speaker, they drag in Senator Argue and his sale to the land bank, suggesting that he had leased 

his land to his daughter. Again the facts are distorted. Senator Argue’s farm was leased to another sister and 

her husband and it was a totally legitimate transaction. The land which was leased to Susan Argue was 

purchased from Gerry and Linda Spenarski, who is a sister of Susan. The charge was made that Miss Argue 

is not farming the land but had contracted others to do the work for her. That charge is also false and I should 

tell you, only two weeks ago before this matter ever came up in the House, I had an occasion to be with 

Senator Argue. I met Senator Argue and his daughter, Susan, at an agriculture banquet in my constituency. I 

can tell you that I didn’t invite them there. I was a guest as he was, and he was the guest speaker at that 

banquet. Mr. Argue, in the course of his remarks that evening, told of his daughter’s love for the farm and 

her involvement in farm activities, from tending the milk cows to running the tractor and to picking stones. 

Now it is possible that she may have had some work done on her behalf since she’s a single woman. 

However it looks to me like members opposite are again showing their bias against women, by suggesting 

that because she is a woman she should be denied the right to farm land on her own. As  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1090 

I understand it she has her own machinery which she shares with other members of her family — and that’s 

totally legitimate. She has her own quota book. She pays her own income tax. And generally, within her 

physical capacity, she does her share in the farming operation. During the winter she’s taking courses at the 

university. Now, Mr. Speaker, would members opposite deny her that? I’m sure they would. Or do they think 

it’s more appropriate that she should go out and curl all winter as the member for Milestone (Mr. Pickering) 

does? Or should she spend her weekends in Banff skiing? Or should she go to California for the winter? 

Maybe that’s a more appropriate thing for her to do during the winter time. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe it is 

our duty to regulate the private lives of our lessees. That may be Tory policy but it certainly is not ours. 

 

In a program as wide ranging as the land bank there will be many marginal cases, and the commission is not 

infallible. There will be lessees who do not abide strictly by their contracts and there may be others who 

abuse the privileges which they receive under the lease. Within the power of the commission every attempt is 

made to avoid this from happening but if a flagrant violation occurs and leases are abused, there are 

provisions for cancellation of contract. However, that is not something which the commission would enter 

into lightly and a substantial amount of staff time is spent on such lessees to try to encourage compliance on 

an advisory basis before more strenuous efforts are undertaken. We try to allocate as fairly as we can. We try 

to ensure that the lessee abides by the spirit of the program but we do not wish to be a gestapo, as members 

opposite suggest that we should be. 

 

The resolution moved by the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for allowing the Saskatchewan 

Land Bank Commission to become insensitive to the needs of the family farm. 

 

At the outset, Mr. Speaker, it becomes obvious to me that the hon. member is either not aware of how the 

land bank works or how it has changed over the years or he is not at all familiar with the needs of the family 

farm; I’m not sure which of those it is. One of the needs of the family farm is to secure land at a price which 

will permit a return to capital plus enough to provide a decent living for the family. There are really only two 

ways for a beginning farmer to secure control of farm land; one is by way of lease and the other is by way of 

a purchase. If land prices are forced up beyond his reach by manipulation and manoeuvres by outside forces 

then purchase is no longer an option for him. He is forced either to lease or he is forced out of farming. To 

suggest that the Land Bank Commission has not changed with the times and thus become insensitive to the 

needs of the family farm is simply making a broad statement in an attempt to mislead the public and hoping 

that no one will challenge it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to state emphatically to the member for Kindersley and to this House that this 

government and the commission have worked hard and long to ensure that the program continued to perform 

the purpose for which it was designed. The land bank cannot be all things to all people. Funds have 

sometimes been limited; decisions therefore have to be made to determine who the program should be 

molded to serve. 

 

As a government program it must be bold enough to take chances on untried and inexperienced people. 

People that the average landlord would not deal with if there was a large farmer nearby who would be 

prepared to lease. I think that’s what the member for Kindersley thinks we should do. I say this, Mr. Speaker, 

I am in no way trying to insinuate that land bank lessees are second-class farmers. A good many of them are 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1091 

unproven because no one else would give them a chance. Given a fair deal as offered by the land bank, these 

young farmers, many of them, will become our leaders of tomorrow. In 1971 it was decided that anyone who 

had a net worth of $60,000 or less and had a net income of $10,000 or less, averaged over the previous three 

years, would be eligible to apply. In other words, the commission was looking to lease to those who 

appeared to have the least opportunity outside of agriculture, certainly not the land barons which the 

members opposite seem to indicate. 

 

Due to inflation, the rising cost of land and the rising cost of living, it became obvious by 1974 that the 

above guidelines were picking out a completely different clientele than the program was designed to serve. 

In order to remain sensitive to the needs of prospective young farmers these guidelines had to be adjusted 

annually and that’s exactly what the commission did using 1974 as a base year. The setting of net worth and 

net income criteria is now adjusted annually based on the change in the wage index for Saskatchewan. I ask 

you, Mr. Speaker, is that being insensitive to the needs of the family farm? 

 

In 1972 land prices had fallen from a 1968 all-time high and grain was just not moving and interest rates had 

again stabilized. Everything pointed to a percentage of land value as being a logical, fair and equitable land 

rent. A decision was made to rent at 5 per cent of what the commission paid for the land and peg at that 

amount for the first three years of the lease. In the fourth year the rent was to be adjusted to 5 per cent of the 

present value of the land regardless of whether it had gone up or down. By the spring of 1976, when the first 

leases were to be adjusted to the new land value, it was determined that the land on the average had almost 

doubled in price since it was purchased by the commission three years earlier. To go with the original 

regulations, land bank regulations would have doubled. Being sensitive to the needs of the family farm, 

regulations were changed to be 5 per cent of the previous three year moving average of land prices rather 

than just the present land value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it looked like a realistic method of establishing rent had at last been found. As land prices 

fluctuated up or down, lessees would pay an average rent. They would not be asked to meet the highs and the 

lows of the land market. Land prices continued their rapid upward escalation. By 1978, even 5 per cent of the 

three year average land value was no longer realistic in some areas. Under the formula, rent continued 

upward while the previous three years had seen the net returns of farmers decrease. So rent was out of step 

with the returns to farming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government and the commission again went to work with the result that a rent based on 

previous yield records and the last known product prices was arrived at. Because the rent is tied to product 

price, it will fluctuate in relation to net returns to farming and thus coincide with the lessee’s ability to pay. 

Mr. Speaker, is this being insensitive to the needs of the family farm on the land bank land? The commission 

did not force that change upon the lessees. Of their own free will and in their own best interest, each one 

decided which rent formula would best suit them. Then there has been the long and tedious complaint from 

the opposition that the land bank was a front; it was a plot to buy up all of the land in Saskatchewan and 

because of this the commission would never sell an acre of land . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, come on. 

 

We all know that 350 lessees had the opportunity to purchase in 1978 and about 50 of them did. If the 

owning of land is a need of the family farm, then the commission was sensitive to that need. Indeed, this 

government assisted the purchase of one quarter by introducing what is now known as the homestead rebate. 

A lessee can now get a rebate 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1092 

of up to 20 per cent of the price paid to a maximum of $5,000 as assistance in buying one quarter section of 

land. Does this indicate, Mr. Speaker, that the commission is insensitive to the needs of family farms? I 

suggest that that $5,000 rebate will be one of the most valuable parts of that program. 

 

Another example of how the commission tried its best to assist family farms in 1978, occurred in the area 

around Kindersley, Saskatchewan. For years, the rural municipality owned farm land in that area and leased 

it to local farmers. The municipal act is clear, in that such land can only be disposed of by tender or public 

auction. The municipal council knew full well that if they moved in that direction those family farmers who 

had leased for years would have had the land sold from under them to the highest bidder, another case of the 

big getting bigger and the family farm being pushed out of business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the municipal council found that if they tendered the land, the land bank could tender on it. In 

this way the majority of those leasing from the municipality would become lessees of the land bank. The 

merits of what was intended was obvious. The municipality would be out of the land lease business and 

would have money to invest. The present renters, for the most part, would be permitted to carry on. The most 

important aspect of the whole thing was that in five years time the lessees, if they wished, could buy the land 

at average market price from the commission and no one would be in competition with them. This, for the 

majority, would be the only way that they would become owners of the land they had leased for so many 

years. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, was the Land Bank Commission acting in an insensitive way towards those family 

farms in the Kindersley area? The commission offered a chance for a long-term secure lease with an option 

to buy, with no threat of a sale by tender or auction hanging over those farmers’ heads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the mover of the resolution, the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) was 

not sensitive to the needs of those family farmers. It was through his interference that the plan was dropped. 

 

In a statement in the Kindersley Clarion, dated January 3 — and I have a copy of it here — the member for 

Kindersley said that he was pleased that the municipality was going to continue to lease and not sell to the 

land bank, because he was opposed to the principle of the government owning land. Now, Mr. Speaker, that 

is a rather funny statement. What is the difference, Mr. Speaker, between the municipal government owning 

land and the provincial government owning land? After all it is only a different level of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of all the members opposite who could have moved Resolution No. 9, the member for 

Kindersley was the least likely. His actions in this matter, in Kindersley, indicate without a shadow of a 

doubt that he is insensitive to the needs of family farms. In fact, it leads one to believe that he doesn’t give a 

damn about the family farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to my mind the member for Kindersley clearly owes his constituents an apology. He has 

committed a good many of them to a lifetime of leasing with no option to purchase. Is that what the member 

for Kindersley wanted? Or did he want an opportunity to get some of that business through his firm? I think, 

Mr. Speaker, it will be a long time before the voters in that constituency forget that their chance to secure 

control of a family farm was upset by their elected representative. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1093 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite, in the last two provincial elections, both Liberal and Tory Parties, came out 

. . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I don’t know about the other members but I am having trouble hearing 

the person who is debating the issue. I am sure all members are anxious to get into this debate, which I am 

sure must be important. I think the best way to accommodate it would be one at a time. Since the Minister of 

Agriculture has the floor now, I would ask members on both sides to restrain themselves until an appropriate 

time and then they can get into the debate after the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m not surprised that the people in Kindersley 

were misled by their Tory member. In his usual Gestapo-like manner, I’m sure he was able to scare the hell 

out of them. I’m sure that he told them that if they were to receive a lease from the land bank, they would be 

harassed by the commission every time they made a decision. I’m sure he would have told them that if they 

sell their land to the land bank, the commission would watch with eager anticipation to see whether they 

spent their money and rule on the validity of that spending. That’s probably the way he would have wanted 

to see it. I’m sure that he would have told them, especially if the lessee was a woman, that the commission 

was going to watch every move. Don’t you dare leave the farm in the winter time to improve your education! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — It’s O.K. for you to go and curl! It’s O.K. for you to go to Florida. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — I’ve never been to Florida in my life. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Oh, come on. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. What’s the point of order? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — As you said, we can’t hear what he’s saying but from what I was able to ascertain, he 

was suggesting that I had been to Florida. Now, if he was then . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I didn’t hear the member that is speaking refer to the member for Moosomin 

(Mr. Birkbeck) as having gone to Florida. I consider the member’s point of order to be a specious point of 

order and I’ll ask the Minister of Agriculture to continue. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t go around asking them if they are going to go to 

California or whether they are going to curl all winter. We don’t think that’s any of our business. They can 

even sit around and pick their nose as some of the members opposite may do but don’t you dare go back to 

school. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. What’s the point of order? 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Do I have the floor now, Mr. Speaker? If any member on that side of the House wants 

to lower themselves in debate in this House to those kinds of remarks to members of the opposition party. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. In order for a member to raise a point of order, some rule of the House 

must have been abridged. Now, the member must, immediately upon rising on a point of order, to prevent 

me from thinking he is getting into the debate, cite  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1094 

what rule has been abridged so that I can decide whether there is a point of order. Now, the member has not 

done that. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Anyway, you want to be sure that you are not a woman, if you are dealing with those 

guys, because you know they sure don’t like to see a woman taking advantage of this FarmStart operation. 

So, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the member for Kindersley was around his constituency telling his 

constituents that, it is no wonder that some of them decided that they didn’t want to deal with the land bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last two provincial elections both the Liberal and Tory Parties came out in violent 

opposition to the land bank as a land transfer program. 

 

Both of those parties, Mr. Speaker, are still wandering in the wilderness. They propose, instead, an interest 

subsidy program which would subsidize interest rates on purchases of farm land for the first five years. 

They’re not being very specific. The figures being used were that the rate for the first five years would be 

about 5 per cent. 

 

Now, on the surface this looks pretty attractive, since it appears to provide protection against high interest 

rates in the early years of the purchase. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You’re not quoting our policy. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Well, that’s pretty close to yours, not quite but pretty close. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Yours is worse. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — But what really happens, Mr. Speaker, and it happens in the case that you mentioned, is 

that a farmer who has a preferred interest rate opportunity immediately becomes more aggressive in the 

market place; that’s understandable. He will quickly calculate that at a lower interest rate he can pay more 

for a given parcel of land than can his unsubsidized neighbor, so he will increase his bid price. However, his 

well established neighbor already has a low cost land base and he will also increase his bid price. What really 

happens is that the price of all land is quickly capitalized at a new level which takes into account the value of 

the subsidy. The subsidized purchaser is not better off because the purchase price of land has increased 

accordingly. 

 

In the meantime, the government will be picking up a rapidly increasing subsidy cost. Our calculations are, 

given a subsidy which would reduce the interest rate to 5 per cent for the first five years, the cost to the 

treasury at the end of the fifth year would be in the order of $50 million a year. You can figure it out for 

yourself. That would be an annual cost which equals the entire budget of the Department of Agriculture. Yet, 

as already shown, the final figures would not be a better opportunity for young farmers, but simply an 

escalation of already high land prices to a new threshold level. 

 

One would wish that this would not happen, but all financial institutions we have consulted agreed that this 

would be the ultimate result. It would not provide the needed opportunity for young farmers to get into the 

industry; it would not reduce the overall financial burden in the early years of farming; and it would not 

provide an opportunity for a young farmer to get into farming without immediately being burdened with a 

high debt load. 

 

For this reason, Mr. Speaker, we rejected that concept and determined to forge ahead with a new and 

responsive land bank concept which is now being examined with 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1095 

increasing interest in many parts of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Land Bank Act is up for amendment in this session of the legislature. The amendments, for 

the most part, are designed to permit the commission to serve the family farm better. If it is really the desire 

of the members opposite that the commission be given all the assistance possible to be sensitive to the family 

farm, then I’m sure that the amendments will no doubt be passed without argument. 

 

Because the mover of this motion has failed miserably in his attempt to make a decent case of his resolution, 

I would like to move an amendment to that resolution. I want to move, seconded by the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Engel), that: 

 

all of the words after ‘this Assembly’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

commends the government of Saskatchewan for the admirable way in which the Saskatchewan Land 

Bank Commission has met the needs of the family farm by: 

 

1. Developing a bold and innovative method of land transfer in Saskatchewan; 

 

2. Keeping in touch with reality by annually adjusting the lessee qualifying criteria of net worth and 

net income in accordance with inflation and the cost of living trends; 

 

3. Changing to a production-based rent which is in tune with net returns to farming; 

 

4. Assisting land bank lessees in the purchase of at least one leased quarter of land. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.W. ENGEL (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on this resolution and 

second the motion of the Minister of Agriculture for several reasons. Firstly, because the land bank is a good 

program, and secondly, I want to make a few comments about the arguments the members opposite are 

developing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite have cited some examples and arguments that add up to the same kind of 

debate as the opposition has mounted many times in this House. They root around in the muck looking for 

ways that they can do a character assassination. The opposition tries to raise a dark, shady cloud of suspicion 

over a person. Have they ever attacked the program? Never. Because they are good working programs, they 

don’t bother attacking them. Mr. Speaker, 2,000 farmers in Saskatchewan are a testimony of how good this 

program has been working. 

 

Members opposite have made it very clear that they do not like the land bank program. They believe that 

farming should be done by a select few. Would you believe 80 per cent less than are doing it today? Large 

corporate farmers. Mr. Speaker, they have no room in their thinking, none at all, for creating an opportunity 

for young farmers who want to get started. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1096 

This program, the Saskatchewan Land Bank, has helped many young farmers. In the budget debate, I 

mentioned 64 or 65 in my own constituency. There are many more comments I want to make. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Maybe I can make them when I can get the floor, so I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resolution No. 12 — Control of Ranching Leases 

 

MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): 

 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its failure to recognize the need 

of the ranching community for long term control of their lease to maintain their economic viability 

by arbitrarily and without cause cancelling leases and further that this Assembly urge the 

Government of Saskatchewan to rescind such powers as set out in the Provincial Lands Regulations. 

 

She said: Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak on my proposed motion, I would like to divide my remarks into two 

categories. One, the failure of the government to recognize the basic needs of the rancher; secondly, the 

uncertainty to this industry caused because of the arbitrary powers of this government concerning lease land. 

 

First, let me say, Mr. Speaker, that my proposed motion has been met with widespread support by the 

ranching community in this province. One of the main concerns of ranchers is that this government does not 

truly understand the importance of tenure of lease to these producers. Ranching is not like grain farming or 

mixed farming; ranching is done for the most part on marginal land. Ranchers do not have the same options 

open to them as other producers. A rancher should be and must be considered as a person who derives at 

least 50 per cent or more of his income directly from raising sheep or cattle. This particular producer is 

highly dependent upon his lease. More often than not the viability of his holding is directly related to the 

amount of leaseland he holds. In many cases, a rancher may own but a small portion of his total acreage. In 

the drier areas it is not uncommon for an operator to have only one-half section of deeded land along with 

perhaps 10 to 15 sections of lease land. But does this make him a land baron? It does to this government. But 

what this government cannot comprehend, and will not comprehend, is that the support ratio of this land may 

only be five to seven head of cattle per quarter section. 

 

This government must come to grips, Mr. Speaker, with the various types of lessees in the province. This 

government must come to grips with the different requirements of the different lessees. There is ample 

opportunity for the government and specifically the Department of Agriculture to consult with the various 

groups concerned. But do they? That’s just asking too much. There’s the Cattlemen’s Association, 

Saskatchewan Sheep Breeders and Stockgrowers but to name a few. Why shouldn’t the government consult 

with these groups in order to come up with an equitable lease policy rather than arbitrarily making decisions 

from an office in Regina? This has always been a bone of contention with the ranchers of our province. 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1097 

Today ranching is becoming a highly specialized field. Technology is enabling meat producers to produce a 

high quality, high protein product for which there is a great demand and a growing demand. Much emphasis 

today is being placed on good breeding, supplementary diets and increased efficiency. To accomplish this, 

Mr. Speaker, it takes money and long-range planning. It is rather difficult to plan 10 to 15 years down the 

road if one can only get a five year lease, five year lease with no guarantee of an extension. Many 

leaseholders would like to have the option of buying their lease in order to remove this uncertainty. The 

government should give this option serious consideration. 

 

Why would any government want the power to cancel long-term leases at will? Is there some overt reason? I 

believe there is and many ranchers of our province believe there is. This government is quick to state that it 

is not interested in purchasing grassland; that the land bank is interested only in cultivated land. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we now have a situation that seems to contradict that. 

 

Today we have many elderly ranchers who would like to retire and who do not have children to whom they 

can give their lease. But can they sell their holdings? No. No one is interested in purchasing one or two 

sections of deeded land, and if the purchaser can’t be guaranteed the lease of that holding, he won’t invest in 

an unprofitable operation. In situations like this the operator has no choice but to sell his deeded land to the 

land bank commission. I believe, Mr. Speaker, along with many others, that this government will not stop 

until they control every acre of agricultural land in our province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. DUNCAN: — This government will not rest until it becomes the biggest land holder of all. I say that 

if this government was not attempting to gain full control of these lands, they would not want these arbitrary 

powers and they would be more accommodating to the wishes of the people concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding this motion I find it’s a motion that all 

members of this House can support. I have dealt with many of these ranchers and farmers for many years 

through the farm machinery business. I’ve found them to be some of the most honourable people that live in 

this province of Saskatchewan. They are the backbone of our farming and ranching community. Their 

operations have been built up through sweat and tears during the hard times and they . (inaudible 

interjection) . I can’t understand why, every time we stand up, we have to chastise you and give you heck for 

infringing on somebody’s rights in this province. Every time you introduce a bill or stand up in this House, 

you introduce something that is going to infringe on one more group in this province. This is again what is 

happening on this leased land. Why doesn’t this government just spend more time worrying about people’s 

problems rather than interfering with people? I think probably one of the things that you’re very good at is 

interfering with people’s lives. I think this has been proven over the years with the hog marketing, the beef 

checkoffs and the 4-H clubs. You seem to blame the federal government for just about everything. Whenever 

you can use them as a scapegoat to get out of some of your own follies, this is what you do — it’s the feds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in supporting this motion, I might say to this government to leave the  



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1098 

pioneers of this country alone. They or their descendants came to this country many years ago and were the 

first to settle these ranch lands and some of these farmlands. They have gone through tough times and 

they’ve gone through some good times. Recently they’ve gone through some very, very bad times in the 

cattle industry. We ask you not to interfere with these ranchers and farmers who have this leased land. These 

farmers and ranchers in all our districts — everyone in this legislature here — are the basis of the steady 

economy of every community that they surround with their holdings. They are the pioneers who have made 

life on marginal land, and they are the pioneers of the cattle industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some of the younger members of these families have counted on a certain size of herd to create a viable 

operation in getting started. Now that you’ve cut them back on the numbers of cattle they can put into 

community pastures, these leased lands are very, very important to them. 

 

You have cut out the old farmer, the rancher, from placing cattle into the community pastures as well. The 

trouble is, there’s just too many bureaucrats making these decisions. There’s not one of you gentlemen on 

that side of the House who is making these decisions. You’ve got somebody pushing your button. You’re 

elected by the people of this province, and you’re letting the bureaucrats push your button and ring your bell. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LARTER: — You’re doing exactly what they want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Nobody pushes my 

button ever. You depend on these bureaucrats to carry out your whole political program and, as I say, 

pushing your button and ringing your bell. And I ask you to please don’t cut the rug out from these ranchers 

and farmers who have this lease land in their families for years. Leave them a viable unit to work with or to 

pass on to their relatives or even to sell it — leave them a viable unit because without this lease land they 

just cannot pass this land on. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And the big get bigger, the small die. Like Big Al over there farming 40 odd 

quarters . . .  

 

MR. LARTER: — Are you giving this speech or me? Mr. Speaker, above all I ask you to leave the farmers 

and ranchers alone so they can have a little bit of peace of mind and enjoy their lives in this province that 

they love and have made their living on. Please leave them alone. It’s a pleasure to second this resolution. I 

urge every member in this House to vote for it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, again I thought I was going to hear something sensational. Again I heard 

what I’ve heard so many times before — statements which are not true. I hear the member for Maple Creek 

telling me that because leases are not allowed to be passed on when there isn’t a family member who wants 

to carry on with the lease, that somehow they can’t sell their deeded land. Now, Mr. Speaker, I was in the 

Maple Creek area and I was in the Shaunavon area and all through that area last summer and visited a lot of 

farms, visited a lot of young ranchers in that area. I asked them what the price of land was in that area. You 

ask the Bascom’s what they got for their land. The average multiple of land down in that area from what I 

was able to 



 

March 27, 1979 
 

 

1099 

determine from the questions I asked was around 25 times the assessed value. Now in my area which is not a 

ranching area, the average multiple is about 15, and so the argument that you can’t sell land at a reasonable 

price in that area is not a valid argument . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . So that’s not a valid argument. Then 

she said that one of the reasons the government is doing this, was not selling land, was because they wanted 

to buy all of that land. She said the land bank wanted to buy all that land. Well, I think even the members 

opposite should know that it’s not the policy of the land bank to buy leased land. The only time when we 

acquire grazing land, is when it’s part of a larger parcel which contains a substantial amount of cultivated 

land . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) said we’re interfering with 

people’s lives and we should leave them alone. I think the member for Estevan knows that lease land has 

been around for as long as he and I have been around. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Longer. 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Even longer, and many of the old leases are 33 year leases. Now I don’t think you’re 

harassing a guy very often if he has to come back once in 33 years to renew a lease. 

 

He talks about the fact that decisions are made by people out in the country and I can tell you some of them 

are. We have lease committees all over the place, in our community pastures. Our lands branch people go out 

there and meet with them on a regular basis and they talk to these people. Many of the policy decisions 

which are made, particularly in community pastures, are made on the basis of recommendations of those 

lease committees. If that is interference, then I think we are happy to have some interference. 

 

He tried to insinuate that land could not be passed on to the next generation. He knows better than that. In 

our lease policy, anytime a rancher has a member of his family whom he wants to pass the lease on to, that is 

done without question. The only consideration might be, in such a case, if his land holding was so large that 

it went above what we call a land size limitation, which is 500 work units. Mr. Speaker, 500 work units is a 

pretty large operation. 

 

The member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) said that we never consult with anybody. Just very recently, 

just a few weeks back, we had the members of the Stockgrowers’ Lease Committee in here and we had some 

lengthy discussions with them. We heard some of their concerns. 

 

One of the things that they said to us was that they didn’t want those operations to get too large because they 

knew they had sons and daughters who wanted to get on some of those leases. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it is almost 5:00 o’clock. I have a lot to say on this motion; I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 o’clock. 

 


