


























































Hansard: May 01, 1979


2319 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
May 1, 1979 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. D.F. McARTHUR (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. MacMurchy, who is unavoidably absent from the House this afternoon, I would like 
to introduce to you and the members of this Assembly, 15 Grade 8 students from Nokomis School who are sitting 
the in the Speaker's gallery. I'm sure all members of the legislature join with me in welcoming these students to 
our Legislative Assembly and in wishing them an enjoyable and educational afternoon here and a safe trip home. I 
will be meeting with the students at 2:45 to answer questions and discuss any questions they may have. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.R. KOWALCHUK (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, 
and through you to all members of this legislature, 34 Grade 8 and Grade 9 students from Grayson Junior High 
School. They are seated in the west gallery to your left, Mr. Speaker. The teachers with them are the principal, Mr. 
Ben Appell, and Mr. Reginauld Lesko. The bus driver is William Ottenbreit, and the chaperones are Gloria Lesko, 
and Fay Appell. I'm sure that all the members here would like to wish these students from Grayson a fine 
afternoon here this afternoon, educational and worthwhile. I hope that their trip back home is safe. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

PAYMENT OF HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question to the Minister of Highways (Mr. 
Kramer). Mr. Minister, some weeks ago during your departmental estimates, I requested certain information be 
supplied regarding highway construction to uranium development areas of Northern Saskatchewan, and as yet I 
have not received the information. My question and concern is this, is the Department of Highways paying for the 
construction of these highways to Northern Saskatchewan, these uranium developments? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — The Department of Highways and 
Transportation, Saskatchewan, is in charge and is paying for all of the major highways, the numbered highways, 
going into Northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A portion of the road, however, to Cluff Lake will be paid for by 
Amok Canada Limited. They have agreed to pay a part of the cost in order to get the road in there by a certain 
time. I am happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that there are only 35 miles left of that road. We've constructed nearly 
100 miles throughout this winter, and expect to have it completed by September. Further, I would like to inform 
the member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham), on another question that he asked. He complained about school bus 
signs. I've had my staff inspect all the school bus signs that are under our responsibility and I 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2320 

find them all in good order. There is none of them that is illegible. If there are any signs they are the signs that are 
the responsibility of rural municipalities or school districts. If they request assistance to refurbish those, we will 
assist them. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I'm glad the minister is becoming so efficient. I would like 
to ask the minister this: A number of members of our caucus, including myself, asked for information during 
estimates which you indicated you would supply within a matter of days and we accepted your recommendation. 
None of us has received that information yet. Would you take steps now to make sure we receive the information 
before we prorogue. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I am rather surprised that the information has not been forthcoming. I don't 
know whether my staff misunderstood whether or not it was to be advanced this quickly, but I am sure for any of 
those questions that were asked, the information is readily available. I'm rather surprised that they have not 
received it. I will check into that and I don't think there is anything further I can say on northern construction. 
 
I presented a sheet to all members in the House of this year's construction program. I think if they check those out 
and compare then with the highway map they will be able to identify all of the construction projects. 
 

BROADCAST COMMENTS - MRS. BROADBENT 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Minister, last night I had occasion to, by accident, turn on a free time political broadcast by the NDP and one 
of the key points of this particular broadcast was when Mrs. Lucille Broadbent was making a pitch to the 
housewives of Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is, Mrs. Broadbent came out rather strongly that the price of beef was far too 
high and that it was at an unacceptable level and that housewives in Canada (while she did not use the word, 
'boycott', I believe the words added up to exactly the same thing . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I want the member to get to his question. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A valid point, Mr. Speaker. I was just getting there as I noticed you getting up. 
 
My question to the minister is, Mr. Minister, as Minister of Agriculture in the Government of Saskatchewan, do 
you support the position being taken by your federal counterparts, the New Democratic Party, and what was being 
put forward by Mrs. Broadbent, last night on behalf of the NDP? 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think the statement made by Mrs. 
Broadbent last night was most unfortunate. We think her remarks are typical of the remarks of many consumers 
across the country who fail to recognize the fact that beef prices have been too low over the last four or five years. 
Many producers have as a result, suffered very severely and have gone out of business in fact. 
 
We think the price of beef to the producer has now reached an acceptable level and we think the consumer should 
recognize that. We think basic salaries in the last 10 years 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2321 
 

have increased substantially and right now we know that an hour of work will buy more pounds of beef than it did 
10 years ago. For that reason, I felt it was a very unfortunate statement on her behalf. I have expressed that 
opinion to Mr. Broadbent's people and I hope they will refrain from making those kinds of statements because we 
don't agree with them. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — My compliments to the minister in his frankness and honesty in his answer. A 
supplementary question, Mr. Minister. On behalf of the beef producers in western Canada and specifically in 
Saskatchewan, which I suppose you are nominally the head of, can you assure us that information to be used on a 
national level by your party that will not be contrary to the producers will be made available forthwith and that 
you will make the strongest possible representation so there will be no reoccurrence. 
 

IPSCO STRIKE 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — I direct the question to the Minister of Labour. The IPSCO (Interprovincial 
Steel and Pipe Corporation) strike in Regina will have continued for, I believe, five weeks tomorrow. I gather that 
there seems to be an impasse and that negotiations have either broken down or have slowed down and are not 
being preceded with at this time. Can you tell me what action the government is taking or contemplating in regard 
to the IPSCO strike in Regina? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Chairman, earlier this day I had the opportunity to talk with 
Mr. Duncan, the director of industrial relations in the Department of Labour and we discussed the current impasse 
at IPSCO and agreed that another effort would be made probably today or tomorrow in an effort to see if there is a 
method that can be used to get the parties unstuck from what appears to be a dead-centre position. 
 
Failing that, the department, through the director of industrial relations, will be making some additional overtures 
that I don't believe would be appropriate, at this time, for me to attempt to disclose any strategy which might be 
involved. But the department is on top of the proposition, attempting to keep in touch with both of the parties. As 
far as actual strategy is concerned, I think it would be unwise for me to involve myself in giving details when it's 
not known at this point whether the suggestions might be acceptable to one party or the other or both. But I can 
assure the hon. member that we are devoting ourselves diligently to the problem in an attempt to find an early 
solution to that dispute. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of supplementary, obviously the strike, being five weeks old, makes it appear that 
perhaps the department hasn't been diligent and has been laying back for some considerable period of time. 
 
Now, the representation I've had from people on strike indicates that they feel themselves that it is going to be a 
long drawn-out strike. Does the minister have any indications that that may not be true? Secondly, with the feeling 
that it's going to be a long, drawn-out affair, would the minister not feel that more precipitous action by his 
department would be in order? Would you also, at the same time, confirm that that seems to be a feeling among 
the strikers? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think there were some indications offered at the beginning of the work stoppage that the 
stoppage in effect could last some time. I think there's no one who can gaze into his crystal ball and really 
determine how long the work stoppage will 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2322 

last. 
 
With respect to the efforts of the department to date, I think anyone who is close to the industrial relations 
situation in the province is aware of the fact that there will be times when a set of circumstances representing a 
solution can be used effectively. If used prematurely, then I think you shot one of your cannons that may not be 
available to you at a point in time when it will be more effective in bringing a conclusion to that strike. We have 
seen, for example, instances where a board of conciliation serves a very useful purpose at a point in time when the 
strike has reached circumstances where both parties are suffering, where if the suggestion were made to the 
parties involved a matter of a week or two weeks or ten days earlier, the suggestion would not be acceptable. So, I 
think the hon. member will heed a word of advice; the situation is being looked at very carefully and with all 
dispatch. When the appropriate moment arrives then our industrial relations people will be making, what I believe 
to be, the appropriate moves to suit the circumstances. 
 
MR. LANE: — A final supplementary. I accept the minister's advice and I hope he'll accept the question in the 
manner in which it's given as well. The strike is five weeks old and I need not tell the minister the effect on the 
Regina economy and the provincial economy of a lengthy IPSCO strike. I'm sure you know better than I. But 
would the minister not admit that the seeming inactivity by the department may perhaps be an indication of the 
position the government will find itself in when it is in both the position as a shareholder of a company, in fact an 
indirect employer, and the position of the government itself concerned about the effect on the provincial and city 
economy? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Well, I take some exception to the member's remark about the seeming inactivity of the 
department. I think the hon. member should recognize that when our industrial relations people make their efforts 
on behalf of the parties involved to effect a settlement they don't do it through the media nor do they go to the 
electronic media or the printed media in order to indicate the moves that are being made or the suggestions that 
are being offered. I think the department has been diligent in pursuing the matter and I certainly offer no apologies 
at this point in time for the department in attempting to make whatever moves are appropriate. We will continue to 
monitor and make those moves that, I believe, will effect a solution, hopefully in the not too distant future. 
 

ALCOHOLIC REHABILITATION CENTRE IN KINDERSLEY 
 
MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Rolfes). Last Friday, Mr. 
Minister, I asked a question with regard to funding by the Government of Saskatchewan to the Danny Fisher 
Centre in Kindersley, which is an alcoholic rehabilitation centre, on a volunteer basis I might add, the bulk of the 
money being from voluntary contributions from people in the community. The Tuesday prior to that, the people 
involved in the Danny Fisher Centre did receive a letter from your department indicating that funding was being 
cut off on that. Can you advise the House as to the reason for the cutback and the elimination of funding for that 
rehabilitation program? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member for Qu'Appelle 
(Mr. Lane), I can handle all Grade 1 questions. So, if he wants to get up, I'll answer him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew), I am sorry I cannot give him the specifics of 
that question, but since my estimates are coming up later on this afternoon, I'm sure that my officials will have the 
answer for me at that particular 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2323 
 

time. I think the answer probably will be that since it is an alcohol rehabilitation centre, primarily, we are I think, 
asking the Alcohol Commission to accept responsibility for that centre and not the Department of Social Services. 
But I will check with my officials this afternoon. I think that probably will be the answer. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that the other program is in fact, going to step in then and 
keep this program afloat in Kindersley? Or is the program either going to fall by the wayside or simply have to 
look for local government funding to carry the thing forward? And I might ask a further question, what is going to 
happen to programs like the DWI (Driving While Impaired) program et cetera within that organization? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated to the member, I think I will have more specific answers for him 
later on. My understanding of the Danny Fisher Centre originally was that it was a federal project which, when the 
funds were cut off by the federal government or they came to an end, they came to our department to tide them 
over for a short period of time which we agreed to. Mr. Speaker, this has happened on numerous occasions and 
this will not be the last one. If the federal government starts particular programs then they become worthy 
programs; people come to us for funding. We may pick it up for a short period of time to tide them over so that 
they can find some other funding. What I'm saying to you is that I believe the answer will be (but I'll get more 
specific answers in estimates) that because it is primarily an alcohol rehabilitation centre, that should be the 
function of the Alcoholism Commission. I can't answer for the Alcoholism Commission whether they will pick it 
up if I'm not the minister in charge. But that doesn't mean, regardless of whether they pick it up, that I should 
continue as Minister of Social Services to fund that particular project if it does not fall within the priorities of my 
department. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A further question, Mr. Minister. I think four or five days should be plenty of notice to 
simply find out the answer to the question as to whether or not your department is going to continue to fund it and 
why you chose to not fund it. How much more time do you need prior to answering a simple question like that? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, very simply, about three hours. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — New question, Mr. Speaker, with regard to this. I question the priorities of your government 
. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. New question. Order. 
 

ADDITIONAL POWER PLANTS 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation) (Mr. Messer). Mr. Minister, with the IJC (International Joint Commission) report not slated to 
come down until late August on the Poplar River development regarding pollution to the environment, water and 
air, but particularly water, is it now your plan, are you looking very seriously at possibly building a unit seven on 
Boundary Dam or a possible new power house and a Rafferty Dam on the Souris River which could service the 
province very well and could probably be built up to a 1,200 megacycle power plant? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — No, Mr. Speaker. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2324 

MR. LARTER: — Has the minister give this any consideration? Has he looked into the feasibility of a possibility 
of a new power house on Short Creek or on the Souris River or unit number seven? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I'm sure I have conveyed to the member on past occasions that we keep all 
options open and certainly pursue all options as far as increased and enhanced power generation is concerned. But 
I do believe that the ordering of priority does not put those options high on the list at this particular point in time. 
It is not to say that at some later date or given a changing set of circumstances that they will escalate. But we are, I 
think, mildly optimistic that we will continue with Coronach No. 2. I announced some months ago, in fact, in the 
fall of 1978 that if the IJC was not able to give us sufficient information by way of a final report or interim report 
to allow us to make final decisions on Coronach 2 we would think seriously of a hydro project at Nipawin. We in 
fact escalated and accelerated our engineering studies at that point to the extent of something approaching $1 
million, so that by the summer of 1979 we will be able to make a decision. If we feel we are deficient as far as 
adequate support and/or information for Coronach is concerned it may well be that we would have to then make 
our decision that the next project would be Nipawin. But it is premature at this time to try to tell the member 
which one of those options we will be choosing. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister know that the United States government has 
indicated their willingness to possibly participate in a dam, a Rafferty Dam instead of a Burlington Dam which is 
going to cost them far more money and that truly a dam built on the Souris River could supply all the water you 
need for a future power plant there? We have the coal to fire this plant. Does the minister know there could 
possibly be as much as $60 million available from the United States government? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not aware that there is that volume of funding which may be 
available from the United States government. I will take notice of the member's information and give it some 
further pursuit. I do want to convey to the member and to the House that he's talking about a pretty significant 
project. When I compare the project that he is proposing, the dam vis-a-vis what is underway at Coronach and the 
related problems which we have had with certain agencies and getting final approval there, I would have to, if I 
was being realistic, look at a time frame of something in the order or five or ten years before we would ever get 
the final working authority to proceed with such a significant project. In light of having to have some generation 
in place, within a much shorter time frame than five or ten years I think that we have to look at alternative 
generating sources that are available to us at this time. I again remind the member that we look at all options that 
are open to us, but given the circumstances that we're dealing with today, the options that he conveys to this 
House are not high on the priority list. 
 

KINDERSLEY LIQUOR STORE 
 
MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — The Government of Saskatchewan, as you are probably aware, has just 
opened a very expensive self-serve liquor store in the town of Kindersley. My question to you, is where are you 
priorities, Mr. Minister, to open and expend thousands of dollars on a new self-serve liquor store to promote the 
sale of liquor, and at the same time cut back on the program to help rehabilitate those with drinking problems? 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2325 
 

MR. ROLFES: — I recall, I think, very clearly that the member for Kindersley protested violently to the opening 
of the new liquor store. I think there was a headline in the Kindersley paper, or maybe I had a dram, I am not sure. 
But Mr. Speaker, let me put if this way. First of all I indicated to the member for Kindersley that it is not the 
priority within the Department of Social Service to set up a DWI (Driving While Impaired) project. That is not my 
responsibility. It is the responsibility of the Alcoholism Commission. Therefore, I should not, as Minister of 
Social Services, be involved in that particular project. I indicated to you, because the federal government started it, 
we very often on an interim time limit pick up projects in order to tide people over, because it may have some 
high priority in that particular community. We would indicate to them, we'll pick them up for a year or two to try 
and get them on their feet, but then they must look for alternate sources of finances. We think that we have given 
them sufficient time to look for other sources, and it's now time that someone else funds them. If they can get it 
from the federal government, fine. If they can get it from the Alcoholism Commission, fine. All I'm saying is for 
the Department of Social Services, it is probably not a high priority. 
 

FUNDING OF NATIONAL FARMERS' UNION 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Minister, I'm sure you are aware that the National Farmers' Union (NFU), purportedly on behalf of all permit 
holders, has launched an action against CPR (Canadian Pacific Railways) and Canadian National Railways 
(CNR). Would the minister tell this Assembly whether his department is involved in any way, shape or form with 
the National Farmers' Union in this particular action, and specifically, have you made funds in any form available 
to the National Farmers' Union in this action? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, Mr. Speaker, we have not. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the Attorney General. Mr. Minister, could you tell this 
Assembly whether the National Farmers' Union is receiving any assistance, in any way, shape or form, in the form 
of legal advice or any other form of assistance or intervention on their behalf, or whatever, in their action against 
Canadian National and Canadian Pacific Railways? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — No, they are not. 
 

NEW PARTY LEADER 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. I understand that there is a new political party running in this election. I wonder whether or not the 
Minister of Agriculture could say whether or not it's true that the cow-calf party is going to have as its new leader 
the hon. member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher). 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it's time for ministerial statements. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 5 
 
MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley) to move that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2326 

No. 5 showing: 
 

The fair market value of each quarter section of farm land owned by the Saskatchewan Land Bank 
Commission as of December 31, 1978. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in this session of the legislature, I have been trying, through various vehicles, to obtain the 
information that I have set out here in the motion for return, and the information that I seek is the fair market 
value of the land owned by the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission as at December 31, 1978, which is the end 
of the last fiscal year of the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission. As I say, I asked in other areas of the 
legislature, the other legislative processes that we go through, and each time I was directed to the Assembly as the 
place where I could find this information, and then through the forum that I have presently advanced it, as the way 
that I can obtain this information. Quite frankly, the information is asked for as is any farm operation you will 
know, the farmer is interested to determine what his stand is at any given point in time as to the value of the land 
in question and, in particular, what the capital gain is that he has either realized actually or estimated on the land 
in question that he has purchased. Now, the land bank program is, I think, in its sixth year now and surely the 
people of Saskatchewan are entitled to know and the opposition is entitled to know what is the exact value of that 
land in question, what capital gain the government has made on this particular land in question? Now, I'm sure 
that this is some type of information that the people Saskatchewan and, quite frankly, the opposition are entitled to 
know as we proceed in this debate. I would, therefore, like to move, seconded by the member for Qu'Appelle (Mr. 
Lane) Return No. 5. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — When you look at this question you begin to wonder whether the member opposite really 
knows what he is asking. He is asking for the market value of each quarter section of land owned by the Land 
Bank Commission in the province of Saskatchewan as of a certain date. I think he will recognize that you can't tell 
what land is worth unless somebody goes out there and makes an assessment of it. So he is asking the 
Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission to go out there and assess every piece of land which we own in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We are not adverse to giving him reasonable information. We are prepared to provide 
for him information which is more general. 
 
We have done a cost analysis and it would cost the Land Bank Commission pretty close to $500,000, anywhere 
from $370,000 and upwards to get the kind of information which you are asking for. If you want specific 
information, the land bank tells me they would have to hire 20 assessors for six months to go around the province 
and assess every quarter section of land, because you have to do it individually. That's what you are asking for. 
You have to do it individually and you would have to have 20 assessors (if you could get them). You likely 
couldn't find 20 assessors to put on the job. The additional cost of staff, we estimate, will be well into the $40,000 
to $50,000 range. We estimate it would take four staff people at least 10 months to compile the information which 
he is asking for. 
 
So we are prepared to provide the estimated market value of all lands purchased by the Land Bank Commission 
up to December 31, and the market value as of that time, as near as we can estimate it. Even that will be a 
considerable task because land values, as you know, are not constant across the province. There are areas where 
land is selling for $150 an acre and some places where it is selling for $400 an acre. So we would have to do this 
more or less on a regional basis to try to get a reasonably accurate assessment of what the land is worth. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2327 
 

I think we have to stress that those figures will be estimates only, because it would be almost impossible to 
pinpoint the exact price of land in any given area. Again, I am saying that land values at one time of the year may 
be different than they are at the other time of the year. So you have to relate it back to your date of December 31, 
which we would do. 
 
You can see the difficulty in assessing land values by looking at the annual reports which are available to us. The 
Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission's annual report indicates that the average land value in 1978 was $171 an 
acre. If you go to Stats Canada figures, they say the average price is $192. So you really can't pick a very accurate 
figure. You have to look at a figure which will give you a reasonable estimate. 
 
So in order to provide the best information to the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew), we think he is entitled to 
have the information, we are proposing an amendment to the motion, seconded by my colleague, the member for 
Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman). The amendment will read as follows: 
 

That Return No. 5 be amended by deleting all the words after 'the' in the first line and substituting the 
following: 

 
What is the estimated market value of land held by the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission as of 
December 31, 1978? 

 
I so move. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — We are dealing with an Order of the Assembly for Return No. 5 showing, to which an 
amendment has been offered. There is a small technical problem with the amendment. The small technical point 
with the amendment is as follows: when the minister stood he said, strike off all the words after 'the' in the first 
line, but his instruction which comes in to me, which doesn't form part of the motion, says: 
 

That Return No. 5 be amended by deleting all the words after 'what is the'. 
 
The words ' what is the', do not exist on the blues. Now, if the House would agree, I could strike out the words 
'what is the' in the instruction, which is unimportant, and strike out the words 'what is the' at the beginning of his 
amendment, which would then make it in order and it would read as follows: 
 

That Return No. 5 be amended by deleting all the words after 'the' in the first line and substituting the 
following: 'estimated market value of land held by Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission as of 
December 31, 1978'. 

 
Now if the House is in agreement I would do that. 
 
MR. LANE: — Now if I could speak on that suggested amendment by Mr. Speaker, I think the precedent was 
well established during the budget debate when the opposition had a motion which was not quite correct and Mr. 
Speaker refused to give any assistance to the opposition in amending it. Any proposed changes should be in the 
hands of the minister making the error in drafting, so we can't give leave. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would draw the Qu'Appelle member's attention to the fact that there is no similarity 
between the two. This is a technical correction to an amendment which 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2328 

has been offered. The situation the member for Qu'Appelle refers to is one where the Leader of the Opposition, I 
believe it was, at the time was asking me to draft the amendment for him. It was an altogether different situation 
which arose and I don't think it's our purpose here to compare situations which may or may not have arisen. 
 
If the members do not wish to give leave I'll have to declare the amendment out of order. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The amendment's out of order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The amendment is out of order then. There is no leave. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 18 
 

OPERATING COSTS OF RECREATION CENTRES 
 
MR. R. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone) moved, seconded by Mr. R. A. Larter (Estevan): 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its insensitivity to local recreation 
centres by compelling them to use demand meters in their recreation facilities, thereby causing an 
awesome burden in operating costs. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to rise and point out some of the main reasons why I've placed this 
motion before the Assembly. 
 
I will refer my remarks mainly to the rural areas of the province. We are aware that most of the towns and villages 
contain a skating and curling facility, this in fact being the only recreation available to these communities during 
the winter months. 
 
The majority of these centres, I admit, are a reality only because of the systems grants and winter works programs 
provided through the Department of Culture and Youth. For this, I compliment the department and the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members are aware of the cold winters in Saskatchewan, as we've just witnessed one; 
however we also have milder ones. Because of this most of these communities have decided they must have 
artificial ice which costs thousands of dollars. Immediately following the installation of our artificial ice the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation installed demand metres which increased costs substantially. 
 
An actual example of this — if the energy charged for a month is $645.24 the demand will increase the bill by 
$341.04. This is an increase of more than half of the original cost. In six months, if they were taken out, this 
would be a saving of well over $2,000 to $3,000 in a lot of these centres. This money could be well spent on 
improvements in other areas. 
 
Another actual example is of ice plants put into service 10 days prior to the monthly reading. The energy charged 
was $173.28 for the actual kilowatt-hours but the demand increased the cost by $296.96. So it also works the 
other way. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2329 
 

Mr. Speaker, I consulted the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and was made aware of exactly how the demand 
metres function. If the full energy demand is required any one day of the month, whether it be the first or the last 
day, this is what the demand charges are based on. Maybe I should just explain that. After the metre reading is 
taken at the end of the month, if the next day the weather is mild and if the artificial ice plants cut in, all the lights 
and electrical appliances in the building are on, the demand metre will go up to a point and then it might not reach 
that point again throughout the rest of the month. It certainly places a financial burden on these small communities 
in the province. 
 
The increase in power costs force them to increase membership fees, open their facilities late and close early, thus 
depriving the people of winter recreation. Many of the families cannot afford the increase in membership fees; 
therefore they have no form of winter recreation. 
 
I am aware that the Department of Culture and Youth instigated an energy assistance grant program in which they 
were to provide 25 per cent of the energy costs. However, they have not fulfilled this commitment. They only 
contribute $60 per month for artificial ice centres and $30 per month for natural ice facilities for a period of five 
months. This certainly does not provide 25 per cent of the energy costs. I have been advised that this program has 
been discontinued as of January 1, 1979. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also centres that have been forced into acquiring liquor licensed lounges in the rural areas 
to help meet commitments. This is causing a great deal of dissension between the local hotel owner and the 
recreation centres in the small towns during the winter months. 
 
I have also been made aware that on February 1, 1979, there was an 11 per cent increase in the energy rates in the 
category these centres fall under. These are some of the main reasons why I have put this motion before this 
Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with these few remarks, I would like to so move. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, in supporting this motion I would like to remind all members of 
this legislature of the fact that a good portion of the members in this Assembly come from small communities and 
certainly they must be sensitive to the feelings of people in these communities. As you know, all these community 
halls and community rinks, particularly the rinks in the smaller towns, have been built with volunteer work and 
some grants. The volunteer work that goes on every winter in these communities, I think you know, is quite 
extensive and we couldn't keep operating without the volunteer help in these small communities. In order to 
provide the recreation and to keep these small towns viable, (and the government opposite preaches very heavily 
all the time that they want to maintain the small communities), the people in these communities have to have some 
relief on the power bills in the rinks during the winter time. I would urge every member to support this motion. I 
would urge the government opposite, particularly the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
(SPC) to take a serious look at aiding these people and maintaining these small communities. 
 
MR. C. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, it is my intent to amend the motion placed before the 
Assembly by the hon. member for Milestone for a number of reasons. A while ago, Mr. Speaker, while speaking 
on a motion by another member opposite, I had the occasion to remark that clarity of thought was not one of their 
outstanding 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2330 

characteristics. On this occasion I think I must say that originality of thought is not one of their outstanding 
characteristics either. 
 
The resolution before us, Mr. Speaker, might well be referred to as the Milestone resolution. Some years ago it 
was placed before this House in a slightly different form. In the present instance it is moved by the member for 
Milestone and in the previous instance, it was seconded by the member for Milestone. 
 
When the resolution was first placed before this House, it was in somewhat more specific terms. It called, for 
example, for a better deal for curling rinks. For reasons unknown to me, the present member for Milestone (Mr. 
Pickering) has framed his motion in more general terms and added 'condemns' which seems to be a very popular 
word with the members opposite. So the first point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that this is really a recycled 
resolution. That's not all. It's rather interesting and revealing but it's not an original Tory resolution recycled by a 
Tory, but it's an original Liberal resolution recycled by a Tory. I don't want to get into the debate as to whether or 
not there's any difference between Liberals and Tories. That's like debating the difference between a barrel and a 
bucket of stagnant water. The containers are different, the contents are the same. But I want to emphasize that 
recycling resolutions is certainly not demonstrating original thought. 
 
While the member for Milestone and his colleague for Estevan (Mr. Larter) were speaking I had in my hand the 
speeches of the original Liberal mover and seconder. I was rather amused and interested by what was said. First of 
all, the member for Milestone didn't even have as much to say as the former mover and he really said nothing new. 
I really liked, I think, a portion of the original Liberal speakers, or one of the original Liberal speakers speech. He 
said this: 
 

I am pleased to have an opportunity to speak to this resolution not only as a member of this Assembly, 
but also as an executive member of the Saskatchewan Curling Association. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few moments to point out to the member for Milestone and his colleague, 
some of the things that have been done by the government and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation which are in 
line with the spirit of this resolution since the resolution was first placed before the House by Liberals. The 
present resolution speaks of demand metres. The SPC has been for some time, billing curling rinks and skating 
rinks on the basis of their highest monthly consumption rather than their highest annual demand. The result of the 
change of course was reduced energy bills for such establishments. For some years now, rinks that use part of 
their facilities, such as canteens or clubhouses during the off-season can convert from their usual rate structure to 
a lower commercial rate structure. This too, has meant savings for them. They can also, as in earlier years, be 
disconnected during the off-season and cut expenses in that way. And that's not all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1972, the Department of Culture and Youth implemented the Energy Assistance Grant program and this was 
designed (you mentioned that; that was good Bob) to help about 500 and some communities with skating and 
curling rinks this year alone. A variety of other government programs have also had a bearing on the provisions of 
an operation of recreational facilities in Saskatchewan communities. One need only mention the urban package of 
1974 which included unconditional grants to urban municipalities and the revenue sharing program of the more 
recent past. Money provided to communities through these programs eases the financial burden on 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2331 
 

people associated with community recreational facilities. 
 
As near as I can determine, Mr. Speaker, since the occasion this resolution was first placed before this House, the 
rate charged for electricity has risen only 1 cent per kilowatt hour. A much more significant increase in costs has 
been the result of rises in natural gas prices. And we know who sets the price for natural gas — good old Tory 
Alberta out West. 
 
The hon. member for Milestone (Mr. Pickering) has chosen to overlook a number of these developments when 
recycling the resolution. And why has he done so? The most charitable explanation I can offer, Mr. Speaker, is 
that in the course of a bonspiel he tripped over his broom, hit his head on the button and conveniently forgot 
everything he didn't want to remember. 
 
While I am on my feet I want to say a few words about SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) rates and policies 
respecting recreational facilities such as curling rinks and arenas. I sincerely hope it will benefit the member for 
Milestone, (it would benefit the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter), but he is gone now) and the other gentlemen 
opposite. 
 
The SPC presently applies the general service rate classification for both electricity and natural gas to curling and 
skating rinks. The specific category applied, general service 2, 3 or 4 depends on consumption. Rates are, of 
course, higher in rural areas as the costs of transmission facilities to provide service to those areas are higher. 
 
Why has the SPC seen fit to apply this rate classification? 
 
First of all, many community facilities are operated as business enterprises. For example, arenas and curling rinks 
charge annual fees or ice rentals and some of them charge admission charges too. 
 
Secondly, capital costs incurred by the SPC for the installation of service for artificial ice facilities is much greater 
than for farm or residential hookups. For example, a three phase hookup for rinks requires two transformers. 
Costs are three to four times higher than for a hookup on a farm. 
 
This being the case, the SPC must ensure that energy rates provide a reasonable return on the investment. I think 
the gentlemen opposite are aware of the importance of a proper return on an investment. 
 
Another important reason for categorizing skating and curling rinks as general service customers is to achieve 
uniformity in rate application. Special consideration for curling rinks would lead to the same request from other 
organizations throughout the province, such as hospitals, schools, churches, swimming pools, customers with 
electric heat and so on. They would be asking for a special rate. 
 
The objective of simplification and reduction of the number of rate structures would be destroyed. This would 
lead to higher administrative costs. And the gentlemen opposite should be aware of keeping administrative costs 
in line. 
 
If special reduced rates are granted, the emphasis on conservation would become a secondary item for rink 
operation and maintenance staff. Subsidies or special rates destroy the incentive to conserve. For example, in 
Calgary, where the government 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2332 

subsidizes private companies, the annual residential consumption of natural gas is 215,000 cubic feet compared 
with 185,000 cubic feet for the average residence in Regina. Temperatures are colder in Regina. It is quite obvious 
subsidies produce waste. 
 
Finally, the SPC recognizes the seasonal operation of rinks and arenas and permits them to disconnect entirely 
during the summer months. Facilities do not have to pay a minimum bill during the shut-down period. If electrical 
service is required during the off-season the electrical rate charged is the lower rate applicable. 
 
One last point. The Department of Culture and Youth is also presently offering a training course (and I believe the 
hon. member for Milestone mentioned that) for operators of recreational and curling facilities to improve their 
efficiency in the utilization of energy. Mr. Speaker, in the future, when the hon. members opposite recycle a 
resolution, I would urge them to do their homework and research matters properly. Therefore, I propose to move, 
seconded by the hon. member for Turtleford (Mr. Johnson), an amendment to the resolution: 
 

That Resolution No. 18 be amended by deleting all words following Assembly in the first line and 
adding the following: 

 
commends the government for its initiative taken to promote conservation and the wise use of energy, 
including the arena, rink and swimming pool operator's course, and for their consultative services to 
municipalities, providing expertise in how to build, renovate and improve the energy efficiency of 
recreational facilities, and 

 
Be it further resolved that this Assembly commend the government for projects and programs designed 
to promote energy conservation such as the Saskatchewan Conservation House and the Warm Up 
Saskatchewan program. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — We're dealing with Resolution No. 18 to which an amendment has been offered, and 
deciding whether an amendment is in order is sometimes a difficult exercise. I think a person can look at the 
motion and the amendment, and if the debate which would follow from the motion or the amendment would be 
roughly the same, then it would be in order. But if the debate that would follow from the amendment is entirely 
different then it would have to be out of order. Now, keeping that in mind, the amendment which has been offered 
in its second part says: 
 

Be it further resolved that this Assembly commend the government for projects and programs designed 
to promote energy conservation, such as Saskatchewan Conservation House and the Warm Up 
Saskatchewan program. 

 
I feel that the debate that would result from that being in the motion is irrelevant to the motion which is being 
amended. Therefore, I'm going to declare the amendment out of order. 
 
MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, the last speaker, the member for Regina Wascana (Mr. 
White), provided some information that I found very interesting. I would like to take some time and look it over 
again, so I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2333 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 22 
 

GRAIN HANDLING AND TRANSPORTATION 
 
MR. D.G. BANDA (Redberry) moved, seconded by Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn) 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to take positive action in dealing with the grain 
handling and transportation system in western Canada by: (1) implementing the Crowrate Guarantee 
Plan of the province of Saskatchewan; (2) ensuring adequate levels of service to the producer; (3) 
taking necessary steps to ensure the proper development at Prince Rupert, British Columbia, and 
Churchill, Manitoba for the export of western grain and other products; and (4) appointing a rail 
co-ordinator within the Canadian Wheat Board to co-ordinate the rail shipments of on-board grains. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to have the opportunity to advance this motion. I think that all members will 
agree that it is a subject that is as important as any we will ever deal with in this Assembly. 
 
The grain handling and transportation system of Western Canada has been an absolutely indispensable part of our 
agricultural economy ever since the prairies were first settled. It was a vast network of seaport terminals, railways 
and small prairie sidings that brought settlers into this vast plain, and it was that same network that allowed the 
homesteaders to ship their products to market. 
 
Without an adequate transportation system in the future, Mr. Speaker, the agriculture sector of the Saskatchewan 
economy will be in severe trouble. We who are the second or third or even fourth generation descendants of the 
original homesteaders will begin to wish that our ancestors had never come to the Canadian prairies, and that is 
how important the grain handling and transportation system is to all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the present time twenty million tonnes of grain a year leave the prairies for export. By 1985 a 
number of reputable agencies tell us that thirty million tonnes of grain will move off the prairies and into the 
world markets. Now that is good, Mr. Speaker. The increased sales will help our financially hard-pressed farmers 
and allow us to do our part in feeding a hungry world. 
 
But what is not so good, Mr. Speaker, is that all the indicators at the present time point to the fact that we will not 
be able to assume our share of the world market or increase farm income or help feed the Third World and why? 
Why will we not be able to do these things, Mr. Speaker? All of them are very worth while. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the reason is clear. The policies of the federal government will not allow us to do those kinds of things. Look at 
our grain handling and transportation system right now, Mr. Speaker. Look at the shape it is in. Delivery points 
are full to capacity, thanks to the inadequacies of the transportation system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote, just briefly from the Thursday, August 24, 1978 edition of the Western 
Producer. This was a front page story and the headline read, 'Plugged Elevators Greet New Year.' The text of the 
story goes as follows, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 
 

The country elevator system across western Canada is up to 95 per cent 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2334 

congested as quotas open for the new crop year, according to grain company officials interviewed last 
week. While no exact figures are available, Neil Boughton, regional manager for Manitoba Pool 
elevators estimates his company would be about 95 per cent congested when the new year's quota came 
into effect August 21. 

 
The situation is the same in Saskatchewan says Merv Ryan, manager of the country elevator system for 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. We have practically no storage space. It is congested throughout the 
country elevator system he said. 

 
In Alberta 250 elevators were plugged July 31 and the situation hasn't improved much in August says 
Irvin Larkins of the Alberta Wheat Pool. He said farmers traditionally finish the crop year with a great 
grain delivery flourish but this year has been worse than usual. Deferred grain delivery permits 
aggravated an overloaded elevator system he said. The Canadian Wheat Board offered deferred delivery 
permits so farmers could haul grain on last year's quota past the July 31 deadline. Farmers could haul 
until August 21 when the new quotas came into effect. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I read down to the point in the story to include the bit about the deferred delivery permits. Deferred 
delivery permits were the solution offered in the last crop year by the federal government to solve our 
transportation problems here on the prairies. What it amounted to was this, Mr. Speaker. It pushed the problems of 
the previous crop year ahead into this crop year and there is no answer at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the front page story in the Western Producer was similar to stories in numerous other newspapers 
and farm publications throughout the summer and late last fall. Every elevator company was affected. The story 
from which I quoted goes on to say that the United Grain Growers and Pioneer Grain delivery points were just as 
plugged as those of the three pools. 
 
What has been the effect at the other end of the system, Mr. Speaker? How has the inability of the railways and 
export terminals to move grain out of the country elevator system affected our sales in the international market? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if there is anyone left, outside of the federal government, the Tories and the railway 
companies, who thinks that the tie-ups in our grain handling and transportation system has not hurt our foreign 
sales of grain, I would refer them to recent statements by the Canadian Wheat Board Commissioner, Charles 
Gibbings, who was speaking at a district meeting in Weyburn, the first week in March. Mr. Gibbings had this to 
say about the effect our grain handling and transportation system has had on international sales of prairie grain. I 
will quote from the Leader Post story covering the meeting: 
 

A total of three million tonnes in sales had to be deferred in the 1978 calendar year. The sales displaced 
cost western farmers nearly $460 million. At least another two million tonnes in sales had to be turned 
down because the system could not handle the transport to export position, he said. 

 
What that means, Mr. Speaker, is that if Canada had some better means of getting grain from the prairies to 
waiting ships at export terminals, we could have sold between 27 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2335 
 

million tonnes and 28 million tonnes of grain in the export market last year instead of the 21.5 million tonnes 
which we did sell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask all members to look at this situation. Farmers are producing more grain than ever 
before and the country elevator system is certainly the best means of handling that production. The Canadian 
Wheat Board could sell another 7 million tonnes of grain annually and in coming years much more than that. But 
in between the two, Mr. Speaker, between the prairie elevators and the ships waiting in line in our ports to take on 
the grain, is our grain handling and transportation system and it is that system which is costing western farmers at 
least $460 million a year in lost sales. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the wording of this resolution are several suggestions as to how this current situation might be 
cleared up: suggestions like greater use of the ports of Churchill and Prince Rupert, which I want to spend a few 
minutes talking about now. 
 
The port of Churchill, Mr. Speaker, as a grain exporting terminal, was developed in the early 1930s. Since that 
time a little over 600 million bushels have moved through that port. This is an average of 12.9 million bushels per 
year over the past five decades. 
 
To be fair, Mr. Speaker, I do admit that the use of the Hudson's Bay Route has picked up to some extent recently. 
In the past ten years the total throughput has averaged 24 million bushels per year and a record year of 28.4 
million bushels was handled in the 1976 shipping season. But we should look at these figures in the proper 
context. Mr. Speaker, 28.4 million bushels sounds like a lot of grain, but it is less than the grain storage capacity 
that will exist at Vancouver when expansion now under way is complete. 
 
Greater grain movement through Churchill could have a number of advantages for farmers, Mr. Speaker. Grain 
producers receive a larger net return on grain sold through the port of Churchill than that sold via the St. 
Lawrence Seaway system. Rail freight rates to Churchill are significantly less than to Thunder Bay for hundreds 
of delivery points in northern and eastern Saskatchewan. The shorter routes should also mean more favorable turn 
around time for the railway equipment. The length of the shipping season could be extended at Churchill. 
Presently, the season runs from the third week of July to the second week of October and that has been the length 
of the shipping season since the mid-1950s. Just until recently, this winter as a matter of fact, we are informed that 
the Canadian Marine Insurers are willing to write insurance for Hudson's Bay at minimum rates from July 20 to 
October 31. Now, this will extend the season somewhat, something like 11 days and that's a small breakthrough in 
all of these years. 
 
Now, many technological changes have taken place since the late 1950s. Ice forecasting and satellite weather 
information is now very advanced. Ships have improved their radio equipment, their sonar and radar equipment as 
well. Even without the use of icebreakers, the season at Churchill could be considerably extended. Mr. Speaker, 
Churchill is approximately the same distance from Great Britain as Montreal. The CN rail line to Churchill is just 
over 500 miles from the nearest prairie elevator, a great deal less than the shipping route through the Great Lakes. 
Clearly, Churchill is an export port for prairie grain that should be used to a much greater extent than it is at 
present and the reason it is not used, Mr. Speaker, is the policy of neglect of successive Tory and Liberal federal 
governments. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2336 

MR. BANDA: — At Churchill, Mr. Speaker, a decision is required with respect to the Herchmer subdivision, 
either reconstruct it or dedicate a complete fleet of boxcars for use exclusively to service that port. However, it's 
my opinion that a long-term plan should be the upgrading to handle all cars and that it should be done 
immediately. Estimates are that double the current movement through Churchill could already be achieved if 
sufficient will was there to do it, insurance changes, more orders and use of modern marine technology; with these 
changes and with the rail line issue resolved and with some modernization of the plant, Churchill could assume a 
stable and significant long-term place in Canadian grain exports. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, on July 21, when a special train was run from Churchill to Gilam to view the Herchmer 
sub, Mr. Hansen, the vice-president of CN made it known to all of those aboard that his organization had no 
intention of spending money on the line and all moneys would have to come from the federal government. With 
that attitude, we know the railroad's position and farmers know and that's not new. A federal commitment is 
needed badly in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Rail Action Committee report is a deterrent to better utilization of that port and I use the 
example of the abandonment, proposed abandonment of the CN Kelvington-Preeceville section as recommended 
by the Prairie Rail Action Committee which would cut off access to Churchill for a large volume of grain unless 
CP would agree to haul it, and CP has strongly opposed this position in the past. Mr. Speaker, much the same 
situation exists at Prince Rupert. Of the 8.4 million tonnes of grain exported through the West Coast in the last 
crop year, 7.6 million tonnes went through Vancouver. The remaining 800,000 tonnes was exported via Prince 
Rupert. When you look at the situation on the West Coast, Mr. Speaker, you are struck by the similarities between 
there and the Lakehead. Like the seaway, Vancouver is where the federal government spends the money and 
directs the export grain. Like Churchill, Prince Rupert has been neglected. 
 
The Vancouver terminal storage has been increased by almost 10 million bushels. That will mean Vancouver will 
be able to ship 10.5 million tonnes of grain a year in the near future. That is the capacity they will have, Mr. 
Speaker, despite the almost legendary rail bottlenecks in the lower mainland of British Columbia. 
 
Why has the federal government not acted on the requests of the Canadian Wheat Board to build a major 
expansion of facilities at Prince Rupert where the rail and port traffic is a fraction of that in and around the 
Vancouver docks? The size of the facility the board is pushing for is dictated by projected export requirements. 
As I said earlier, Canada's future for grain sales looks bright and an ever-increasing amount of our exported grain 
is likely to move west to the Pacific Rim and Asia. The time to expand facilities at Prince Rupert is now so that we 
can handle 5 million or 6 million tonnes of grain which the wheat board predicts will have to be moved through 
the port annually by 1985 or the 9 million to 10 million tonnes the board estimates will move through Prince 
Rupert by 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important part of this resolution is that having to do with the appointment of a rail 
co-ordinator within the Canadian Wheat Board. We will all remember the findings of a group of farmers, 
belonging to the National Farmers Union (NFU) (and I know the members opposite like this group) when they 
looked into the grain-hauling system last fall. They found more than 1,200 boxcars carrying work orders sitting on 
sidings around the countryside, some for as long as four years. All that was needed, in some cases, was to put the 
boxcars back into service by a minor repair 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2337 
 

or a thorough cleaning. Yet they sat on sidings for months on end and, as I said, in some cases as long as four 
years. This was occurring at the very same time our country elevator system was plugged to the rafters. The NFU 
members also found boxcars and hopper cars held up at delivery points from eight days to three weeks waiting for 
a train to pick them up. Again, Mr. Speaker, remember these NFU farmers were conducting their survey in the last 
week of August, 1978. At the time our delivery points could not accept any more deliveries of grain because they 
were full to the shingles. 
 
The survey also found a sizable quantity of Canadian railway rolling stock in the United States. Mr. Speaker, that 
is an average of three Canadian boxcars for every mile of track surveyed, rolling stock that could have been used 
here in Canada except for the fact that the railway companies can charge three or four times as much hauling U.S. 
grain on Canadian rail lines because American farmers do not have the protection of the Crow's Nest Pass freight 
rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeated the findings of those Saskatchewan farmers to demonstrate the kind of job the railway 
companies are doing in co-ordinating their grain-hauling equipment. It is quite apparent that the railways are not 
the ones seeing to it that the rolling stock and locomotive power our two national railways have is most effectively 
employed in moving prairie grain. 
 
A rail co-ordinator within the wheat board with enough power to force the railways to act would be a step forward 
in moving to correct the abuses I mentioned earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reduction in demurrage charges alone would pay the staff salaries a thousand times over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the appointment of a rail co-ordinator, together with other improvements to our grain handling and 
transportation system which I described earlier, would go a long way towards correcting the present disastrous 
and tangled mess. To do other than act on some of these proposals will mean that the federal government is 
robbing western farmers of millions of dollars of future grain sales. 
 
Adequate levels of service have to be provided to the producer. At present, a yearly volume of about 21 million 
tonnes seems to be the maximum quantity the system is capable of moving into exports. Considering the projected 
rate of growth in grain exports and the rate at which box cars are going out of service, there would be a shortfall 
of over 15,000 grain cars by 1985, resulting in an export loss of between 10 to 14 million tonnes. An export loss 
of this magnitude has enormous economic implications for the three prairie provinces and for Canada's balance of 
payments. 
 
Assuming a price of $200 per tonne in 1985, which doesn't seem unreasonable, the loss to the prairie economy 
would be between $2 billion and $2.8 billion. With Saskatchewan's share of grain exports around 56 per cent, the 
loss would be between $1 billion and $1.5 billion annually to Saskatchewan farmers. This does not take into 
account any multiplier effect. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the wheat board says it can market 30 million tonnes by 1985 and there is general agreement 
that farmers in the Canadian Wheat Board area can meet that target through reduced summer fallow, increased 
fertilizer usage, higher yielding varieties and improved farm management practices and so on. The golden 
opportunity however, will be lost unless steps are taken now to deliver the kind of grain delivery system to meet 
the grain export demands of today and the 1980s. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2338 

Farmers can and will produce the additional quantities providing they are sure they can deliver their grain and of 
course, receive a fair price. As a part of a national transportation policy it is the responsibility of the federal 
government and the railways to provide the adequate trackage and rolling stock to enable western farmers to take 
maximum advantage of expanding world grain markets. 
 
This is particularly so since there are not practical alternative modes for transporting grain, in effect, making 
farmers captive to the railroads. The branch line system to support the elevators must also remain in place. 
Maintenance throughout the years would have averted much more costly repair work now. 
 
I believe that the greatest long-term social and economic benefits can be derived from a branch line/country 
elevator system for grain collection. Increasing the capacity for grain handling by rail means effecting a complex 
series of cause and effect relationships. 
 
More movement requires putting more trains through in a day. Putting more trains through in a day requires that 
each train moves faster. In order for trains to move faster, particularly in the mountains, grades need to be less 
steep, curves need to be more gradual, and tracks need to be in better condition. Some solution must be found for 
delays caused by trains meeting each other. And some solution must be found to blockages caused by the increase 
in maintenance crews and the increase in movement that has made necessary. 
 
Increasing rail capacity means moving more cars on the same trains, moving larger cars rather than smaller ones to 
increase tonnage, and that means more horsepower. 
 
Increasing rail capacity means including a margin for natural disasters in physical facilities. The storms will occur, 
but there must be sufficient capacity in the overall system that they do not dictate the difference between being 
able to move desired quantities and not being able to, over the period of a year. 
 
The increased rail capacity means not one improvement but a series of improvements costing a lot of money. Our 
government is prepared to put some moneys into a plan to help a part of that problem — a guaranteed Crowrate 
plan — and my colleague from Weyburn will be elaborating more in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a federal government with a commitment attitude, not a blame-the-other-fellow attitude. 
Mr. Speaker, I've covered a number of areas and I hope members opposite will support this resolution. 
 
I was thoroughly disappointed to read the Leader Post of Wednesday, March 28, 1979, in which a report was 
given on the western premiers' conference at Prince George. And, Mr. Speaker, the great Tory tradition came 
home to rest, by the report on Premier Lyon's statement made at that conference. I'll quote from that article. This is 
the article that was written, and I quote: 
 

But, trying to take a universal approach to the complex problem, Manitoba left the door open for 
changes in the statutory rate structure, didn't emphatically condone the Prairie Rail Action Committee 
report on rail line abandonment and mentioned possible highway transfer of grain, which would suggest 
possible inland terminals. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2339 
 

Lyon insists that he said nothing that was new, or hadn't been said by grain producers in Manitoba 
before, and didn't think it would create any problems for Progressive Conservative candidates in the 
federal campaign. 

 
He's probably suffering under a bad misconception. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, was Mr. Lyon truly stating Tory policy? I believe he was. I think this attitude is deplorable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read articles like the April 12, 1979 edition of The Western Producer. Here is the headline: Crow 
Fix-up Group Takes the Case to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to just quote a few of the comments made in here, because I think it is very interesting, 
and I quote: 
 

Promoters of a plan to change the statutory freight rates on grain movement quietly took their case to 
the federal government officials last week. 

 
Then it goes on to state: 
 

We want to start getting an understanding here, said the producer official, who asked not to be named. 
He said a planned meeting with the caucuses of the Liberals and Progressive Conservatives had to be 
cancelled because of the election. So the pitch to the politicians will have to wait until May 22. 

 
And I'm quoting, Mr. Speaker. Further down another interesting little writing here, and I'll quote again. I quote: 
 

The attempt to develop a plan to change the Crow's Nest Pass freight rate system has been couched in 
secrecy since it began last winter with a series of private meetings involving some producers, some 
processors, some politicians, some cattlemen and senior officials of the railways. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Tories and Liberals say one thing and do exactly the opposite. Federal candidates, on 
numerous occasions in this election, are standing up at public meetings and saying that they are supporting the 
crowrate if producers want it. Then they turn around and have secret meetings on what they're going to do with 
the crowrate as soon as the federal election is over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entire national transportation policy, encompassing not only the implications which underlie the 
possible loss of statutory grain rates, but the possible abandonment of thousands of miles of branch lines have 
far-reaching implications toward the economical viability of thousands of farmers in rural communities in this 
province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I move this resolution, I hope that the people of Saskatchewan will really assess the old-line 
party policies in this area, and if they do, they'll elect an NDP government into Ottawa on May 22. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BANDA: — If they assess the facts, Mr. Speaker, they'll elect an NDP government 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2340 

on the 22nd which will implement the parts of the resolution that I'm going to move. I know that the people of 
Saskatchewan will be interested. I know that members opposite will be listening to hear what their comments are 
and whether they will support this resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker I move Resolution No. 22. 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to second the motion of my colleague, the member 
for Redberry (Mr. Banda), and I'd like to compliment him on his presentation in moving the motion. 
 
The subject matter of the resolution before us has received considerable discussion in Saskatchewan over the 
years, both in these Chambers and outside these Chambers, and I might say that the spokesmen of the political 
party that sits to your right, Mr. Speaker, whether they were at the provincial or federal level, have over the years 
made the New Democratic position abundantly clear, and that position has been consistent. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I think members of both sides would agree that, of those making the case for a decent 
transportation system for Saskatchewan farmers, one of the most powerful spokesmen we have had is the member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy), our Minister of Municipal Affairs in charge of transportation. 
 
We on this side, Mr. Speaker, have taken the position that our transportation system ought to be an instrument of 
national policy in this country. If it is to be such an instrument, and at the same time be effectively used as such, it 
is not rational to expect the system to have profit instead of service as its primary objective. 
 
In my estimation, Mr. Speaker, we could probably look at every mode of transportation we have in this country 
and find that if it weren't for the public subsidies, either stated or hidden, if it weren't for such public outlay of 
capital, none of the different modes would show a profit in the usual sense. 
 
By way of example, I think it would be fair to say that the air transport business probably wouldn't turn a profit if 
it had to finance airport construction, maintenance and operations. 
 
Our trucking industry, Mr. Speaker, would probably have a great deal of difficulty remaining competitive with 
other modes of transport if fuel taxes were closely related to and financed anywhere near the full cost of highway 
and road construction and maintenance. 
 
I wouldn't want my remarks to be interpreted as somehow depreciating the contribution made to our transportation 
system by the air carrier and the trucking industry, far from it. Both of these modes have advantages of speed and 
convenience in moving people and goods about. 
 
What I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that somehow the idea has got into people's minds that it's only our rail 
system that's at issue here and that it's only our rail system which is involved in public subsidization. 
 
I think it could be established that this is a wrong idea, though I don't propose to go into it at length. What is 
important to realize however is that we would get a radically 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2341 
 

different analysis and set of proposed solutions if we took the view that transportation was, in fact, an instrument 
of our national policy and if, as a country, we were prepared to act on that belief. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want, this afternoon, to comment in a little more detail in regard to our crowrate guaranteed 
plan for western Canada. 
 
It is a fact that the major markets for our agricultural products will be in other parts of the nation and the world. 
The prairie provinces have five million people; the rest of Canada has 15 million. We are a country of 20 million 
in a world of four billion. Obviously, the real market for our products which we can produce with such quality 
and quantity is not our market here at home but is the market outside of Canada. 
 
The export of our agricultural products is not only of great benefit to our primary producers but it is of benefit to 
our entire country. One only has to consider the positive impact on our balance of trade situation to appreciate this 
point of view. Because of the national benefits, members on this side think it is not unreasonable to expect the 
entire country, through our transportation policy, to see to it that our products remain competitive on the 
international as well as the domestic market. 
 
For this reason, among others, we believe the costs of putting our products in export positions ought to be shared 
by all Canadians just as all Canadians in many cases pay a premium for many domestically produced 
manufactured goods because of protective tariffs. That is why members on this side take the view that the 
crowrate for moving our products is not some handout for which we should be grateful but rather part of a deal 
called confederation. 
 
Now, some will argue that the problem for secondary industry in western Canada is the crowrate. We say the 
question should be viewed from the opposite perspective, for the reasons I have already outlined. We take the 
view that if rates for our agricultural products, including refined agricultural, were tied to the crowrate our 
competitive edge in international markets, Mr. Speaker, for these other products would be as solidly established as 
it has been for wheat and other cereal crops. 
 
Now furthermore, if you accept the concept that the crowrate is a legitimate part of the confederation deal, it is 
difficult to imagine why it should only apply to a limited list of raw products and not to these same products in a 
refined state. Surely the arguments for moving rapeseed at crow, apply to moving the refined product at crow as 
well. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the refined product really ought to be more attractive to move from the railway's point 
of view since a good deal of the bulk is removed and only the marketable part of the product is being shipped. 
 
The only argument against moving the refined product at crow is the notion that too many Eastern politicians still 
have, that western Canada is a hinterland and that Canadians in general and western Canadians more particularly 
should remain as hewers of wood and drawers of water. That argument, Mr. Speaker, we here reject. 
 
Mr. Justice Hall in his report recommended that the benefits of the crow be extended to more agricultural products 
to allow development of secondary agricultural industry in western Canada. Our government has indicated it is 
committed to do everything it can to hasten and facilitate the implementation of Hall, including this aspect. We are 
aware of the jurisdictional limits to provincial government involvement but we have said that we are prepared to 
co-operate with the federal government to implement such a plan. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2342 

Certain parts of the proposal only the federal government can do. They must guarantee crow to the producers and 
the railways must be compensated for grain movement. It is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we get these kinds of 
guarantees from the minister in charge, Mr. Lang, only during election campaigns and nothing in between. 
 
The federal government must act to give the Canadian Wheat Board a stronger hand in co-ordinating grain 
movement as recommended by Hall. Here again it is unfortunate Mr. Lang's response was not to act and 
implement Hall. Instead he hired a consulting firm IBI of Toronto, if you remember, to study the inland grain 
gathering system and the operations of export ports, as though these things hadn't already been studied to death 
before. He hired Booz, Allan and Hamilton another American firm to investigate the rail-car allocation system, as 
though this too hasn't already been studied at length. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, among those things the federal government could do, they must arrange to have 
products in addition to grain moved at the crowrate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government has said that if the federal government would act on these three points, instead 
of procrastinating, this provincial government would accept the responsibility for providing the rails with 
compensation on the movement of rape seed products, alfalfa, dehydration products and processed specialty crops 
such as peas and lentils. We have, in effect, Mr. Speaker, said implement Hall and we will provide compensation 
in the case of the third point made by Hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this year's budget there is provided $3 million because we mean business to do it. We mean 
business because if the crowrate guaranteed plan were implemented it would mean they wouldn't have to worry 
about the crowrate being checked out and with it the future of our rural elevator system placed in jeopardy. It 
would mean farmers wouldn't have to worry about the $150 million that would be coming out of their pockets if 
the crowrate were checked out. It would also mean that many producers could take advantage of diversification in 
their crops thereby increasing prospects for a more healthy and stable return on their operations. 
 
For the secondary agricultural industry, which we could develop, the guarantee that processed products could 
move to export positions at rates competitive with the raw product, would mean opportunities to set up operations 
at the source of supply of the raw products. And for possibly hundreds of Saskatchewan young people, this would 
mean jobs, Mr. Speaker, here at home instead of seeing them exported abroad. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are good reasons why producers, industry spokesmen and others in Saskatchewan, have 
reacted favorably to our crowrate guarantee plan when it has been explained to them. 
 
At the present time we have less than a lame duck government in Ottawa because there is an election campaign 
finally in progress. Now, this campaign, Mr. Speaker, might provide Saskatchewan people with just the 
opportunity to wring some commitments from those people who are going to be making decisions in Ottawa (or 
not making them as the case may be). We ought to use this opportunity and demand that spokesmen for each of 
the parties state, in unequivocal terms, where they stand on these recommendations of Hall. What we don't want 
or need to hear is that they will promise more studies. I say, of those we have had enough. What the situation 
demands is decisions and actions. We are entitled to know whether or not these Hall recommendations and our 
offer in the guarantee plan have the support of the parties asking for the public support. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2343 
 

Mr. Speaker, I know what the answer will be from a party at the federal level. Our position is already on the 
record. Perhaps what we need after May 22 is another government at Ottawa that depends on votes from the New 
Democratic Party caucus for its survival. I can assure you that this proposal would be part of a shopping list. 
Perhaps only then, just as with medicare and with indexed old age pensions, would we get some action instead of 
stalling and studying. It is my view, Mr. Speaker, that this is exactly what it will take. 
 
My colleague, the member for Redberry (Mr. Banda) has given many good reasons why this resolution deserves 
the support of all members of this Assembly. I hope, too, Mr. Speaker, that I have been able to show good cause 
why we should accept this resolution now. Therefore, it gives me considerable pleasure to second the motion and 
I ask all members to bring it to a speedy and positive vote. 
 
MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, prior to adjourning debate on this motion I wish to say a 
couple of words. 
 
First of all, at the member for Redberry (Mr. Banda) I think, perhaps, this House has seen the next Minister of 
Agriculture coming forward, eh? Fantastic deliver of this particular program. I have a few more things to say 
about the program. The other thing, the member for Redberry (Mr. Banda) elevates the position of agriculture in 
this House to the highest position. Quoting from what he says: 
 

This is the most important, the most important motion ever discussed in the Assembly for many years. 
Above medicare, above mineral resources development. 

 
People of rural Saskatchewan are with you on that particular position. I question whether it's quite that important 
though with your colleagues. Now this particular motion, Mr. Speaker, could quite easily have been made by a 
member from this side of the House, as it relates to developing the crowrate plan, as a base to implementing a 
co-ordinator for the transportation problems . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We're talking about implementation of 
the crowrate guarantee plan. I read from the newspaper: 
 

National unity depends on a viable east-west trade and the statutory Crow's Nest freight rate is a major 
economic incentive encouraging such trade. Therefore, the crowrate should be retained and even 
increased with taxpayers absorbing the difference. 

 
Pretty good stuff. He went on to say: 
 

Inflation has caused the operating costs to rise far beyond what they were when the rate was set and 
increase their need to let the companies upgrade lines and buy new equipment. However, because the 
benefit of the crowrate ripples through the economy benefiting all, the increase should be paid by the 
public purse rather than by the farmer. 

 
Sounds like Allan Blakeney. January 25, 1978. Speaker, Dr. Grant Devine, University of Saskatchewan. 
 
That is where the crowrate guarantee plan came from. You didn't invent the crowrate 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2344 

guarantee plan. There's where the program is, so what do we say about the crowrate guarantee plan? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The estimates for this year, $3 million; $3 million knowing full well this is our 
program, but if these other guys go along with it, and they go along with it, the $3 million will never be spent this 
year or next year, because you tie it to too many conditions. Why don't you take some leadership? Why don't you 
go out and spend some of that $3 million and help supplement the crowrate so that we do attract some secondary, 
more secondary industry to this province? 
 
Now we want to co-ordinate transportation. I'll tell you the one political party in this federal election campaign 
that is advocating a co-ordinator to insure that the transportation problem will be put into better stead, is the 
Progressive Conservative party, not the NDP party. We advocate that the Canadian Wheat Board should be going 
out and selling the . . . go out and sell some grain to the Canadian Wheat Board. And the transportation system 
under the Department of Transport should be looking at co-ordinating that program. Co-ordinating car programs. 
Now the hon. member for Redberry talks about how we're going to help out Prince Rupert, develop the Prince 
Rupert port. I don't see the provincial government doing very much to help out Prince Rupert. The province of 
Alberta is on record, $100 million to assist a conglomerate, a group of companies . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That's a loan! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I said that it was a loan. How much are you going to lend him? Why don't you lend him 
support? You wouldn't give him anything. You're not even giving him your support. 
 
So, we say we want to proceed with Prince Rupert and it's probably going to be the provinces of western Canada 
that take the initiative to proceed with Prince Rupert. It certainly is not going to be Otto Lang (federal Minister of 
Transportation) who proceeds that way. It's not going to be Broadbent (federal New Democratic Party Leader). 
Well, what's he got to do with it? He's not in the race anyway. 
 
Now we come to developing a total. I see the member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen) wearing a badge which 
says, the perfect union. I see a minority government the perfect union — NDP and Trudeau. When we have some 
problems on the west coast where the ships are shut down because of labor tie-ups, where is the member here 
going to stand — exactly where the NDP stood between 1972 and 1974. You can't interfere with that. Ask the 
Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding), he spoke against it. Some perfect union! That's the perfect union, as we 
come to the end in this election campaign. The Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) states the NDP's position — 
minority government, we're going with Trudeau. One of our conditions of course, is that we would have to have 
Trudeau step down. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We're going to win it! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — You're going to win! Trudeau has to step down and as the member for Qu'Appelle (Mr. 
Lane) says, who are we going to replace him with? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I seem to have lost the member on the debate. I was following the debate on 
Resolution No. 22 and apparently, the member strayed from the debate. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — To expedite matters, Mr. Speaker, on this, I'm sure there are other 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2345 
 

members of this House who would also like to speak on this motion. At this point in time, I would beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

BILL NO. 02 — AN ACT TO REPEAL AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE CANADIAN 
CO-OPERATIVE IMPLEMENTS LIMITED 

 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

BILL NO. 03 — AN ACT TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE AN ACT RESPECTING 
SASKATCHEWAN CO-OPERATIVE CREDIT SOCIETY LIMITED AND SASKATCHEWAN 

CO-OPERATIVE FINANCIAL SERVICES LIMITED 
Sections 1 to 36 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

BILL NO. 04 — AN ACT TO CHANGE THE NAME OF NORFOLK TRUST 
 
Sections 1 to 4 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

BILL NO. 05 — AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION OF PROPERTY 
OF THE BOY SCOUTS OF CANADA SASKATCHEWAN PROVINCIAL COUNCIL 

 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved second reading of Bill No. 104 — An Act to amend The 
Vehicles Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, my concern regarding The Vehicles Act I've expressed on numerous occasions in this 
House. It has to do with the section of The Vehicles Act that pertains to the school buses. The section is section 
152 and it reads as follows: 
 

Section 152(1). The driver of a school bus equipped as provided by subsection 123(21) shall, unless 
driving on a public highway with a posted limit of 55 kilometres, which is 34.18 miles per hour or less 
(and it goes on to say) . . . activate the flashing lights when stopping for the purpose of loading and 
unloading school children at least 350 feet before the point of loading or unloading. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2346 

Now, my concern is this. I feel the matter of loading or unloading school children is of prime importance to us in 
Saskatchewan. I feel that we have had incidents of near loss of life and I think it would be foolish to think that 
there couldn't be loss of life in situations such as this. I pointed out that the laws and regulations enforcing the 
loading and unloading of school buses are not adhered to as strictly as they should be. I have seen incidents and 
many incidents throughout this province where school buses unload children in a manner that is against the law; 
they go across in front of that bus and over towards their school grounds. Also, if we are driving on the public 
roads we often see again, the children must cross in front of the bus. 
 
I feel we, in our society, should not be in such a rush we have to be concerned about holding up traffic for a few 
moments for the safety of the life of a small child, especially in this International Year of the Child. I think it is 
time we in Saskatchewan, and as legislators in this province, took a serious look at this. My feeling is that if by 
changing this law, we could save the life of one child, it would be well worth the change. 
 
I feel there are perhaps a few buses that do bus in the urban centres. I have checked into this and it is about 10 per 
cent of our school buses. I don't think the matter of loading or unloading children is going to take that long a 
period of time. I feel, as I have said before, that the people who are driving our buses for young people in 
Saskatchewan are, in the main, very responsible and conscientious people. I don't think they would be activating 
those lights in such a way as to tie up traffic or be of a hindrance to the motorists of Saskatchewan. I think we 
should be taking a serious look at this and I urge this Assembly to support this amendment to The Vehicles Act, 
by which the lights on school buses would be activated at all times, regardless of the speed zone in which students 
are being loaded or unloaded from our school buses. Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
MR. J. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to rise on Bill No. 104. I think it is a very, very 
important issue to be dealt with in this House and to be dealt with before we leave this House. Hopefully, the 
members opposite will join with us and this bill can pass through. I believe it is time for us to start putting 
children's lives first, speeding and people being in a hurry to get from point A to point B, second. 
 
If we don't protect the lives of these small children, who is going to? This is a very personal issue with me because 
there was an accident in my constituency. If the law had been as we're proposing it to be right now, maybe that 
accident would not have taken place. Maybe a little girl wouldn't have to go through a lot of pain and suffering. 
What we're asking this House here today on this bill is nothing outrageous. It's not going to cost any money. It's 
just a matter of amending The Vehicles Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want this. I believe they should have it and have the protection for their 
children riding buses all over Saskatchewan. I am very pleased to second this motion. 
 
MR. R.G. LONG (Cut Knife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Speaker, just a few words regarding this motion. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Stand up, Bob. Don't hide behind your desk. 
 
MR. LONG: — Come over and stand beside me, Colin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tend to support many of the aspects that have been mentioned in this motion. I think there are a 
number of good points that have been made by the 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2347 
 

opposition, but there are a few other things that should be said about this motion and at this time, I would like to 
possibly comment on it later. I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of 
Health) that Bill No. 69 — An Act to provide for Community Health Units be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of 
Health) that Bill No. 84 — An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on this 
particular bill. In general, I have to say I support the principle of the bill, but I question the sincerity of the 
government in bringing the bill forward. I have a news release here dated December 7, 1978, in which the 
minister indicates that he's going to establish the cancer foundation. He says, I have initiated consultations with 
interested organizations in preparation for the presentation of the legislation in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Unfortunately, I have had a hard time finding anyone he has solicited input from. Dr. Watson indicated that such a 
foundation should be formed with the advice of interested consumer properly constituted groups. Yet, Mr. 
Speaker, since at least February 23 of last year, there has been at least one particular group that I'm aware of, and 
it's called the Cancer Lifeline Group from Saskatoon, that has been trying to set up meetings with the Premier 
(Mr. Blakeney), and with the Minister of Health (Mr. Tchorzewski), etc. to try and have some input into this 
legislation. They have been denied this input at almost every turn. Only recently, I think, did they in fact get a 
meeting with the Minister of Health and, from my understanding, the meeting, you know, was a day late and a 
dollar short. There was no real input provided through that meeting. 
 
In talking with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, they're going to give their support to the bill only because 
it's better than nothing. It's a step in the right direction, but it really doesn't provide for the autonomy that Dr. 
Watson says is imperative for the foundation to function properly. That has been the only group I have found that 
has any input into the legislation and, of course, the input wasn't listened to in any case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the minister wasn't just flirting with the people of Saskatchewan when he said, I have 
initiated consultations with interested organizations in preparation for the legislation, so when second reading is 
voted on I'm going to be moving a motion to allow the minister to have those inputs properly provided. 
 
There are several concerns that I have as it relates to specifics in the bill, which shall be 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2348 

dealt with in that committee, or whatever committee the House deems the bill should go to. With those few brief 
comments, Mr. Speaker, I will indicate to the House we support the bill in principle. However, we are not 
satisfied that the minister properly solicited input for the legislation as recommended by Dr. Watson and as 
indicated was going to happen by the Minister of Health. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 46 
 
Pepper Kaeding White 
Dyck Feschuk Larter 
Bowerman McArthur Berntson 
Smishek Johnson Katzman 
Romanow Allen Swan 
Snyder Vickar Thatcher 
Kramer Rolfes Taylor 
Baker Cody Ham 
Skoberg Lusney Pickering 
Kowalchuk Long McLeod 
Matsalla Gross Andrew 
Robbins Nelson Duncan 
MacMurchy Thompson Garner 
Mostoway Engel Muirhead 
Banda Poniatowski Rousseau 
Whelan   
 

NAYS — Nil 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) that: 
 

Bill No. 84 be referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, maybe this is a . . . maybe indeed I have been outsmarted but I would like to know 
what rule this is by. A motion usually is done before the bill be read a second time. The mover gets up and says 
that this bill be not now read a second time, but be referred to law reform etc. etc. The business of the day is 
ordered by the government. We've done with the bill. We're moving on to the next item. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — You are both wrong. What the Attorney General is referring to is a motion of referral which 
is quite in order at that time, but that is not what we are dealing with at this time. The member for 
Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson) is out of order because the Clerk has to declare second reading and then I have 
to say — when shall this bill be dealt with in committee and then the member would be in order. At this point the 
member for Souris-Cannington, I believe, is out of order. 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2349 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry . . . 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Roy, you have been hooked, just take it like a man. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I may be hooked all right but I want to know what precedent is being set here. Is Mr. 
Speaker saying that when Mr. Speaker asks (which by the way I am not saying is wrong, but the first time in my 
12 years in this House) that when Mr. Speaker asks, on a government bill — when shall the bill be read in 
committee, that anybody — opposition or government — can introduce a motion relevant to that? If so, I would 
be appreciative if Mr. Speaker would give me the appropriate rules and/or Beauchesne's quotes to allow that, 
because I have never had that in 12 years. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will supply that to the Attorney General, very quickly, I hope. 
 
Order, order! I refer all members to rule No. 52. The marginal note says, readings before committal. 
 

Every bill shall be read twice in the Assembly before committal or amendment. 
 
That is the position we are at now and this is before committal to a committee. The Attorney General asked if this 
procedure is used or if there is any precedent for it. If the Attorney General will just go back to page 10 of the 
blues, where it says second readings, Bill No. 105. Now, if that bill had been dealt with today, it may have been 
referred to a committee other than Committee of the Whole. It is quite likely that that bill would have professional 
bills dealing with the professions and would have been referred to a committee other than Committee of the 
Whole by a motion of the member piloting the bill. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — On public bills, yes. It's not a government bill. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I agree with the Attorney General that this is not used very often. However, the 
mechanism is there and there is no rule prohibiting a member rising and moving that it be sent to a certain 
committee. If the members of the Assembly do not like that direction that the bill is being directed to, they can 
vote against it and defeat it. If in fact it is the will of the House that it go to that committee, then it would, 
obviously, pass and would go to that committee. That is something the members have to decide among themselves 
at this time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Rule 38 says the following: 
 

Forty-eight hours notice shall be given of a motion for first reading of a bill, resolution or address for 
the appointment of any committee or for the placing of a question on the order paper, but this shall not 
apply to public bills after their introduction (that is the example you gave, a public bill) or to private 
bills (which is also now applicable here), or to the times of meetings, or adjournment of the Assembly. 
Such notices shall be laid on the table and be printed in the Votes and Proceedings of that day. 

 
Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, we would be left in the ludicrous position where virtually every other motion requires a 
pink 48-hour notice — government motions, bills, government bills. Everything is 48 hours in notice except that a 
private member can get up on a government bill without notice at all and move a substantive resolution. Surely, 
that 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2350 

can't be the position of the House. I say, Mr. Speaker, I don't know of any precedent in the last 12 years that that 
has ever happened. 
 
If that is the case, then with all due respect to the governance of the House any member at all can simply say, well 
I am not going to give 48 hours notice, I'll move any motion that I want. Mr. Speaker, I ask you to reconsider that 
motion and to perhaps hold this motion in abeyance until you consider all the aspects of the ruling, because this 
will be an important precedent which you are setting. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Since this is a subject which is not very seldom touched on, I will ask the members at this 
point if there are any further comments on the point of order? I want the members to understand that once I 
reserve decision on it I won't take any more comments on the point of order. I'll ask the members now if they wish 
to make any further comments on the point of order? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, may I make a suggestion? It is 4:40, could we agree by agreement of the 
House to revert back to this bill to hear Your Honour's ruling after the supper hour, and that way we could at least 
get Committee of Finance started and it would give everybody a little more time, because I think it is a unique 
point? Can we keep it going? I am not worried about the motion, but I am worried about the procedure, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — This is a public bill, Bill No. 84, and the rule which the Attorney General referred to is Rule 
No. 38. What Rule No. 38 does is exclude public bills, if it is read properly. I will just go over the rule again: 
 

Forty-eight hours notice shall be given on a motion for first reading of a bill (and that's what this is), 
resolutions, address, or for the appointment of committee, or for placing the question on the order 
paper, but this shall not apply to public bills after their introduction. 

 
This is a public bill and it has been introduced. Therefore, the rule cannot apply to this, so I take it that the motion 
is about to be made. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) that: 
 

Bill No. 84 be referred to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments and Delegated Powers. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 15 
 
Larter Taylor Andrew 
Berntson Lane Duncan 
Katzman Ham Garner 
Swan Pickering Muirhead 
Thatcher McLeod Rousseau 
 



 
May 1, 1979 

 

2351 
 

NAYS — 32 
 
Pepper MacMurchy Cody 
Dyck Mostoway Lusney 
Bowerman Banda Prebble 
Smishek Whelan Long 
Romanow Kaeding Gross 
Snyder Feschuk Nelson 
Baker McArthur Thompson 
Skoberg Johnson Engel 
Kowalchuk Allen Poniatowski 
Matsalla Vickar White 
Robbins Rolfes  
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of 
Health) that Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, this is just barely more than a nothing bill. Sections 1 and 2, of course, are 
just procedural things. Section 3, as I understand it, is just to clarify something where the only place there was any 
confusion was in the Department of Health. Everyone else understood it perfectly. Section 4 is to provide for an 
approved form. 
 
The doctors have to use an approved form on mode 3 billing so that patients can in turn collect from MCIC 
(Medical Care Insurance Commission). The minister has indicated to SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) 
that this will not be proclaimed at this time. All I can see happening here is an additional overhead expense for the 
doctors in Saskatchewan, putting them further behind the eight ball than you already have them. Since the minister 
has indicated that he just wants it on the books, he's not going to proclaim it till he needs it, I wonder if he's just 
not using it for a tool to further hammer the doctors and further deny them mode 3 billing. 
 
It's really a nothing bill except for that. I don't think the doctors have any particular strong feelings. Had they been 
asked to do it instead of just hammered with this silly little bill, they probably would have done it. Since 
somebody decides that the clarification was necessary, we'll probably support the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 45 
 
Pepper Kaeding Poniatowski 
Dyck Feschuk White 
Bowerman McArthur Larter 
Smishek Johnson Berntson 
Romanow Allen Katzman 
Messer Vickar Swan 
Snyder Rolfes Taylor 
Skoberg Cody Lane 
 



 
May 1, 1979 

 
2352 

 
Kowalchuk Lusney Ham 
Matsalla Prebble Pickering 
Robbins Long McLeod 
MacMurchy Gross Andrew 
Mostoway Nelson Duncan 
Banda Thompson Garner 
Whelan Engel Rousseau 
 

NAYS — Nil 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5 to 7 o'clock. 


