






















































Hansard: November 29, 1979


1 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 29, 1979 

 
This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor dated October 30, 
1979 for meeting of the second session of the Nineteenth Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 
 
The Clerk advised the Assembly that Mr. Speaker, would not be present to open the sitting. Thereupon the 
Deputy Speaker took the chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the private secretary to His 
Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, stating that His Honour would open the session at 3:00 p.m. today. 
Thursday, the twenty-ninth day of November 1979. 
 
 3:09 p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 
 
MR. SPEAKER, 
 
MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 
 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Second Session of the Nineteenth Legislature of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

This Session will bring my Government into a new decade, a decade we anticipate with confidence 
and enthusiasm. The past decade was one of continual growth and prosperity for Saskatchewan. We are 
confident that the 1980s will see that growth sustained. 
 
CELEBRATE SASKATCHEWAN 
 

The year 1980 is our 75th anniversary as a Province. Two years ago my Government established the 
Saskatchewan Diamond Jubilee Corporation to make plans for celebrating the event. 
 

The Jubilee Corporation and the Celebrate Saskatchewan Committee of Citizens will assist local 
communities in initiating projects and will provide staff to co-ordinate activities. 
 

Celebrate Saskatchewan will have some formal activities, but its main emphasis will be on 
communities, where people of all walks of life will honour the past, celebrate the present and plan for the 
future. 
 
CANADA 
 

As we enter a new year and a new decade, we are conscious of the great challenges facing our nation. 
 

For Canada, the 1980s will be a decade of decision. 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

2 

Next spring the people of Quebec will vote on their government’s referendum. Whatever the 
outcome, my Government will remain committed to a strong and united Canada. My Ministers have 
consistently stated that in a united Canada there is no place for sovereignty association. They have also 
maintained that the status quo must be changed in favour of a new Confederation bargain that will better 
meet the needs of all Canadians. 
 

We will continue to play an active and constructive part in the building of a renewed Confederation. 
 

Federal-provincial relations continue to be an increasingly important part of government activity in 
Canada. My Ministers have had a number of meetings with their counterparts in the new federal government 
to discuss economic development, agriculture, transportation, communications, oil pricing and other matters. 
 

My Government looks forward to working with the new federal government, and will continue to 
promote Saskatchewan’s interests, and the interests of Canada in a constructive and vigorous manner. 
 
CANADIAN ECONOMY 
 

In the immediate future, the prospects for the Canadian economy are not encouraging. 
 

Although unemployment has moderated recently, improvement is likely to be temporary. 
 

Inflations still plagues Canadian families. The impact of soaring interest rates has been especially 
severe on farmers, small businesses and homeowners. 
 
SASKATCHEWAN ECONOMY 
 

In contrast to the national scene, Saskatchewan’s economic prospects are bright. 
 

In 1978, grain crop yields fell some 25 per cent below the record levels of last year. but because of 
the good quality of the crop and strong world prices, farm cash receipts increased. Personal income in the 
province increased faster than in the nation as a whole. In addition, strong investment activity helped to keep 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate among the lowest in Canadian. 
 

The provincial economy is not immune to the effects of high prices and high interest rates. However, 
prices for farm products are expected to hold firm. The mining expansion now in progress will add to export 
earnings. Accordingly, while it will take some time for the effects to work through the economy, prospects 
for income growth in the early 1980s are promising. 
 

The provincial population is expected to grow as more workers and their families are attracted to the 
province. 
 
AGRICULTURE 
 

Saskatchewan has some of the world’s most productive farmers. The inability of our 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

3 

transportation system to deliver, however, has forced the Canadian Wheat Board repeatedly to turn 
away international customers. 
 

My Government will introduce legislation to continue the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
which will purchase 1000 hopper cars, at a cost of $50 million, to be placed under the jurisdiction of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. These cars will move an additional 60 million bushels of prairie grain per year. 

 
The cars will be manufactured at Canadian plants. The purchase will be financed from resource 

revenues, a direct return to the farmers and people of Saskatchewan of my Government’s resource policies. 
 
With renewed determination, my Ministers will act to protect the basic rights of farmers: equal 

opportunity through orderly marketing, and equal rate for equal distance through the Crow Rate. These are 
the bases, not only of our economic prosperity, but also of our health communities — a social structure 
unique to Saskatchewan. 
 

We are increasingly concerned abut the federal government’s indecision on the Crow rate. We are 
pledged to support the Crow rate and will oppose schemes which transfer additional costs to farmers. 
 

The Canadian Wheat Board predicts that sales will increase by 50 per cent by 1985. A corresponding 
increase in production will require research into soil salinity, crop rotation and week control. We must seek 
to increase production without an over-reliance on pesticides and chemical fertilizers. 
 

We will press the federal government for income stabilization programs for the cattle producer and 
the hog producer as well as for the grain farmer. 
 
ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES 
 

My Government will follow its present policy of managing the development of energy and mineral 
resources for the economic and social benefit of Saskatchewan. 
 

The production and sales records set by the potash industry in 1978 will be surpassed in 1979. World 
demand for potash is expected to increase steadily in the next decade. 
 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s expansion program will assure that this province 
maintains its share of the world market. 
 

Petroleum development in Saskatchewan is increasing dramatically. More than a thousand wells have 
been drilled in 1979. 
 

We are pleased by the very high level of exploration for heavy oil and by the efforts made to develop 
and improve existing recovery technology. We will continue our current incentives to encourage further 
development in heavy oil. 
 

My Ministers are giving high priority to maintaining an assured supply of petroleum products for 
Saskatchewan farmers and consumers. 
 

As oil exploration intensifies, my Government remains firmly opposed to the federal 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

4 

government’s proposed dismantling of the one publicly owned national oil company in Canada. We 
believe that the role of Petro-Canada is too important to be lost and will press this view on the federal 
government. 
 

Exploration for uranium in Saskatchewan remains very active. Mines at Uranium City and Rabbit 
Lake shipped uranium valued at $260 million in 1978. The value of shipments will be similar this year, and 
should increase when the Cluff Lake mine begins operation in 1981. 

 
Through the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, my Government has the option of 

public participation in new mines in Northern Saskatchewan. As of July 1, it was involved in 245 
exploration and development projects. Thus we are assured a public presence to monitor and control events 
at each stage of mining development. 
 

My Government recognizes that some of our future ability to provide energy depends on our present 
ability to conserve. During the upcoming Session you will be advised of new initiatives to assist 
Saskatchewan citizens to save energy. 
 
NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

In Northern Saskatchewan, my Government will continue to implement the major recommendations 
of the Bayda Commission. 
 

We will maximize the benefits to northern people, and to the people of Saskatchewan, while 
minimizing the costs of such development as much as possible. 
 

Very recently my Government entered into an agreement with the federal government which will 
provide funding for the development of industrial parks like the one recently announced in Creighton. The 
Northern Economic Development Act will be made more responsive to the needs of northern people. 
 

My Government will place an increased emphasis on support to northern schools. Greater attention 
will be paid to the training of northern people in resource development skills so that more people will be able 
to take advantage of employment opportunities in the North. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan, 
through its newly created Manpower Secretariat, will closely monitor mineral developments to make sure the 
developers meet their northern hiring commitments. 
 

Capital construction in the North will continue at a strong pace. 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 

During this Session my Government will propose an Environment Assessment Act. This Act will 
require that full consideration be given to the environmental impact of any project and that necessary 
mitigation measures be established. 
 

Our province will thus continue to have Canada’s most comprehensive and open assessment 
procedure — a procedure that is applied to both public and private developments. 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

5 

This Assembly will be asked to consider amendments to The Department of the Environment Act. 
These amendments will provide statutory requirements for reporting spills of hazardous materials and taking 
prompt clean-up action. 
 
HEALTH AND RECREATION 
 

Improvement of health care facilities remains a major commitment of my Government. With this is 
coupled a growing emphasis on maintaining health, in part through more opportunities for healthful outdoor 
recreation. 
 

In the current year, a Health Protection Division has been created within the Department of Health to 
investigate environmental health hazards. 

 
One of our main interests in the coming year will be to improve services for injured workers and the 

handicapped. In this regard, we await with considerable interest the report of the Task Force on 
Rehabilitation. 
 

Hospitals in Saskatoon, The Battlefords and Regina will be improved further, and renovations will 
also be made to medical facilities in smaller communities. Community Hospitals at Carrot River and La 
Loche are expected to be completed in 1980-81. 
 

In recent years, the number of Saskatchewan people seeking recreational opportunities in provincial 
parks has increased dramatically. Over the same period, participation in a variety of winter recreation 
activities has flourished. 
 

My Government believes this growing interest in the outdoors is a positive move toward a healthier 
society. We are giving special attention to our parks and to the adequacy of their recreational facilities. 
 
SOCIAL SERVICES 
 

In the coming year, my Government will continue to improve and expand social programs. 
 

We will place particular emphasis on improving employment opportunities for low-income 
individuals and families. 
 

Over the next few months, my Minister will undertake a major evaluation of our day care program. 
This evaluation will give direction to Saskatchewan day care by suggesting better methods of community 
and parent participation. 
 

My Government will expand and develop the new Home Care program. This program provides 
services which enable the elderly and the handicapped to remain in their homes. It will be one of the most 
extensive and comprehensive programs of its kind in North America. 
 

My Government has taken steps to provide special facilities for handicapped citizens in its newest 
public buildings. The Department of Government Services is current surveying all provincial government 
buildings to assess the need for additional provisions for the handicapped. The specifications set by the 
Department will apply to all provincial government buildings, and it is out hope that they will be adhered to 
voluntarily outside Government. 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

6 

EDUCATION AND CO-OPERATION 
 

Saskatchewan has long been recognized for the high standard of education provided to our province’s 
young people. To maintain and improve that standard, new initiatives will be taken in 1980. 
 

The social studies curriculum will be revised, and other aspects of the school curriculum will be 
evaluated. 
 

The special needs of Native students will be further recognized through new initiatives to be 
developed in co-operation with school boards and native organizations. 

 
The problems arising from the declining size of the school population will be examined co-

operatively with school boards and teachers. This examination will give particular attention to the special 
needs of smaller rural schools. 
 

The strength of Saskatchewan’s system of provincial teacher bargaining was confirmed again this 
year, with the conclusion of a new contract. In particular, the contract provides for secure and equitable 
pensions and other benefits into the 1980s. 
 

You will be asked to consider amendments to The Teachers Superannuation Act and The Teachers’ 
Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act arising from the successful conclusion of these negotiations. 
 

Saskatchewan’s community colleges and technical institutes are facing sharp expanded demands, 
arising from rapid economic development. 
 

My Minister of Continuing Education is concluding a review of technical and vocational training on 
order to identify new training needs and new training approaches. 
 

Post-secondary education and training programs will continue to recognize economic, social, and 
environmental needs, as is illustrated by the creation of an environmental monitoring course at Kelsey 
Institute and a radiation protection course at Saskatchewan Technical Institute. 
 

In our Jubilee year, my Government will promote student tours and youth seminars to educate young 
people on the role of co-operatives in our society. We will also observe a Co-operative Week in recognition 
of the importance of co-operatives in our history and in our economy. 
 

My Minister will continue to offer co-operative resource materials to the educational system. 
 
JUSTICE AND CONSUMER RIGHTS 
 

Steps will be taken in the coming months to improve the court system in Saskatchewan. Five 
objectives will guide the changes to be introduced: 
 

– Uniformity of Service 
– Expansion of Service 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

7 

– Simplification 
– Accessibility 
– Efficiency. 

 
You will be asked to consider legislation consolidating all security-related statues in the form of The 

Personal Property Security Act. Legislation will also be presented to revise The Jury Act and The Libel and 
Slander Act. 
 

My Government will place before you measures to strengthen consumer rights and consumer 
protections. These will be proposed in amendments to The Department of Consumer Affairs Act and The 
Consumer Products Warranties Act. 
 
INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE 
 

Saskatchewan’s businesses and industries have expanded and diversified at an unprecedented pace 
during the decade of the ’70s. 

 
To maintain this momentum, my Government is helping Saskatchewan businesses, industries, and 

communities to take full advantage of the many opportunities created by the development of the Province’s 
natural resources. 
 

The Industrial Benefits from the Resource Development Program is assisting local businesses and 
industries to supply products and services required by resource development companies. 
 

The Small Industry Development and Product Development Programs are encouraging 
manufacturing companies to expand and develop new products. 
 

The Min Street Development Program is assisting smaller Saskatchewan centres to revitalize their 
business districts. 
 

Marketing support is being provided to Saskatchewan industries whose wide range of products — 
modern electronic equipment to farm machinery — are now sold around the world. 
 

Saskatchewan business people and their entrepreneurial skills have been a moving force behind the 
expansion and diversification of the province’s economy in the ’70s. My Government shares the business 
community’s confidence in our future, and will continue to support business and industrial development in 
the ’80s. 
 
MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS 
 

My Government will introduce legislation to formalize the division of the Department of Municipal 
Affairs into two separate departments — Urban Affairs and Rural Affairs. This division reflects the growing 
need to respond more precisely to the interests of each. At the same time, there will remain areas of inter-
municipal concern which will require the closest co-operation between the two departments. 
 

My Government believes in strong local governments. Revenue sharing has provided municipalities 
with greater autonomy. In 1979-80 grants to urban municipalities reached $73 million, of which almost $50 
million was unconditional. These grants will continue to grow as the economy grows. 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

8 

My Government will introduce a new capital grants program similar to the Community Capital Fund. 
This new capital program, along with operational Revenue Sharing will provide local governments with 
unprecedented levels of unconditional financial assistance. 
 

Legislation to provide for a Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw will be placed before you. 
 
LABOUR 
 

The healthy state of the Saskatchewan economy is reflected by the average employed labour force, 
which over the first nine months of 1979 was 14,000 higher than the average for the corresponding period of 
1978. The 1979 average of 413,000 represents the highest nine-month average number of employed persons 
on record in Saskatchewan. 
 

At the same time, Saskatchewan continued to experience low levels of unemployment. Throughout 
1979, the Saskatchewan rate has been consistently the lowest or second lowest in the country. 

 
To permit minimum wage earners to keep pace with rising living costs, the Saskatchewan minimum 

wage was increased to $3.50 an hour on October 1 of this year; and will be raised to $3.65 an hour on May 1, 
1980. 
 

In the coming year, the Workers’ Compensation Board will take new steps to encourage safer 
working conditions. A system of merit rebates will be introduced rewarding those employers with excellent 
accident-free experience. 
 

Amendments to The Workers’ Compensation Act will be placed before you. 
 
PENSIONS 
 

During this Session, you will be asked to consider amendments to The Pension Benefits Act, which 
will strengthen the rights of those who contribute to employer pension plans. 
 

Also to be placed before you are amendments to The Public Service Superannuation Act, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act and The Municipal Employees Superannuation Act. 
 
HIGHWAYS 
 

Saskatchewan has demonstrated its commitment to improved highway transformation by a number of 
major projects. Highways serving the north have been completed or upgraded, and a number of bridges are 
under construction. 
 

A third major provincial airport is nearing completion at Buffalo Narrows. It will assist commercial 
and private air traffic, as well as provide fire protection in the commercial forest area of Saskatchewan. 
 

My Government will continue its financial and technical assistance for improved urban transportation 
services. 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

9 

The greatest challenge facing highways transportation is that of safety. During the past five years on 
Saskatchewan highways there have been substantial decreases in the number of serious injuries and most 
importantly, in the fatality rate. 
 

We will persist in efforts to expend highway safety. 
 

In this International Year of the Child, my Government is pleased to announce that regulations will 
be introduced requiring all children under five to be secured properly in child restraining devices and seat 
belts while riding in vehicles. 
 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 
1980, will be submitted to you. 
 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with the full confidence that you will favourably 
discharge your duties and responsibilities. 
 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its 
deliberations. 
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 
Presentation to Mr. John Lewis Solomon 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly of the following vacancy in the representation, namely in 
the constituency of Regina North-West due to the resignation of E.C. Whelan, Esquire. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has received from the chief electoral 
officer a certificate of the following election and the return, namely of John Lewis Solomon, Esquire, as 
member for the constituency of Regina North-West. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the honor to present Mr. John Lewis 
Solomon, member for the constituency of Regina North-West who has taken the oath, signed the roll and 
asks permission to take his seat. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Introduction of Pages 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Jacqueline Deighton, Dianne Emmins, Rhonda 
Fenwick, Alyson Graham and Joyce Gwilliam will be pages during the present session. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 29, 1979 

 

10 

MOTIONS 
 
Speech from the Throne 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General): 
 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor be taken into consideration on Monday next. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Messer, (Minster of Mineral Resources): 
 

That he Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly be printed after first having been perused by Mr. 
Speaker, that he do appoint the printing thereof and that no person but such as he shall appoint do 
presume to print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Members to Compose Lists for Select Standing Committees 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Municipal 
Affairs (Urban)): 
 

That Messrs. Dyck, Allen, Berntson, Birkbeck and Mostoway be constituted a select special 
committee to prepare and report, with all convenient speed, lists of members to compose the select 
standing committees of the Assembly, provided under Rule No. 86. 

 
That the said select standing committees be severally empowered to examine and inquire into all 
such matters and things as may be referred to them by this Assembly and to report from time to time 
their observations thereon with power to send for persons, papers, and records and to examine 
witnesses under oath. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:43 p.m. 


