






















































Hansard: February 28, 1979


103 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
February 28, 1979 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to introduce to you and to 
members of this House, a group of 16 Grade 8 students from Dana Radar Base, near Bruno — 
particularly since they took their courage in their hands and drove down in this kind of weather to view 
the proceedings of this House as well as to visit other parts of the city of Regina. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Charlotte Ruth and by Master Corporal Coffin and Corporal O’Connell, as well as Mrs. 
Loreny and Mrs. Dosken. I am going to meet with them after the question period for a brief while to 
answer any questions that they have. I know that members will join with me in extending our welcome 
to them and wishing them a very safe trip home when they leave later on this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission Purchase 
 
MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Kaeding). Can the Minister of Agriculture advise this Assembly whether the Saskatchewan Land Bank 
Commission has made an offer to purchase the north half of 17 — 26 — 18 west of the third from one 
Tom Turner, Plato, Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think I will have to take notice of 
that. I wouldn’t be aware of whether the Land Bank Commission has offered to purchase this particular 
piece of land. 
 
MR. ANDREWS: — A supplementary. While you are verifying that particular question, would you 
also verify whether or not the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission also made an offer to purchase 
Caroncrest Farms Limited, for the same land, approximately two months earlier? And would you 
determine or not the price offered was $137,600? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I will have to take notice of that. I am sure that I wouldn’t know 
those figures offhand and I would have to take notice. 
 
MR. ANDREWS: — Mr. Speaker, one further question to the Minister of Agriculture. Would you also 
determine whether or not in these particular offers, this particular person was not trying to circumvent 
the act and obtain land . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Next question. 
 

Squaw Rapids Loop Line 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
104 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SPC. On your 
loop line that is to be built joining the Squaw Rapids power project to the hydro project in Manitoba, it 
has been recommended by your one-man committee, the Dean of Engineering from the University of 
Saskatchewan and the environment board that you take a different route than the one proposed by SPC. 
Can you tell me if there is a different route? Are you going to take the route that they are advising or are 
you going to take the SPC as originally planned? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation provided to the Department of the Environment, as is the policy of the government, and to 
Mr. Nikiforuk, who is the one-man committee reviewing, if you like investigating this matter, the 
proposed routes that SPC had thought were practical. They had an ordering of preference in regard to 
those routes. It is correct that route B, the preferred route by SPC was not recommended by the 
Department of the Environment nor by Mr. Nikiforuk, the dean at the College of Engineering in 
Saskatoon. It is the intention of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to follow a route that was partially 
proposed by Mr. Nikiforuk, route E. He had proposed a slight modification to be called, if you like, the 
modified E but he did stipulate that if for some reason SPC was not able to follow it within the time 
frame that it had to build the line or if for some reason SPC was not able to get sufficient material to 
follow the modified route because it was longer and more material and more time was needed, that he 
and the Department of the Environment would agree to the route E which was initially proposed by the 
corporation but not its first choice. So at the present time the short answer is that SPC is, for all intents 
and purposes, following the recommendation not only of Mr. Nikiforuk but of the Department of the 
Environment in constructing on route E. 
 

Conflict of Interest — Mediation Board 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to ask a question of the minister 
responsible for the Provincial Mediation Board and I rise to ask the question in defence of the civil 
service of this province. Mr. Speaker, would the minister not agree that within the last six months a 
member of the Provincial Mediation Board was fired because of conflict of interest and subsequently 
was hired by the federal Liberal government? 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — In answer to the question, I know of no 
one on the Provincial Mediation Board that was fired. If the individual who was working for us and who 
resigned is working for the federal government I have no knowledge of it. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. On the contrary as the minister is very much aware, 
a man by the name of Peter Daniel was fired, relieved or whatever terms you would like to use, of his 
duties as a member of the Provincial Mediation Board. And because of that, Mr. Minister, and because 
of the reply by the Premier of this province in response to a question from the Leader of the Opposition, 
that he will not immediately introduce conflict of interest legislation pertaining to ministers, I ask the 
question Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Next question. The member for Swift Current. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Then I would ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
regarding this matter if in light of the failure of the Premier to answer for his departments and his own 
offices, will this minister then come in and provide us with 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
105 

conflict of interest guidelines to protect the civil servants of this province? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — May I repeat; so if the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) listens and 
hears this time, no one was fired, it was a resignation. The resignation was handed in by the individual. 
There was no conflict of interest that he indicated or I indicated in his resignation. I have no knowledge 
of what he’s talking about. He’s making a case out of pure cloth and there’s just nothing to it and he 
knows it because we discussed it. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for the Provincial Mediation Board knows 
very right well why that member resigned and he is refusing to tell this House here today. I ask the 
minister one more time, will you now today tell this Assembly why did that member of the Provincial 
Mediation Board resign? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, he’s finally admitted the truth but if he resigned that was his decision, 
not ours, and I think that should be very clear. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mercury Contamination 
 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources. In light of recent decisions to allow netting of whitefish on 
Diefenbaker Lake and in view of the problems mercury contamination is causing in many of our lakes 
and river systems, has the minister’s department lifted the mercury contamination warning on the South 
Saskatchewan River and the lake or are sportsmen to continue to fish for fun? 
 
HON. A. MATSALLA (Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the 
mercury content in the Qu’Appelle River system is there but it’s at a level that is safe for the fishing of 
whitefish and selling of it on a commercial basis. The reason for that is that the whitefish has different 
eating habits than the other fish and, therefore, it is a much safer fish for sale purposes. But, as far as the 
rest of the species of the fish, the river system is going to continue as a fishing for fun system. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that the minister is not aware that other species of fish, 
namely those accidentally caught by the nets, are being given to needy families in districts of the lakes 
and rivers. Is your department allowing the poor in this province to be eating contaminated fish? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, no we’re not allowing the sale of other species of fish for 
commercial purposes. Nevertheless, the warning is clear that in so far as the other species of fish are 
concerned, it’s fishing for fun and, in so far as the whitefish are concerned, our research indicates that 
that fish is not of the level of the mercury content of the other fish. 
 
MR. HAM: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I am afraid the minister misunderstands. The 
commercial fishermen are giving fish being caught accidentally to poor and needy families in the 
districts of those rivers and lakes. They are in fact eating mercury-contaminated fish. Will you see that 
this is stopped? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, I do not think there is anything we can do if someone decides to 
give some fish to some family that would like to have fish for a meal. I do not 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
106 

think there is any way we can control that. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — In the light of the minister’s suggestion that the Qu’Appelle lakes and river system 
is a fishing for fun area and yet some fish are being taken out of it for commercial use. Why then, does 
the minister’s brochure on fishing grounds in the province of Saskatchewan stipulate for the North 
Saskatchewan River systems, and more specifically, the Nipawin area, that it is a fishing for fun area, 
while at the same time that same brochure does not stipulate that the Qu’Appelle River system in the 
Qu’Appelle Lakes is a fishing for fun area? Is there some attempt by the minister to differentiate 
between that North Saskatchewan River system, which he says is a fishing for fun area in his brochure, 
and that the Qu’Appelle River system which is only a fishing for fun area in this House? 
 
HON. A. MATSALLA (Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the 
brochure that the hon. member is referring to indicates fish which is done by angling. It doesn’t refer to 
fish that could be caught by net. It strictly refers to angling species. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, surely the minister jests in what he says. 
He presents to the people of Saskatchewan, and of the world, who want to fish in Saskatchewan waters, 
the fact that the Nipawin area on the North Saskatchewan River is a fishing for fun area and that the 
Qu’Appelle River system in the Qu’Appelle Lakes system is not a fishing for fun area — it is a proper 
fishing area. Therefore he is telling the anglers that they can fish in the Qu’Appelle system but they can 
only fish for fun in Nipawin, and at the same time you’re telling this House that the Qu’Appelle system 
is a fish for fun area. Would the minister once again please say why have you made Nipawin and district 
and the Qu’Appelle River system different when in this House you say they are both fish for fun areas? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, the level of contamination is higher in the Saskatchewan River 
system than it is in the Qu’Appelle River system, but waters in the Nipawin area that the hon. member is 
referring to are part of the Saskatchewan River system. 
 

Changes to Education System 
 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education (Mr. Shillington). 
 
As this is the International Year of the Child, and much mention was made of this in the throne speech, 
and also it was the theme of the celebration at the opening of the legislature, I would like the minister to 
explain why there is very little, if any, mention of serious changes to the education system mentioned in 
the throne speech. 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education): — We aren’t, Mr. Speaker, planning any 
extensive amendments to The Education Act. We are still in the process of bringing in regulations to that 
act. I am meeting with teachers and trustees, and they haven’t indicated to me that they see any pressing 
changes needed in The Education Act, and I think until we see some need for some changes we won’t be 
making them simply for the sake of creating some activity in any given year. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I did mention little or no mention of 
education, and the only thing that I could find in the throne speech was 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
107 

education along the co-op principles. Being a co-op member myself, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask 
the Minister of Education whether in these times when drugs, and drug abuse in the schools of 
Saskatchewan, when alcohol is running rampant in our schools, when sex and smoking are problems are 
there not more serious topics than co-op philosophy to be offered in the curriculums of the 
Saskatchewan schools? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Another Billy Graham. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would recommend . . . listen to this . . . I would recommend to the hon. 
member that he read past annual reports. He will find in there that we have had such a program for a 
couple of years that’s ongoing. I might also add, for the edification of the hon. member that that isn’t the 
case in any province governed by a Conservative government. It is the only program that exists. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to draw to the attention of the minister that if he 
studies the curriculums of the Saskatchewan schools he will see that there are ample opportunities for 
teaching co-op principles. And, I cite the Grade 12 social studies course, I cite the economic . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll take the next question. 
 

Reference to Horn Cattlemen’s Fund 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question for the Minister of Agriculture. On January 23, the 
Saskatchewan Horn Cattle Check-off Committee advised the minister of a $95,407 allotment from the 
horn fund. Has the minister signed the cheques and processed them to where they are supposed to go? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, any of the recommendations that have been made to me by either the 
check-off committee or the horn cattle fund committee have been approved by me. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is the minister suggesting that he has not changed them in any way, shape or form 
as he attempted to do years ago on the cattle check-off system? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I have made no change. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can we now have your assurances that from 
now on these committees can continue to have that response from the minister? When they make 
recommendations you will not take it upon yourself to be better than the people you appoint to these 
committees — appointed as representatives and you will continue to approve their recommendations 
without change? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, my job as minister is to insure that the act under which they operate 
is properly taken care of, and properly dealt with. If the recommendations are within the act, certainly I 
will not interfere. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary. Then why have you interfered in the past, and why are you 
interfering in the cattle check-off as indicated by the Western Producer? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I think the interference I made in the past, if I made any 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
108 

interference at all, was justified. 
 

Tommy Douglas Building 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Question to the Minister of Government Services. Mr. 
Minister, since you have now received the preliminary report from Dr. Atharle, and since that report 
indicates a very serious condition in the sub-basement of the T.C. Douglas Building, have you made a 
decision and are you now prepared to move these people out of that area into more suitable conditions 
and a more suitable area? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Government Services): — In answer to the hon. member’s 
question. I think you are aware of the fact that the Department of Government Services has made a 
number of changes and brought in an engineer prior to the Occupational Health and Safety Division of 
the Department of Labour’s engaging an environmental engineer. He was in the city on Thursday, 
Friday and Saturday of last week conducting some exhaustive tests. Tests are continuing and it is my 
understanding that the environmental engineer will be returning after some of those tests have been 
made and some conclusions have been drawn. At this point in time office services employees have been 
removed from the quarters and are being utilized in other facilities that have been provided by the 
Department of Government Services and when the problem has been rectified the necessary decisions 
will be made at that time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I think I understood the answer. Have they all been moved out 
now? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I understand that there are no employees who are being housed there on an ongoing 
basis. I believe some photographic equipment that is mounted in the sub-basement is being used from 
time to time but the clerical staff and other staff have been removed and it is my understanding that there 
is no one permanently housed in those quarters. 
 
I wonder if the member will bear in mind the fact that there are a number of other places and a number 
of other locales in Canada and elsewhere where entire shopping centres are located beneath the surface 
of the ground. Montreal for example, with an entire subway system operating on top. So it is not an 
insurmountable problem. There are some difficulties I believe with the ventilation system but every 
indication seems to point to a resolution of the problem, hopefully in the not too distant future. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I presume, Mr. Minister, that you have read this 
telex from Dr. Atharle. The thing that concerns me is the area where he suggests justifiable concern was 
expressed about the lack of natural lighting and the existence of the parkade above the printing rooms. 
Are you suggesting we are going to move the parkade out? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think the hon. member for Regina South is putting a connotation on the telex 
which actually is not there. I think if he will read it carefully he will note that Dr. Atharle has drawn 
attention to some contributing factors in an indication of the problem. He is not suggesting that the 
problem is an insoluble one or that the premises should not be occupied in the future. I think you are 
putting a construction on the telex that just simply is not there. I have read it carefully myself. 
 

Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
109 

MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation. 
 
This council, I understand, was set up to provide government dollars to put into a fund as a matching 
fund for charitable organizations to use for overseas development purposes. Can the minister tell me if 
the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation is an independent body or are taxes controlled 
by this government? 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — An 
independent body. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Are you aware that the Red Cross now is trying to get matching funds from the 
Government of Saskatchewan by not going through the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-
operation because of its involvement in political arenas? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I am not aware of the Red Cross. I am aware of the withdrawal of one of the 
organizations, a UNICEF organization, because they had some arguments with the internal operation of 
SCIC in relation to their educational activities. That is one of the reasons why we felt that they should 
rectify the problems within their own organization before coming back to us for increased grants. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Red Cross and UNICEF have both declared that they 
cannot work with the Saskatchewan Council for Co-operation and International Development because of 
the political activism of that council. Now if it is set up to be an independent body, then can I ask this 
government to take a look at what is going on within that group? If the group is not doing the proper job, 
then take steps to correct that job so that these groups — UNICEF, Red Cross and other responsible 
groups — can have co-operation. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, when the UNICEF organization withdrew from SCIC they came to us 
and asked for matching grants. We said no, those matching grants would be given only to SCIC and that 
they should stay within the organization or should re-apply in order that they could make alterations if 
they disagreed with the educational matters which were being dealt with within the organization. How 
can they be independent if we go and interfere with them? We are not going to interfere with them. We 
are simply saying that they must stay within the organization or re-apply. I hope they will re-apply and 
will go back into the organization and put their point of view. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think that any group of this type who are set up as an 
independent body by government must have some guidelines to go by. If they have those guidelines and 
their guidelines are that they are not to be politically active, then can they not be expected to operate in a 
non-political arena? My question is, Mr. Speaker, I would like the government to see if they are 
following their guidelines and give us an answer in this House? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I can check further on the matter but I am sure they are following the 
guidelines related to the fact that only a portion of the money that gathers from non-government 
organizations and matched by the government is spent for educational purposes. I think the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose would have to agree that within the organization itself they must settle their 
differences — if they have differences of opinion with respect to the educational factors which are 
carried out. Frankly, there are a number of organizations in there, church organizations and others, 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
110 

and as far as I know UNICEF and the Lutheran Brethren were the only two who came to me and 
expressed concern about it. We said to them stay within the organization, fight for your point of view 
and win it. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the minister has just announced 
that the SCIC is independent of government. How do the members of the board of SCIC get acquainted? 
 
MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, we just finished saying that SCIC was not a 
government organization; and since we are not here to give general information to members opposite 
that they can find out from reading the press, or at the Legislative Library for those who wish to pursue 
that route . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And hot lines. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . And hot lines as he says. It’s in no sense our function generally to provide 
information so far as I’m aware. It’s not within the official knowledge of the Government of 
Saskatchewan how SCIC chooses its officers. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, the, Mr. Speaker. If the organization is definitely not 
appointed by the cabinet or by the Premier, as the Premier is certainly suggesting, then is the Premier 
suggesting to this Assembly that an organization that has no appointment or input from the provincial 
government is in fact, administering provincial government funds for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Oh, come on! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — That’s true. If this organization is administering government funds, what 
guidelines has the government set down for that organization to administer the government funds? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The answer to the first one is, of course, yes. There are great numbers of 
organizations which are not appointed by the Government of Saskatchewan which in your language, 
administer government funds. Every school board in the province in your language, administers 
government funds and there are many others. With respect to the question asked by the hon. member 
when he was standing, I will say this: the organizations who are operating in this area, the Red Cross, 
the Lutheran World Relief, the Mennonite World Relief and others came together, and represented to us 
that they were all members of an organization — and others joined. They put forward guidelines, and I 
don’t have them in my head, but they were going to devote a given percentage to education and the great 
bulk to specific overseas relief work and a given percentage to organizations as I recall it. And based 
upon that internal guideline, the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation operates. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. White (Regina Wascana) 
for an address in reply and the proposed amendment thereto moved 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
111 

by Mr. Collver. 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, when I entered the debate yesterday, I took the 
opportunity to extend to you my congratulations on once again being selected as the Speaker of this 
legislature. I said then and I say again, that in my judgement, you discharged your duties with ability and 
impartiality in the past and I’m confident that you will similarly serve this new legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I also tendered my congratulations to the mover of the motion, the hon. member 
for Regina Wascana and the seconder of the motion, the hon. member for Shaunavon. I said that I was 
proud that our party could attract men of the calibre of the member for Wascana and the member for 
Shaunavon and that judging from their performance to date, I am confident that they will make an 
important contribution to their constituency, their province and their country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I went on to congratulate all of the new members of the House — there were 19 
in all who are members of this House and who weren’t members of the last House. That indicates a very 
high rate of turnover; it indicates that to be in the public service of the people of Saskatchewan in this 
legislature is a position which offers many rewards but does not offer security of tenure and that when 
judging whether or not a person is going to enter public life he must take that into account. Accordingly 
when we are judging how we ought to provide for prerequisites for our members that too ought to be 
taken into account. 
 
I want to say a few words about some of the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Collver). He upbraided us for the way we conducted the election. He ascribed our success to the 
posthumous talents of Dr. Lenin and Mr. Machiavelli. I am surprised that he overlooked Adolph Hitler 
and Genghis Khan. They would be equally credible. I think he indicated that Conservatives are 
unwilling to admit that the public accepted our policies and rejected theirs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And because they are unwilling to accept the fact that the public adopted our 
policies and rejected theirs, they are looking for scapegoats. They are trotting out stories to the effect 
that civil servants have been brow-beaten, that old people have been hoodwinked. But they name no 
names and they name no places; just blanket charges unsubstantiated by facts. Then, Mr. Speaker, he 
descended to a low which I would have thought we would not see in this legislature. He repeated a story 
alleging that a member of the cabinet was a homosexual. Then he called upon me to deny it. I say that it 
is not worthy of a denial. I am not going to indulge his prurient interest, his titillation with the 
sensational; nor am I going to allow myself to get into the position that the Leader of the Opposition can 
come into this House and make any charge and then call upon someone to deny it. I say to him and to 
every member opposite, if any one of you dares to go outside this House and name a name, I predict you 
will have full opportunity to prove what you allege . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
112 

MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . you will have full opportunity in a court of law. 
 
To the Leader of the Opposition I say this: you have raised this matter in the House without any 
evidence to support it; you have raised it in a speech in which you purported to be saying that we should 
be elevating the moral tone of Saskatchewan. You have raised it in this way without a shred or shadow 
of evidence. Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) does not have the courage, I 
would go even farther, doesn’t have the decency, to go outside this House and name a name, then I say 
to him and I say to all members opposite I extend to you my sympathy because in that case the member 
for Nipawin and all his party has a problem and I predict it will come to be known as the PC problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I will leave that matter because I do not feel that it is worthy of further comment 
in this House. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition started his remarks by saying that his party would stand up for what they 
believe in, would present an alternative program, but I listened and my overwhelming impression was 
that his approach was negative. I heard no attempt to put forward an alternative program, a positive 
program. Yes, of course, he repeated the platitudes that he stood for justice to all. I make that point, 
justice before the law for all, nobody to be victimized. Then it seemed to me that he selected out 
homosexuals for victimization, but I leave that aside. He repeated platitudes to which I am sure we 
would all ascribe but when it came to putting forward a program in a positive form I listened in vain. 
 
I’ll give an example. He gave a litany of the problems of this and every other society and he mentioned 
gambling. Did he give the policy of his party on gambling? There are some hard questions which I am 
going to invite him to answer in this House. Does he favor elimination of all lotteries? If so, I wish he 
would say so. People would then know. Does he favor restricted lotteries operated largely by non-profit 
organizations as is the Saskatchewan model, which is clearly the policy of this government? If he favors 
that I wish he would say so. I wish he would, in his words, stand up and be counted. Does he favor the 
widespread use of Las Vegas-type casinos that we find in Edmonton and Calgary? If that is his policy I 
wish he would stand up and be counted. Does he favor even more open gambling? Now that is a current 
issue. It is one on which the Conservative Party could state a policy, could tell the people of 
Saskatchewan where they stand. But I listened to the Leader of the Opposition and I don’t know where 
his party stands because he is afraid to say, he is afraid to offer an alternative. He is afraid to put forward 
his proposal in a clear concise way. He is in fact afraid on this and many other issues to stand up and be 
counted. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we believe our policies are right but we readily acknowledge 
we could be wrong. I say to the opposition that your alternative policies may have merit but we’ll never 
know unless you present them. Government proposes legislation and proposes a budget and in this way 
outlines its policy. The opposition outlines its policy in major speeches by its leader and in the 
resolutions which he puts on the order paper giving it the opportunity to set out with clarity where it 
stands so that the people may know. In the resolutions, as I pointed out yesterday, Mr. Speaker, of the 
16, I believe, resolutions put forward on the order paper by the opposition, no less than 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
113 

15 start out by condemning and then do not name the policy which the Conservative Party advocates. 
 
I pointed out that when we were in opposition we put forward positive resolutions dealing with an 
Independent Boundaries Commission, dealing with our stand on school taxes, dealing with issue after 
issue, items which found their way into our 1971 election program. I invite any hon. member to look at 
the resolutions on the order paper here and see what positive program the Conservative Party could put 
forward on the basis of those resolutions. In fact we have no word what the party stands for, no attempt 
to set out constructive alternatives. I say whatever the short-term merit of offering no policies to deal 
with hard issues but simply voicing platitudes, sooner or later the public will insist on knowing where 
the Conservative party stands. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And then, Mr. Speaker, what I call the PC problem will become clearer. The 
opposition will be tested and they will be found wanting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal a little more fully with what I regard as the broad questions facing the people 
of Saskatchewan. I want to put the position of our government, first, in a somewhat philosophic context 
and then go on to more specific issues. 
 
Briefly put, the role of the Government of Saskatchewan is to assist the people of our province to 
achieve the aspirations they set for themselves. Many of these aspirations are personal to each citizen 
and as such are not the direct concern of government but many are aspirations which we share in 
common, in which we must seek to fulfil through our organizations, through our churches, our unions, 
our governments. And government is one of the organizations by which people seek to fulfil their 
aspirations. Governments have a role, too, in setting some rules so that in seeking our own goals those of 
us who are strong do not trample those who are weak. All this I think is clear. 
 
Now what goals do we seek for Saskatchewan? What is our framework for Saskatchewan? For my part, 
I would like to see our province be a place where rural values can be preserved, a place where 
opportunities for fellowship and personal enrichment abound, a place where there will be varied job 
opportunities for our young people, a place where Indian and Metis people who wish to pursue their 
traditional way of life may have an opportunity to do so and those Indian people and Metis people who 
wish to become part of the main stream may also follow that road without being discriminated against, a 
place where our resources will be developed for our benefit and where we, in this place and this 
generation, will recognize our position as stewards of those resources and our obligation to people of 
another place and a future generation, a place where our multicultural roots will be nourished so that 
over time we will create in this province and in this country a new people proud of our future without 
anyway being ashamed of our past. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
114 

MR. BLAKENEY: — A place where people feel comfortable with themselves and their own sense of 
identity and where we willingly take our part in sharing responsibility as citizens of the larger 
community of Canada and the world. 
 
A place where material progress is our servant and tool and neither our goal nor our God. Now that 
would be a society which all of us would be proud of and we will not succeed in building that society — 
of course not — but we can make progress. I believe few places on earth are in a better position than 
Saskatchewan to build that kind of society, a society both tough and compassionate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — What are the things which make our province strong; make it a good place to 
live in? There is a great natural wealth with agricultural land, mineral resources, forests, wildlife — then 
there are our people — as sturdy and self-reliant a group of people as will be found anywhere on the 
face of the globe. There are our social institutions — our churches, our local governments, our schools, 
our universities, our hospitals, our co-ops, our community organizations — as rich and well-developed a 
matrix of self-help organizations as exists for any one million people anywhere in the world. There’s our 
concern for our neighbor — not all that we would like it to be, certainly with large blind spots, but a 
concern which means that we have essentially a compassionate society. 
 
Some years ago, a writer wrote that no place on earth are the good things of life more evenly distributed 
than they are in Saskatchewan. I’m sorry to say that isn’t true, but it approaches truth and it’s a high 
tribute to pay to any society. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to talk this afternoon about some of the things which make our province 
strong which make it so distinctive and so desirable — things which have caused Saskatchewan people 
to walk with a new pride and new self-reliance. The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that because of past 
misfortunes and ignorance about our achievements and our potential, the understanding of our province 
among other Canadians has sometimes been woefully inadequate. This has rubbed off on Saskatchewan 
people. The result has been an undue modesty by our province and its people. This is fortunately 
passing. We do not wish to be jingoistic but undue modesty itself is no virtue. The day of self-
consciousness about being rural, of uncritical admiration of the urban society in the big city — that’s 
passing too. For centuries — from the glories of Athens and Rome to Samuel Johnson’s cryptic 
comment, that he who is tired of London is tired of life. From those very days we have tended to admire 
everything of urban nature. Regarded urban life as the summum bonum of civilized man — is the 
highest pinnacle of civilization. No, we no longer accept that. We know we need not accept it, nor 
should we. 
 
Modern communications have opened up most of the cultural offerings of the city to small town and 
rural dwellers. We still have much work to do to see that we get even more cultural offerings in the rural 
areas. But the western world is in a new era, an era 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
115 

when a gracious, comfortable and satisfying way of life can be built on the strengths of rural and small 
town living with its personal contacts and opportunities for participation plus the great cultural offerings 
of the largest cities brought to us electronically and, in part, by travelling companies. 
 
And this is a new era, a new era for North America and it is certainly a new era for Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan people are responding with a new sense of pride and a new sense of self worth. When I go 
about Canada and elsewhere in the world, I am proud to say that I am from Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I have always been proud to say that, but I say to you that in the last few years 
there is a growing recognition by people all over North America at least, that I have every right to be 
proud. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It’s a good province and working together we can make it better. Let me turn to 
some more specific things, the things which are of greatest importance to our well-being. There are 
really, perhaps, for four or five interconnected, but in part separate. There is our agricultural industry. 
Will it continue to be prosperous and will it be organized in a way which will strengthen our way of life 
or weaken our way of life? Our mineral resources — can we develop them in a way which will benefit 
us and our children? Will the benefits be siphoned off for other parts of the world by multi-national 
resource companies? Our social institutions — can we continue to develop our social institutions and 
our schools and our health services and the like in a way which will reinforce the unique values of 
Saskatchewan life? Or will these institutions be swallowed up in the almost inexorable application of 
management techniques and the like, swallowed up in the monolithic North American culture? I am not 
suggesting, mind you, that all of that is bad or most of that is bad. I am suggesting that we will have to 
work to maintain our distinctiveness. 
 
Fourthly, our Nation, federal-provincial relations. Can we in Canada develop relations between the 
federal government and the provincial governments which strengthen regional development and at the 
same time maintain a strong Canada? Or will we see growing tension, a growing tension which 
enervates the energies of Saskatchewan and of all Canadians and, therefore, makes us weaker? 
 
Now these are vital questions for Saskatchewan people, important questions that I would like this 
legislature to address. 
 
Let me turn now to the first one of those, agriculture. The goal of any government in Saskatchewan must 
be to increase farm production and see that the farmer gets a fair and stable income. When considering 
production our governments and our university do an outstanding job in seeing the farmers have the 
facts on which to base decisions, and farmers make the decisions and make good decisions. 
 
This is an area where up to now we in Saskatchewan have had comparatively little concern. If we 
provided the farmers with information and if the university provided the farmers with information, we 
could pretty well depend on the farmers and the farm organizations to produce and they didn’t need 
much from governments. In the past our problems haven’t been that we couldn’t produce wheat or 
produce other grains, or 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
116 

produce oil seeds, or produce livestock. Our problems have been that we couldn’t sell them or sell them 
at fair prices. Markets were, and by the way, still are absolutely key to our farmers. And I’ll say a little 
more about that in a moment. 
 
There is growing evidence that we may in fact be facing problems in production. Not because our 
present production will drop but rather that our markets will grow and we will want to seize the 
opportunity to fill all those markets if we can. The major developments are in grain. Let me give you a 
few figures to set the framework. I will use the new metric measure of tonnes because that’s what 
everybody is using to discuss export amounts, even though I have some difficulty converting tonnes into 
bushels. My children have few of those difficulties but I confess I still have them. 
 
Canada consumes for livestock and human consumption about 15 million tonnes of grain a year. For 
these purposes, I will lump grain and oilseeds together and call it all grain. Now some of this is 
transported by rail; a lot of it is transported by rail but a lot of it is consumed in the area where it is 
produced. Canada exports about 20 or 21 million tonnes of grain. All of this is transported by rail. So 
about two-thirds of the grain we produce is exported. Of the 20 million tonnes of grain that is exported 
by Canada, a little more than half of it comes from Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Canadian Wheat Board is telling us something very different than it has been saying recently. 
They are telling us over and over again that they can sell 30 million tonnes of grain or more by 1985. A 
50 per cent increase in exports, about an extra 10 million tonnes a year and that’s at least a 35 per cent 
increase in the grain handled by rail. Now, Mr. MacMurchy and Mr. Kaeding and I were in Winnipeg 
last month attending a meeting of officials concerned with grain handling. Premier Lyon was there. 
Premier Lougheed was there, a B.C. cabinet minister was there. Mr. Lang was there, Mr. Martin 
O’Connell, the federal Minister of Labour, the President of the CNR and the President of CP Rail and 
the Presidents of the Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta Pools and the President of the United Grain 
Growers and the President of Cargill and a number of the other companies, the Chief Commissioner of 
the Canadian Wheat Board — almost all of the actors who are concerned with the marketing and 
transport of grain. We had long and tough sessions and the overwhelming conclusion of that group was 
that while nothing is certain, the Canadian Wheat Board predictions of exports of 30 million tonnes of 
grain by 1985 was sound enough and cautious enough that we should make our plans based on these 
figures. Now that’s a major decision. It’s a decision with important implications. For production, it will 
mean that special efforts may be necessary if we’re to obtain and maintain a rate of production to allow 
exports of 30 million tonnes by 1985 and growing thereafter. 
 
Now, I have confidence that farmers will respond if the market and the price is offered, but maybe 
unforeseen problems will arise when you start talking about increasing grain production by 40 per cent 
in five or six years. To help meet those problems, there will be a need for more emphasis on agricultural 
research and at this session we hope to set up a new basis for funding agricultural research by our 
province and I hope that the federal government will continue to support agricultural research. 
Unfortunately, their moves have suggested a withdrawal. I do believe that this may be the greatest 
opportunity that Canada has to earn foreign exchange dollars and to get out of some of the difficulties 
which Canada is continuing to face and going to face in the next several years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
117 

MR. BLAKENEY: — The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding) will deal more fully with our 
research proposals. I say our farmers may need help in producing their crops but they will certainly need 
help in marketing that crop. History has shown that farmers will produce when the price is high enough 
— and this is important —when there is some evidence that it is going to be stable. Stability is very 
important if high levels of production are going to be reached and maintained. People can tell us that 
even in cattle. Right now, even with high prices, people are a little bit concerned about getting into cattle 
because they are not sure how long those prices are going to stay. You can see that tendency in farmers 
— a very, very prudent tendency in farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that offering stability to grain producers is best done by the orderly marketing 
of grain. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We fully support the Canadian Wheat Board and we do not believe that 
members opposite support the Canadian Wheat Board. We believe that it would be best if all members 
of this House rallied behind the Canadian Wheat Board and we will be asking members to do that in this 
House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What could we do if we did not want to rally? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks what he can do if he does not want to 
rally behind the Canadian Wheat Board. He can do what members of his party are doing up and down 
Canada; undermining the Canadian Wheat Board and suggesting it would be a good idea to have another 
seller, a competitive seller of Canadian grain abroad, such as other Conservatives are doing. That is what 
he could do. He could suggest that Canada’s best interests would be served when we are dealing with a 
monolithic buyer like the Chinese government to have two or three people bidding, cutting the price of 
Canadian grain. He could suggest that that is the way to do it. That is not our opinion though. That is the 
opinion of members opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — This leads me to touch upon two topics of vital interest to agriculture; rail line 
abandonment and the statutory crow rate. Decisions on these issues will decide whether our rural 
economy and rural way of life is strengthened or all but destroyed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the long battle between the people of Saskatchewan and the railways over rail line 
abandonment is reaching a climax. We have had the Snavely report; we have had the report of the Hall 
Commission and I want to say that in my view the public awareness generated by the hearings of the 
Hall Commission and the public awareness generated by the Hall Commission report itself saved 
Saskatchewan from a transportation disaster. 
 
The Hall Commission report presented the best blueprint for organizing and financing grain 
transportation in the West. The federal government has repudiated Hall but that report, be it repudiated 
or not, cannot be totally ignored because it is anchored in common sense and public support. 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
118 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the way that our government responded to this 
challenge. When we were elected to 1971 we anticipated that this problem would arise and we set about 
immediately to organize a group of people who would gather information and assist farmers to fight for 
their rail lines. We took the ‘then’ Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Harold Horner and said to Mr. 
Horner, make this your full-time job because the day is going to come before long when we will need 
every scrap of information we can get. 
 
The minister, the Attorney General and then the current Minister of Municipal Affairs organized this 
work laterally under a transportation agency. We presented to the Hall Commission the best-documented 
material of anybody. We armed our rural people with the full facts on what grain moved on their rail line 
and what the consequences of abandonment would be and, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that made an impact 
on Mr. Justice Hall. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We helped many rural communities to rally and as a result many of their lines 
are included in the permanent network. Some of them have lines guaranteed, at least supposedly, to the 
year 2000. But there are still many communities that are not so fortunate. Some lines have been 
abandoned, properly so, and some lines are slated for abandonment when it should not happen. 
 
Now the latest report is that of the Prairie Rail Action Committee (PRAC). The Hall Commission had 
recommended that a Prairie Rail Authority be set up to look at a number of lines over a number of years, 
so that their future could be decided on the best evidence available. Judge Hall said we are uncertain 
about this block of lines. We do not think the facts will be in right away. We think the lines should be 
continued and examined overtime. The federal government apparently thought that a quick decision was 
better than an informed decision. Now, mind you, there’s merit in both. There’s some merit in knowing 
where you stand, but there’s some merit in having the facts before you jump. And so the federal 
government appointed the PRAC, and we had the report of that committee, complete with their 
calculations. I invite hon. members to look at that report, and particularly to look at the calculations 
which are in it. I say to you, virtually every calculation that’s in that report is based upon the five year 
average of grain movements from 1973 to 1977, inclusive, and on this basis they are recommending the 
abandonment of over half the lines they looked at, around 1,500 miles of track. And we have the federal 
Minister of Transport apparently agreeing with their recommendation and the basis of their calculation. 
 
I invite all hon. members, urban and rural alike because this concerns us all, to look at the action 
committee’s calculations about cost to farmers, about returns to railways. As I say they’re almost all 
based upon this five year average or in some cases they took the ten year average into account, and on 
this key assumption let me tell you what they did. They looked at the five year and ten year averages — 
usually worked with the five year average — and then made a key assumption; that that amount of grain 
which has moved in the last five years was going to move in the next five, and the next five. Note that 
assumption because it’s key, and if it’s wrong, the report is destroyed. Now the federal Minister of 
Transport apparently thinks it’s right. This is strange, because I told the House about our meeting in 
Winnipeg with the Canadian Wheat Board when the Wheat Board was very firm that our exports were 
not going to be the five year average or 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
119 

the ten year average, but 50 per cent above the five year average or 50 per cent above the 10 year 
average. The minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat Board was there and he agreed with the Wheat 
Board officials. Now we have Transport Minister Lang saying one thing and we have Wheat Board 
Minister Lang saying another. Now one of them isn’t leveling with us and one of them isn’t being frank 
with the people of Saskatchewan, and I think it’s the Minister of Transport. He knows, and the action 
committee knows, that the whole basis of that report is faulty. I call upon the Canadian Transport 
Commission (CTC) to establish at the outset of its hearings a projection of future grain exports based on 
the soundest evidence available. I say that that evidence will not support the action committee, indeed it 
cannot support the action committee unless the Wheat Board and the grain companies and the Wheat 
Board minister had been totally misleading us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the situation is almost farcical. We have four provincial governments, two federal 
cabinet ministers, two railways, all the major grain companies in complete agreement that we must beef-
up our grain-handling system to meet huge new demands. Our old system handled 20 million tonnes and 
they say it is not enough. We need work on the main lines, we need work on the ports, we need special 
work on Prince Rupert and we need a crash program to buy hopper cars. Unprecedented steps need to be 
taken by the wheat board. That 30 million tonnes must be moved, that’s what we were told and that’s 
how they are acting. But what about branch lines? The action committee tells us we have got to abandon 
branch lines and that we must scrap hundreds of miles. The farmer says, why? The action committee 
says that we don’t need them to carry that 20 million tonnes. The farmer says, just a minute, Mr. Lang. 
You said we needed main lines and we need ports to handle 30 million tonnes and you are taking my 
money to buy hopper cars because we are going to move this 30 million tonnes. Now, if we need main 
lines and ports and hopper cars to handle 30 million tonnes how come we don’t need branch lines to 
handle 30 million tonnes? That’s a good question and one that hasn’t been answered and one that should 
be answered before any major rail line is abandoned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now if we had followed the advice of the Hall Commission we wouldn’t be in 
this position. We would have taken the time, as Judge Hall recommended, through the Prairie Rail 
Authority to find out what the facts were, but it is still not too late. If we can defer a moving on the 
major action committee recommendations until we have the facts on which sensible decisions can be 
made, then I predict that many lines recommended for abandonment by the action committee will be 
found to be desirable and, indeed, necessary to move the tonnage that we are talking about. 
 
Certainly some of the proposals of the action committee are not reasonable — the proposal like scraping 
the line to Ceylon and Bengough and Willow Bunch, the proposal like taking the railway out of a town 
like Holdfast which already has to handle about 800,000 bushels a year and has every reason to believe 
that it will be much higher. I mention those two but there are many other semi-million bushel points 
where they are talking about taking the rail line out. 
 
The position of our government is that in many instances the case for abandonment has not been made. 
We intend to help the communities who have a reasonable case to put 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
120 

that case before the CTC (Canadian Transportation Commission). The battle to save the rail lines goes 
on and for our part we have not given up the fight. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in all this the Conservative Party has been strangely silent 
and small wonder. Oh, I understand now that they are taking a position against the Prairie Rail Action 
Committee (PRAC) but I invite any hon. member on this side of the House or that to square that with 
what the hon. member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) has been telling us for years, that our whole 
grain-handling system is hopelessly obsolete, that only massive centralization and huge inland terminals 
would save it. That’s what the member for Thunder Creek the seatmate of the Leader of the Opposition 
has been saying for years. He, and his colleagues certainly cannot object to the action committee’s report 
unless they say it doesn’t go far enough. Nor can farmers look with much comfort to the comments — at 
the least the quoted comments — of the federal member for Vegreville, Mr. Mazankowski. He is quoted 
as saying that the Conservatives will certainly fight for any line that the farmers, and the railway 
companies want to keep. Now that is a comfort. That’ll be a comfort to the farmers to know that Mr. 
Mazankowski will stand foursquare with the railway companies. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the battle lines are drawn, as they so often have been, and we 
of the NDP stand with the farmers and small towns of Saskatchewan and we stand proudly with them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I turn to a related subject, the crow rate on grain. The railways are 
once again mounting an assault on the Crow’s Nest rates, pleading the case that they are losing money. 
Once again we are hearing allies of the members opposite leading to the attack on the crow rate . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Members opposite indicate that we are being silly. I say to them, that 
members of Palliser Wheat Growers Association have consistently indicated that the statutory crow rate 
ought to be changed . . . inaudible interjection . . . I think better not comment on their disavowing their 
close allies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is true the costs for the railways have risen and I think we must acknowledge that. And 
that raises the question of what ought to be done with the crow rate. Really, four positions are possible: 
 
1. The crow rate could stay as it is, and the railway companies could continue to absorb the losses — 

so-called. 
 
2. The crow rates could stay as they are for farmers, and a subsidy could be paid to the railway 

companies to make up their loss — and that is the Hall Commission’s solution. 
 
3. The statute by which the crow rate is set up could be changed, and it could be increased by statute; 
 
4. Or, the statute covering the crow rate could be repealed and substituted with some other method of 

rate setting, say the CTC. 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
121 

There is a vast difference for farmers depending on which of those routes you use. The first two leave 
things as they are for the farmers and therefore are desirable. The third one — changing the statutes to 
increase the crow rates — would increase rates, but would still leave farmers with a protection of a 
statute. The fourth, to remove the crow rates statute altogether would be to declare ‘open season’ on 
farmers. 
 
Now, our government supports the Hall Commission; our government supports that solution. And one of 
the arguments against maintaining the crow rate for farmers is that it discourages the processing of some 
farm products in western Canada. Our government has met that argument by saying that we will pay a 
subsidy on certain processed farm products, we will pay the difference between railway costs, as 
determined by an independent body and a crow rate equivalent. We will pay that subsidy and we have 
called it our crow rate guarantee plan. Our election program contained that platform. We make this offer 
conditional upon the federal government accepting the crow rate recommendation in the Hall 
Commission report. That offer stands and we hope that it will be picked up by the federal government of 
whatever stripe. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me make one final point before I leave crow. If there is any justification for 
increasing the crow rate to farmers and I say ‘if’, that action must be by way of changing the statutory 
rate and not removing it. There can be no justification whatever for removing from western farmers the 
protection of a statutory grain rate. Our government would oppose any such proposal with all the force it 
could muster. I will not repeat the reasons why; I have done it on many other occasions. I simply want to 
repeat that our government is totally and unalterably opposed to removing from our farmers the 
protection of a statutory grain rate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now I have spoken primarily of grain and oilseeds, although our government 
fully recognizes the major contribution made to our economy by livestock and poultry. We are pleased 
the long period of depressed prices for beef producers has finally ended and that for the time being 
returns are relatively good. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have spoken of grain, rail transport and rail rates because these are the very 
lifeblood of Saskatchewan. If we lose these battles, then small town rural Saskatchewan is struck a 
devastating blow and all producers, be it of grain or oilseeds or livestock, will be the losers. And so will 
all Saskatchewan. That is why this battle must not be lost. That is why this battle will not be lost. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have said that our future depends upon agriculture, mineral 
resources, upon keeping and strengthening our social institutions and upon how Canada as a nation is 
governed. I want to say something about resources. 
 
In each throne speech debate for several years I have spent some time outlining the policies of our 
government respecting non-renewable resources. The policy objective, I have said, is firm. In a word, 
our objective is to guarantee a fair return to the people of Saskatchewan, in dollars, in jobs, in future 
security. But I also said the means are 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
122 

flexible. And I set forth the approach we were using resource by resource. I would like to report to you 
again on activity during the past year touching on the major resources. It has been an eventful year. 
 
Let me begin with oil. I do so with some pride because year after year opposition spokesmen have told 
the public that our government had frightened the oil industry out of this province. The member for 
Estevan (Mr. Larter) has stuck with that story. He has always been faithful to that story and he has 
always been wrong, and he’s never more wrong than in 1978. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I know the Minister of Mineral Resources will have an opportunity to report 
more fully during this session and now I’ll confine myself to a few highlights. 
 
In 1978, the number of oil and gas wells drilled was 998, just about double the number for 1977. In the 
sale of oil and natural gas, in the sale of permits and drilling rights this year, we set all time records. The 
bids were over $22 million and that’s double the 1977 figures and that was a record figure. In oil, the big 
news has been heavy oil. There has been a resurgence of interest in this great resource. Members will 
recall the feverish activity to acquire the shares of Husky Oil by Petro-Canada and Occidental Oil of 
California and Alberta Gas Trunk all in the race. And you will remember too, that Petro-Canada after 
losing that race, bought a major share of Pacific Pet. Now, this corporate activity was sparked by rising 
interest in heavy oil in Saskatchewan and Alberta. Last fall, a consortium of three companies, Petro-
Canada, Saskoil and Gulf announced a long-range drilling program to cost $100 million. Shortly 
thereafter, Husky, now effectively controlled by Alberta Gas Trunk, announced an even bigger 
exploration and drilling program. Now, the purpose of these programs is to firm up the supply of heavy 
oil, to establish that there is enough to supply our regular markets and also to provide the feedstock for 
an upgrading plant. An upgrading plant is one which will take that Lloydminster type crude which is 
heavy and sticky and by chemical means convert it into a light crude oil product more suited to the 
manufacture of gasoline and other light ends. An upgrading plant is not assured and in any case will not 
come in the immediate future. But there are good prospects that we will see an upgrading plant before 
too many years in the general Lloydminster area. Oil revenues have continued at a high and increasing 
level. Negotiations are proceeding with the industry to resolve all outstanding issues respecting past and 
future taxes. In short, action in the oil patch is at record high levels and record high levels of taxes are 
coming into the provincial government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, we have record activity without resorting to the tax giveaway policies 
recommended by the opposition. they said we couldn’t have both taxes and high levels of activity and 
they were wrong and they were wrong when they said it and 1978 proves them wrong once more and 
1979 will prove them even more wrong if possible. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, turning to potash — our potash policy announced just over three 
years ago stated our intention to acquire half of the productive capacity of the province’s potash 
industry. Since that time, purchases of capacity from Duval, Sylvite 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
123 

at Rocanville, Alwinsal at Lanigan, Amax at Esterhazy and U.S. Borax and Swift at Allan have been 
completed. 
 
Expansion of some mines has also proceeded with the result that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan as something over 40 per cent of the productive capacity of the Saskatchewan industry. It 
is the largest producer and exporter of potash in North America and is gradually expanding its 
productive capacity. PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) is having a good year. The Alwinsal 
mine at Lanigan, which was bought and refurbished before it was put back into production, is now 
producing. Sales are up and prospects are good. The entire industry is enjoying a good year. Markets for 
potash are expanding modestly and all mines, private and public, are operating at or near capacity. 
 
There is every reason to be optimistic about our prospects. As I have indicated, expansions are under 
way at the Cory mine, the Rocanville mine, the Lanigan mine and other expansions are planned. This 
will mean more sales, more jobs and more money for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It will also mean more foreign currency earned for Canada. We are proud of 
what our potash industry is doing to help Canada’s short-term problems. We are proud, too, that the 
industry is on the way to helping us with our long-term problems. In 1971, 15 per cent of the potash 
industry was Canadian owned. Today the figure is close to 60 per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I say to this House and to the people of Saskatchewan that there can be no long-
term solution to our economic problems in Canada, our balance of payments problems and our slumping 
dollar until Canadians own the lion’s share of our basic resources. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That is why I welcome Alberta Gas Trunk acquiring the Husky shares. That is 
why I welcome Petro-Canada acquiring Pacific Petroleums. That is why I welcome Eldorado Nuclear 
and SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) acquiring uranium interests. And that is 
why I welcome the Potash Corporation buying potash mines. 
 
That is going to be a key issue for Canadians to face in the months ahead. They are going to have to ask 
themselves very, very, earnestly whether they are prepared to see this country continue to be the hewers 
of wood and drawers of water and continue to have the adverse economic consequences which are all 
about us — a weak dollar, massive outward movement of dividends and interest — or are we going to 
take our courage in our hands and see that the resources of this country are owned by Canadians and 
developed for Canadians. Exploration in Northern Saskatchewan was at record levels. Indeed, hard-rock 
mineral exploration in northern Saskatchewan was not only greater than in any other province or 
territory, but I believe about as much as in all the provinces and territories put together. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
124 

MR. BLAKENEY: — A key event of the year was the receipt of the report prepared by the Cluff Lake 
Board of Inquiry headed by Mr. Justice Bayda. The report was an exhaustive inquiry into most aspects 
of developing a uranium mine at Cluff Lake in northwestern Saskatchewan. It dealt in particular with the 
possible effects on the physical environment, the safety of workers and others who would be associated 
with the project, the social and economic impact of such a project on northern Saskatchewan and on 
people in northern Saskatchewan, and more broadly with questions related to the use of uranium as a 
fuel to generate electric power throughout the world. More broadly, the questions dealt with were 
technical, political and moral. 
 
Many have disagreed with one or other aspects of the report. Almost everyone has agreed that the report 
is an exceptionally able and thorough review of the issues and makes careful and thoughtful 
recommendations. 
 
The government has accepted the general conclusions of the report and is taking action with the report 
as a guide. 
 
In referring to uranium and hard-rock minerals 1978 was a banner year for hard-rock minerals. The 
Cluff Lake project is proceeding. Steps recommended for environmental protection and worker safety 
are under way. Steps to see that economic benefits come to northern people have been taken and more 
are under preparation. 
 
Many countries have examined in great detail the problems associated with using uranium as a power 
plant fuel and have decided to use it — Britain, Sweden, Germany, Japan and many others. We do not 
think that based upon the evidence available, it would be appropriate for the Saskatchewan government 
to conclude that these countries have wrongly assessed their best interests, and for us, based upon that 
conclusion, to attempt to prohibit further development of Saskatchewan uranium resources. 
 
Now there’s widespread interest in Saskatchewan uranium. Further development is expected. The 
government believes that this development can proceed in a manner to benefit our province and our 
country if sufficient care is exercised. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the House, 
we will be proceeding and we will be exercising very great care. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now there have been important developments, too, with respect to natural gas, 
coal, water power, and the session will provide other opportunities to discuss these. It’s been a good year 
for Saskatchewan resource development. It’s been a good year because we ignored the advice of 
members opposite. The faint hearts and the doom-sayers of the opposition would have us turn over our 
resources to international resource companies. We heard once again yesterday the proposition that none 
of the resource should be developed by Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. We heard that very 
definitely, and I call that the Exxon syndrome. 
 
Mother Exxon knows best. The opposition goes so far as to say that it is quite improper, for example, for 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to have gas wells. I think that that is a point of view which would 
be found only in a few conservative recesses in North America. We have countries like Holland where 
the government is engaged in oil production and I like Italy and France and Britain; and indeed the 
British BP is here and 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
125 

the French company is here and the Dutch company is most assuredly here . . . many, many companies. 
We are dealing with the Japanese companies which are effectively government-controlled; we are 
dealing with companies from all over the world where government is involved. But somehow members 
opposite feel that what the Japanese can do for their citizens we somehow cannot do and that we are not 
as bright as the Italians so we could not run an oil company. 
 
I think this view is wrong. I think the view which says that we must leave the development of this 
resource to Exxon, and its like, is one which is counsel of defeat. It will mean that we will forever not be 
owners, not be in the management team, but we will forever be, as I said, the hewers of wood and the 
drawers of water. That is Conservative policy; it is most assuredly not our policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — When I hear members opposite say that somehow it is wrong for us even to have 
one Crown Corporation in the competitive field I am reminded that Canada is famous for its dinosaurs 
and they are not all dead. 
 
We on this side reject that policy. We believe that if Canadians, yes and the people of Saskatchewan, 
stand firm we can develop our resources. We can get a large flow of royalties and we can own a large 
part of resources, these resources. We say it can be done; we say it is being done. We are doing it 
ourselves and all the people of Saskatchewan are the winners. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Oh I talked about agriculture and resources. I talked a bit about our institutions. I 
won’t have time to deal with all of them. I do want, however, to say something about health. 
 
It is not uncommon for politicians to reminisce over past campaigns. I guess I am no different. The other 
day I was speaking about the 1971 campaign, my first campaign as the Leader of the NDP. What is most 
startling are the differences. 
 
Then I was talking about the Liberal depression, the exodus of young people from the province, the 
closed schools, the closed small hospitals, the drop in retail sales, the business failures and the idle 
construction industry. 
 
All those things were real in 1971. Some of you may not remember just how real. Today all of that has 
changed; but there is one issue that has not changed since 1971. The opponent has changed names; a 
couple of times it has not even changed names, but not intentionally. 
 
Back in 1971 I used to introduce this issue by quoting the book of Genesis — the seven years of 
pestilence with the seven lean and gaunt Liberal cows chewing and gnawing away at Saskatchewan’s 
health care program. They doubled medicare premiums and they imposed deterrent fees and they failed 
to introduce the drug program they promised. And we said we’d change all that if we were elected and 
we did. And we had seven good years of restored and expanded health services in Saskatchewan — no 
more deterrent fees, no more premiums. Now we have a new pestilence in the horizon, ready to start 
chewing and gnawing at health care if it gets the chance. Not Liberal, that’s true. But just as gaunt, just 
as lean, just as anxious to follow the lead of 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
126 

Conservatives in Ontario and Conservatives in Manitoba and Conservatives in Alberta. 
 
Now consider the evidence. I’ve got it right here, Mr. Speaker. Let me tell you what the Conservative 
government in Ontario is doing. They’re feeling a little less rich these days and like Conservative 
governments everywhere, they’re saving money at the expense of the sick. Let me draw your attention to 
some stories in the Toronto Globe and Mail and I won’t go back to a couple of years ago, although I 
could find them then. I have here the issue of January 19, this year, which has a story beginning. 
 

The Ontario ministry is calling for a reduction of more than 1,000 active-treatment beds in Metro 
Toronto while hospital officials maintain the area is already squeezed for bed space. 

 
In the same issue I have another story with the headline ‘Admission delays planned as hospitals face 
squeeze’. And the stories continue. On January 20, a front page headline says ‘Budget will mean misery, 
hospital chiefs say’. And on January 23, there’s another front page headline. ‘Some hospitals turn away 
sick in ambulances.’ And that’s what’s happening in the province where every family pays a premium of 
$456 a year. 
 
Closer to home, in the Conservative province of Alberta, I note with interest that the provincial 
government is trying to find ways to spend their oil revenue. But they haven’t hit upon the clever idea of 
eliminating medicare premiums. They give money to the municipalities to retire municipal debt. That’s 
good. They eliminate all gasoline tax, but they don’t free their citizens from the burden of health 
premiums and deterrent fees because they are a Conservative government and they believe that health 
care is a privilege which should be paid for. The Conservatives in Saskatchewan hold the same view and 
the Conservatives in Saskatchewan have been acting on that view. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And they believe that a universal health plan is a bad thing if it doesn’t have 
premiums . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I will discuss with members opposite what their 
members are saying. The member for Thunder Creek, the seat mate of the Leader of the Opposition, has 
made it as clear as possible that he believes in deterrent fees. In March, 1977, and I quote this from the 
Hansard: 
 

‘I think that it is fair to say that the universal concept of medicare where there are no user 
charges involved for using the system has failed. I believe it to be a common denominator in any 
program that a user must pay more for using the system than a non-user. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That’s once from the member for Thunder Creek . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I again repeat that the users of our system must begin to pay more than the non-users up to a maximum 
limit. Then in April of 1977 — Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that your system of universal medicare has 
failed and is continuing to fail — and you go on to say — somewhere along the line those who use the 
system are going to have to pay more than those who do not use the system. Now these are quotes from 
him. There couldn’t be a clearer call for user fees, deterrent fees, a call from the seat mate of the Leader 
of the Opposition. Now the Leader of the Opposition says that when we say the Collver Conservatives 
call for deterrent fees, he says we are not telling the truth. He says we’re wrong. Well I say the member 
for Thunder Creek has most certainly 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
127 

called for user fees, most certainly called for deterrent fees. The member for Thunder Creek is most 
certainly a Conservative. The only place we could be wrong is that maybe he isn’t a Collver 
Conservative. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition may feel that medicare has failed but we do not 
believe this. It is not perfect but it’s a better way to deliver medical services than the private enterprise 
method we see in the United States. Mr. Speaker, that’s recognized even in the United States. A few 
months ago, I was down in Boston attending a meeting of the governors of the fifty United States 
representing the Canadian Premiers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The chief subject of discussion was whether or not United States should have a 
medicare plan patterned on that in Canada. Leading the argument for it was Senator Edward Kennedy 
who gave all the traditional arguments, the arguments which we all know so well. I was very, very 
pleased to stand up and outline for them what had been done in Saskatchewan, what had been done in 
Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And the fact, that in all but a few circles in Canada, medicare was regarded as a 
success and as a great addition to the entire social climate of Canada. I was proud to say that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Nor, Mr. Speaker, do we believe that sick should pay more than the well as the 
member for Thunder Creek most assuredly does. Look at the figures. Look at the reports from the 
Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan particularly, or the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Plan. 
See who are the large users of hospital and medical care and you will see that they are senior citizens 
and families with sick children. These are what the statistics show. These are the users whom the 
Conservative member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) is saying should pay and pay more. There is no 
way that he can move from that. We do not agree. 
 
Conservatives do not believe in medicare in spite of what they say because their record speaks for itself. 
We have built one of the best health systems in the world here in Saskatchewan and they have fought it 
every inch of the way. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Away back when they opposed the hospital plan and the medicare plan and I 
well remember their opposition to the medicare plan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not us. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — They say, not us, but I look up and down the corridors here and I see going into 
your caucus office — I don’t know what he is doing there but Dr. Barootes is going in there and coming 
out there — and if you are saying that he is among the ones 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
128 

who did not oppose the medicare plan then I think your facts are a good deal different from mine. He is 
very active in the Conservative party, not as an elected member, but I think you and I well know what 
his function is in the Conservative Party. 
 
When more recently, Mr. Speaker, we brought in Aids to Independent Living and the Prescription Drug 
Plan and the children’s dental plan, none of which exists in Ontario or Alberta, the Conservatives called 
them frills — not some distant Conservative in the past, but some of the Conservatives sitting in this 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And they went on to say these are, quote, ‘not meeting the real needs of 
Saskatchewan residents.’ They said they would do away with the children’s dental plan and the drug 
plan. Conservatives may believe that the children’s dental plan is a frill. I say that plan has done more 
for the dental health of rural children than anything else in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Conservatives may believe that providing wheelchairs to handicapped people 
free of direct charge is a frill. The New Democrats disagree. I believe that if the Conservatives ever had 
the power to do so they would gradually chip away at those plans, piece by piece they would begin to 
dismantle the health care plan which has been so carefully crafted in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, whether or not that is their intention, I predict they will not have 
the opportunity to act on it for many years to come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We propose to go on improving our health care plan. We are going, in the next 
four years, to work to make a good system even better. We made proposals during the election campaign 
and we propose to act on them. We promised a health research fund. This will provide a continuing and 
stable source of support for health research conducted in Saskatchewan, by Saskatchewan researchers. 
We believe that this fund will encourage the development of even more active health research in our 
province. 
 
We promised to provide dentures to senior citizens at reduced costs. Work is proceeding on that 
proposal. We promised to extend children’s dental care to age 18 and in the fall of this year the plan will 
be extended to include children age 13. It will be extended step by step. 
 
I could mention other areas. We intend, for example, to maintain and improve cancer treatment services 
in Saskatchewan. We proposed an entirely new structure, a cancer foundation, to undertake that task. 
We intend to continue our regeneration plans for the General and Pasqua Hospitals in Regina, and the 
renovations at the University Hospital in Saskatoon. Improvements of these hospitals will improve the 
level of medical services for the whole province. 
 
Now these are immediate plans. Other steps will be taken in the future as we become 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
129 

more aware of the best way to help our citizens protect their precious health. Mr. Speaker, we are proud 
of our health service in Saskatchewan, but we’re not complacent. We promised improvements during the 
election and we’ll take time over the next four years to make those improvements. We look beyond that 
to see if we can’t do even better, and we will do this even though members opposite will, I predict, say 
pull back, it’s too dangerous, it’s too expensive, let the sick pay for themselves. If we can rely upon past 
history to tell us what’s going to happen in the future, that will be their reaction. Mr. Speaker, we will 
look not back but forward. We are determined to keep Saskatchewan in the very forefront of health care 
in all North America. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say a few words about the national picture. In my 
speech last year I outlined the grave difficulties faced by this country as a result of the election of the 
Party Quebecois government. I tried to outline how we perceived the problems in Canada at that time. I 
also said that all people in Canada would have to approach discussions about Canada’s future in a spirit 
of compromise, a spirit of understanding. 
 
This should not mean that legitimate interests should not be pursued. It shouldn’t mean that legitimate 
grievances shouldn’t be redressed, far from it. It meant that in order to achieve a redress of our 
grievances, we might well have to acknowledge that other areas had grievances as well. Understanding, 
tolerance, compromise — these are the attributes necessary for a just nation and these are the attributes 
necessary if we are to rebuild Canada into a stronger nation. These are the concepts that need to 
dominate our leaders if we’re to heal the country. These are the principles which must guide both the 
head and the heart as we seek to build a better Canada. 
 
Of course, as westerners, we enter these negotiations with a sense of grievance, with a sense of feeling 
that over decades of time we have not been fairly dealt with in this confederation and, in that sense, we 
go in hardheaded and we go in with the head. We also have to acknowledge that prairie people, even in 
the depths of the depression, had a very strong feeling of patriotism for their country. Even under the 
most crushing blows they have never turned their back on Canada, and they want their governments, 
federal and provincial, to work to build a stronger Canada. They have Canada in their hearts it is up to us 
to see that we, too, have Canada in our hearts. And so our approach to the problems of today must 
reflect the work and dedication of our settlers from yesterday. It must reflect their iron will and at the 
same time their love for their new nation. 
 
I believe we are trying to do that in Saskatchewan. We have said that there need to be changes in the 
constitution, said that we are willing to make changes. Indeed, in some cases we are insisting on 
changes, and I see some movement. The last year has been an eventful year. 
 
In June of last year, the federal government introduced Bill C-60, their blueprint for constitutional 
change. The 10 premiers met in Regina in August and dealt with Bill C-60. I think that we tried to deal 
fairly with the proposals put forward in Bill C-60. 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
130 

The federal government made a large number of proposals but two of them particularly raised the 
objections of provinces. The federal government took the position that they could change the 
constitution of Canada without consulting the provinces on a wide range of issues dealing only with the 
federal government, which everybody agrees to. But they said that this included the position of the 
monarchy, the supreme court and the Senate. We said that whatever the letter of the law may be, the 
federal government should not try to change the position of the monarchy, or the Senate, or the supreme 
court without provincial support because they go to the very basis of the federal system and the federal 
system must involve not only the provinces, not only the federal government, but the provinces as well. 
 
The federal government also said that they wished to arrive at a formula to allow Canadians to amend 
the constitution and after that to bring it home, to repatriate the constitution, patriate it as is sometimes 
said. All the provinces agreed that we should patriate the constitution and agree on a formula to amend it 
if we could, but all insisted that this must be part of a full discussion at which were considered questions 
of the division of powers between the federal government and the provincial government. The Premiers 
set out their views, in detail, following the Regina Conference. The Prime Minister responded by calling 
a constitutional conference in October. 
 
Before that conference was held two important things happened in Saskatchewan. First, we had a 
provincial election and as members opposite will know we were returned to office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Second, the supreme court brought down a decision in the Central Canada 
potash case, brought it down during the campaign. The two things became linked and the election 
campaign was in part fought upon constitutional issues. For our part we knew where we stood, for our 
part we knew that we stood with the people of Saskatchewan on the CIGOL (Canadian Industrial Gas 
and Oil Ltd.) decision and we propose to fight the constitutional proposals implicit in that decision. 
That’s where we stand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I regret to say that the opposition parties did not know where they stood. They 
wished to beat up the New Democratic Party but they did not wish to state anything which might support 
Saskatchewan if it in fact would also support the NDP. Their whole position was one of refusing to take 
a position and if anyone can find the position of the Conservative Party on the CIGOL case during the 
last election campaign I would like them to refer me to the public statement or the clippings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we could have used some support from all parties in Saskatchewan on that 
issue at that moment. We believe and still believe that over the last several years the federal government 
has launched a campaign to see if they can wrest at least partial control over resources from the 
provinces . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Nipawin and others are unaware of the basis 
for, let us say, the CIGOL decision. They are unaware of the fact that the underlying basis of the CIGOL 
decision dealt with indirect taxes, unaware of the fact that in Alberta that is not an issue, unaware of the 
fact that in Alberta almost all the oil rights are owned by the Crown. 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
131 

Accordingly they may levy royalties which are not open to attack. They are unaware of the fact that in 
this province we have had to raise taxes rather than royalties and are, therefore, on a different 
constitutional basis. And, therefore, they are totally unaware of the fact that comparisons between the 
legal position in Alberta and the legal position in Saskatchewan have no basis in fact or law. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The member for Nipawin very clearly does not like lawyers but he ought to get a 
little advise from some of them now and then. Mr. Speaker, the position we took on CIGOL and in the 
Central Canada Potash case while it did not earn the support of the members opposite earned us the 
support of virtually every provincial government in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And I go further, Mr. Speaker, in saying that when we had our constitutional 
conference in October and again in February, we made very significant progress in convincing not only 
other provincial governments but the federal government of the justice of our cause, the justice of our 
cause on behalf of Saskatchewan because the members opposite would not support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will tell you what happened. Following the meeting in October we formed a committee of 
ministers on the constitution, and there were a series of meetings. I am very pleased to say that the 
provincial chairman of that committee was the Attorney General of Saskatchewan. There were two 
chairmen, a federal chairman and a provincial chairman. I am pleased to say that representing all of the 
provincial ministers was the Attorney General of Saskatchewan. I am pleased to say that he did an 
outstanding job on behalf of Saskatchewan and Canada and all the people in Saskatchewan should be 
grateful for his work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, what I say about the Attorney General is not only my word. They 
may, if they wish, consult with other provinces, consult with other people who are familiar with the 
work done by that committee and they will say that the contribution made by the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan was outstanding. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The results, so far as Saskatchewan was concerned, were quite outstanding, were 
quite outstanding because the problems dealing with resource management may be put under three 
headings: firstly, whether or not provincial powers are going to be restricted even where the federal 
government does not assert a power. That is, are we to be limited by the constitution or by transgressing 
on specific federal legislation. That’s an important question. Right now we are limited by the 
constitution. Even where the federal government may wish to have us exercise jurisdiction in the 
resource area, it still cannot be done. The federal government conceded and all the other provinces 
conceded that that situation was undesirable. That was a major step forward. 
 
The second question dealt with indirect taxes and that’s of particular benefit to Saskatchewan because 
the CIGOL case held that our particular system of taxes (the 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
132 

majority judgment held there) involved indirect taxes. All the provinces and the federal government 
conceded that that type of tax should be able to be levied by a provincial government. We were pleased 
with that. 
 
The third thing dealt with the power of the federal government to intervene in this area based upon its 
power to regulate trade and commerce. The conclusion arrived at was less clear here. Since this was of 
paramount importance to the province of Alberta and since they had little interest in the indirect tax end 
of it, it’s understandable that their reaction would be somewhat different than ours. But all in all, anyone 
looking at that record of performance by the Attorney General, and what was achieved at those 
conferences cannot help but conclude that if these changes become part of the Canadian constitution, 
then Saskatchewan will have made a long step forward in regulating its resources for the benefit of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, other things happened. Generally, it would be fair to say that three 
things happened at the conferences which may turn out to be important. The first thing perhaps was that 
there was a major reshaping of the federal attitude, a major reshaping of the federal attitude. As I have 
tried to say they have up to recently been preoccupied, some might even say obsessed. I will say 
preoccupied, with the problem between Quebec and the rest of Canada. They have not been willing to 
turn their mind to other regional grievances; that has changed. 
 
The second important thing that happened was that the present government of Quebec participated at all 
levels in the constitutional review. I won’t speculate on why they participated but they were there. And 
if, as I think will happen, separation is rejected by the people of Quebec and we start the process of 
rebuilding the constitution again, we will be a long step forward because the Government of Quebec has 
participated in each of these steps. It won’t be starting from scratch, it will be starting from a different 
position. 
 
The third important thing which emerged, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that all parties seemed to be 
committed to an ongoing process. From time to time the Government of Quebec or some others give 
some indication that they are going to turn their backs on this whole process, but they don’t. They are 
there and we are discussing the minutiae of changes. At the last conference we were in effect discussing 
the wording of proposed constitutional changes. This is a very long step forward from where we were 
short months ago. I think we can say that significant progress has been made. 
 
I recognize, Mr. Speaker, that there are some forces militating against future progress, not the least of 
which is the stance of the Government of Quebec . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, now that the 
member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) is here I want to mention the position of the Conservative 
Party on this issue. I want to say to him what I have said to the people of Canada. I believe that the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the government of other provinces should be saying to the province 
of Quebec, we do not believe that if you separate from Canada we can negotiate sovereignty association. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I say that in all earnestness because I do not think at this point that I could 
recommend to this legislature that we enter an arrangement for sovereignty 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
133 

association and I think that following the trauma which would come about if there was separation, I 
don’t believe it would matter if I did recommend it. I think people wouldn’t have it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — As I have said to people in Quebec, consider our position. We in the West 
believe that over the decades, we have paid a lot to be in confederation. We have paid higher tariffs. We 
have been part of this economic system which forced us to sell cheap and buy dear. We are saying this; 
we are saying that we got certain benefits from that federal system. What ever we got was a protection 
because our economy is a boom ad bust economy and we got the protection of a federal government in 
times of stress. We got a commitment as we thought from the federal government to provide us with a 
transportation system which will allow us from our land-locked position to take our products to market 
and we got assistance in selling our products abroad — the wheat, the potash, the rest. That’s our quid 
pro quo and we gave the money we paid in higher tariffs. 
 
I said to the people of Quebec, consider that — you come along here and we say we pay the tariffs 
because we need a strong federal government to protect us in times of drought, to give us transportation, 
to help us sell our products abroad and you say, our idea is for you to keep paying those tariffs, for you 
to keep buying things from Quebec at high tariffs but we will not put in a dime to the federal 
government which is going to offer you your protection. That’s their proposal — that we continue to pay 
the benefits which we are conferring on Quebec and Ontario by way of tariffs but that the Quebec 
people not contribute anything to the central government which is our quid pro quo. 
 
I said to them, no sale. That is clearly not possible to sell to the people of Saskatchewan and I have 
further said that we must not underestimate the emotional content of what will happen if you separate I 
fear that Canadians will say go, go with our qualified blessing but don’t come back here and bargain just 
for now. I think we would have all we could do to restrain Canadians from wishing to resort to other 
means to preserve this nation. We shouldn’t underestimate at all the power that is in people’s minds, 
their devotion to a united Canada. So I said this and I believe that to be true and I believe people 
shouldn’t be talking about negotiating sovereignty association. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I believe they shouldn’t be talking about it, first, because it isn’t in the best 
interest of the West and secondly, because they couldn’t deliver anyway. When I see the Conservative 
leader talking about sovereignty association and when I see Mr. David Crombie, the member for 
Rosedale, talking about sovereignty association, I say that is unwise. I say they are doing Canada a 
disservice. I say this: those who wish to support Mr. Lalonde’s position can vote for Mr. Trudeau’s 
candidates and those who wish to support Mr. Crombie’s position can vote for Mr. Clark’s candidates 
and those who support the position I am putting forward can vote for the New Democratic Party 
candidates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the whole world is challenged with social change. Other countries 
are having great internal difficulties. Canada is fortunate indeed, that we hold dear to the position of 
peaceful political change. Of all goals that a people can 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
134 

pursue, the goal of peaceful and just social change is one that will continue to be the mark of a mature 
people, a people that truly care for each other. I pledge for my part, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
will continue to bend its every effort to ensure that this tradition of Canada and of Saskatchewan in 
particular, will be foremost in our minds as we search for lasting constitutional change in Canada. And I 
think we can find that change. I think it’s beginning to gel. We will not know until the Quebec situation 
is resolved, but I believe that it is beginning to gel — a new proposal for a new Canada where we will 
have to respond to many of the deeply felt aspirations of the people of Quebec. But I think we can do 
that within a united Canada. I can see it beginning to gel and I say to you what I’m sure all members of 
this House would agree to, that the people of Saskatchewan would want their government of whatever 
stripe to pursue that objective. I, as long as I occupy this office, will certainly pursue it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the record of our party in this province is a proud record. We took 
one of the poorest and most debt-ridden provinces in Canada and in the years of the ’40s and ’50s, 
created a system of social services without parallel in North America We wiped out the provincial debt, 
made the province a model of fiscal responsibility. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Wiped out the provincial debt? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, wiped out the provincial net debt these people will have you believe that 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is a millstone around the necks of the taxpayers. 
 
Would that we had more millstones, would that other governments had had the vision to set up 
organizations like the power corporation, would that we were in that happy position . . . (interjections, 
inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I wonder if the members can restore the dignity and decorum of this 
Chamber, to which we are usually accustomed. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I note that the hon. member is not familiar with distinctions 
between net debt and gross debt and since it will undoubtedly be a very, very long instructional session I 
will defer it until another time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, just allow them to vent their enthusiasm for a moment we will carry on . . . 
(interjections). Mr. Speaker, whatever we may have done in the past, it obviously has bothered members 
opposite so they do not like to have it repeated. They do not like to hear about what has been done in 
this province; they do not like to recall what is was like when the last Conservative government was here 
. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I wondered when you were going to get those long shots in. That was your 
first campaign wasn’t it? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I know that times are significantly different but even with times being 
significantly different I invite you to look at the stewardship of those days, compare it with the 
stewardship of these days, and make your judgment. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The people of Saskatchewan have done that. 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
135 

MR. BLAKENEY: — In the next four years we propose to do a good deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan: we will reduce property taxes for senior citizens; we will give a rebate to renters; we will 
designate even more revenue for municipalities, with no strings attached; we will improve our health 
care system by extending children’s dental care to 18; go into a health research and many of these 
things. 
 
We propose, in the next four years I hope, to look even farther ahead. We can see some problems for 
this province, and I want to dwell just a moment as these are not particularly partisan . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We have run out of money. Is that one of those problems? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I would like to talk about a couple of things which members opposite may be 
interested in or may not be interested in but there may well be one or two of the newer ones who would 
be interested. 
 
I wonder if I could talk for a minute about the plight of Indian and Metis people of this province. We are 
working diligently to resolve unfulfilled land entitlements for Indian treaties. We have established some 
stringent employment regulations for new developments in northern Saskatchewan, regulations which 
guarantee jobs for northern people. But this government or any government can only do a limited 
amount. 
 
We need to hear from Metis people and from Indian people just how they want to participate in 
Saskatchewan society. Do they want a separate development with minimum links between their society 
and ours? Do they want to pursue rapid assimilation? Now that question hasn’t been resolved and I tell 
you whatever your party that that issue is going to have to be in part resolved. The question is being 
resolved in part by default but it is a real question for this province. It is an issue which will require 
tough decisions, primarily by Indian people and Metis people themselves and will require some 
thoughtful and sympathetic listening by the rest of us — because I am sure I don’t know the answers and 
I suspect members opposite don’t either. We must do everything we can to encourage this process. 
 
I was happy to see the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians have a policy on economic development 
because that is going to be necessary if we are going to address those problems. It’s a dilemma for all of 
us who are not of native ancestry and it is one which we have not resolved. 
 
This leads me to some larger issues. We need as a society to see if we can challenge young people. In 
the 1960s young people were . . . by the standards of us who were older then (these words will not apply 
to some of you) . . . we felt them to be high spirited and indeed unruly. Nonetheless, they had an 
idealism which is not clearly evident in young people today. I don’t know whether it is just a change of 
mood or whether they have developed a cynical approach to society. I hope it is simply a change in 
style. If in fact it is that they have lost confidence in the ability to change, if they have lost confidence in 
the capacity of ideals to motivate people, then we are in a poorer position than we were in those days 
with all their difficulties. 
 
I think we can do some things, as older people, to stimulate young people to be interested in their 
province and to be still idealistic about what they would like their province to be. They must be 
encouraged by innovative methods to try new things. We 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
136 

can provide opportunities outside our strict governmental capacity. We will have to encourage them to 
cherish the ideals which will be necessary to make this a truly vibrant society. 
 
I don’t know whether government people can do everything or much in this regard. Much of the task 
will have to be done by people whose appeals are to your imagination and idealism. People who are 
artists or musicians or explorers or developers — they don’t all have to be artists — they can be 
promoters in the best sense of the word because these people all have a vision of the future. Some of us 
develop tunnel vision here in this legislature. But our task here in this legislature is to give them a 
chance to be heard, to live and to work and to express their vision here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is happening in our province. I believe we are beginning to build a 
cultural life here in Saskatchewan which is something more than reruns of network television shows. A 
culture which is allowing us to participate in the riches of North America and yet to develop some 
distinctive cultural aspects of our own province. I think it can be done and I think it is being done 
slowly. Not in any great measure, but in some measure and to the extent that we make some progress, 
it’s desirable. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not a second CBC I hope. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, if we are to do that, it will require confidence in ourselves and in 
our young people and will require a positive approach to our future and our potential. I ask hon. 
members to ask what has been offered by members opposite in this debate? Because the opposition’s 
approach as illustrated so vividly by the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, is almost wholly 
negative and I would suggest, petty. Because it offers only criticism and no alternative policies, I must 
reject that approach. Conversely Mr. Speaker, for eight years our government has put forward positive 
programs and acted on them. Every citizen in Saskatchewan has benefited from them, benefited 
materially and benefited in a new pride in this province that we hold so dear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we can continue along that road. I think if we reject the negativism of members 
opposite we can move on and as we move on we can stimulate the imagination of young people to build 
this into the province we would all like it to be. Because I believe that Mr. Speaker, because I believe 
the opposition approach is negative and our approach is positive, because I believe that much needs to 
be done in this province — this province of great potential — because I believe that Mr. Speaker, I 
reject the opposition approach, I adopt ours and accordingly, I will oppose the amendment and support 
the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E.C. WHELAN (Minister of Consumer Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to speak in this 
debate on the Speech from the Throne, let me first congratulate the mover, the hon. member for Regina 
Wascana (Mr. White) and the seconder, the hon. member for Shaunavon (Mr. Lingenfelter). 
 
The hon. member for Wascana, in his capacity as a professor of history at Campion College, University 
of Regina, taught two members of my family. Recommended reading for every Saskatchewan citizen is 
Power for a Province: A History of Saskatchewan Power. The book, based on his doctoral thesis, was 
written by the hon. 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
137 

member for Regina Wascana, a Saskatchewan railroader who educated himself step by step. He wasn’t 
born with a silver spoon in his mouth, like the deputy leader of the Opposition. I predict that he will 
make a valuable contribution to the government of this province and that he will be elected for a long 
long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Shaunavon is a young energetic person who worked hard to get 
elected and I predict too, that he will be an effective member and he’ll always be a New Democrat; he 
won’t be jumping all over the place like the hon. member for Qu’Appelle. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I have great difficulty remembering which party you fellows belong to; it’s a really 
difficult thing. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What about your Premier, what did he used to be? 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I’m talking about the way that you got elected. Just plain opportunistic. There 
should be an opportunist party and you fellows should be the leaders of it. That’s where you belong. On 
Monday last, the hon. member for . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Ed, if you ever saw the light, you’d be a member of the Progressive 
Conservative party. 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Never! I saw the light when I was six years old. My father was a Tory. I lived 
during the ’30s. I saw the light. On Monday last, the hon. member for Nipawin attempted to re-fight the 
election in the same manner in which he lost it. When the Premier spoke following the hon. Leader of 
the Opposition’s dissertation, it must have occurred even to those members on the other side of the 
House, that the people of this province made the right decision. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Through most of his speech, the Leader of the Opposition tried to prove to us . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I think he does a far better job speaking from his seat but I wish he wouldn’t 
interfere with what I’m trying to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the most of the hon. Leader of the Opposition’s speech, he tried to prove that in the last 
election we had used dirty tactics, to quote him. And then near the end, in a shameful quotation of 
someone on some radio program, he attempted to discredit in a most gross fashion, every member of the 
cabinet. Mr. Speaker, this is the member who was talking about dirty tactics! He lectured us about dirty 
tactics, Mr. Speaker. There is a story that Conservatives of this province tell about the Leader of the 
Opposition. Let me tell the story about the Leader of the Opposition that the Conservatives are telling, 
not the new Conservatives that have been around for a long time. The story is that the hon. member for 
Nipawin handed a fellow Conservative a pin. Another Conservative took one look and said, ‘Run for 
your life he’s got the hand grenade in his mouth.’ 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — During the campaign and after, everyone was blamed by the Leader of 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
138 

the Opposition. He was blaming them all for losing the election, everyone except himself. He said the 
press was responsible, the New Democrats had dirty tactics, the Conservatives in Manitoba undid 
everything he was trying to do. He talked about what Conservatives were doing to him in other parts of 
Canada but the truth is and the facts substantiate it, the hon. member himself had a great deal to do with 
losing the election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Let’s look at the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I would ask the members to try to restrain themselves from making 
comments when other members are speaking. I don’t do this for any other reason except it’s in the rules. 
Now if the members don’t like the rules well then there is a method of changing the rules but the rules 
are quite clear. Rule 18: 
 

Mr. Speaker, shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of order. 
 
Sub. 3: 
 
When a member is speaking no member shall interrupt him except to raise a point of order nor 
pass between him and the Chair. 

 
Now I think I have been fairly lenient in interpreting that rule and have allowed the odd comment to 
cross the floor but I think after we reach a certain point it becomes disruptive of the business of the 
House. I think we should try to adhere to the rules. I ask all new members to observe that rule. I know 
there are some members who have some problems with it but if they could reassess their position in the 
light of the fact that we have new members here who I am sure want to be instructed properly in the 
rules. The best way to instruct members properly in the rules is by example. I think the senior members 
should take this under advice at this time. 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, I think you are doing an excellent job under very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the performance of the hon. member for Nipawin. When 
he first came into this House with a sanctimonious air, he announced to all the world that his members 
would not chew gum, they would not heckle, they wouldn’t pound their desks, they wouldn’t read their 
newspapers. Mr. Speaker, this was the way he began his performance. 
 
In this legislature, after the election, let’s look at the contrast, Mr. Speaker. He used such foul and 
abusive language to my colleague, the hon. member for Saskatoon Nutana, on the front steps of the 
legislature that the hon. member, because of honest anger had to give the member for Nipawin a cuffing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I tell you that it was not dirty tactics. There was nothing devious about the hon. 
member for Nutana, nothing unfair. The well-mannered member for Nutana 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
139 

gave the hon. member for Nipawin a cuffing, Mr. Speaker, I contend that he deserved it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — I’ve known the hon. member for Nutana as a close friend, for 33 years, and I can 
tell this House without hesitation that he does not become angry easily. He does not exhibit righteous 
wrath unless he’s pushed a long, long way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Regina North West is one of the largest in the province. It has 13,000 
voters. Young people from all over Canada live in this area because it’s the newest part of this growing 
city. Last October some residents were so new that in the election, some of the polls in the new areas 
had as many as 20 people, 20 voters, who were not yet qualified to vote in the election because they 
hadn’t lived in this province six months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the people in the constituency in Regina Northwest work for the IPSCO steel 
plant. The Conservatives ran up and down talking against government ownership. Most of the people in 
the constituency knew that the provincial government under Tommy Douglas began the steel plant, now 
over 60 per cent owned by government. Outspokenly opposed to public ownership, dedicated to free 
enterprise, they were trying to get elected and they were running up and down saying to steel workers 
public ownership of IPSCO by three governments is a bad idea. They were saying that if IPSCO is going 
to produce the pipe for the Alaska Pipeline it’s a bad idea because it’s publicly owned. The hon. member 
says we used rough tactics, dirty tactics. Mr. Speaker, we just quoted the history of IPSCO. We told the 
truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — The result was that we got 55 per cent of the vote and they got a miserable 31 per 
cent of the vote. We didn’t use dirty tactics, we told the truth. The constituency that I’m proud to 
represent not only gave the Conservatives a pasting on election day, but the young people, the older 
people, working people, steelworkers, homemakers, teachers, students, business people, all turned out to 
communicate their convictions and put to flight the remnants of a badly led Conservative Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — It was a party that tried to get elected without a policy, without a program, and with 
a worn-out slogan, something about time for a change — I can’t remember now; they had a lot of these 
sloppy old worn-out reactionary slogans. 
 
Why did the people support the New Democrats? Well because the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
promoted home ownership for hundreds of families in Regina North West. The Department of 
Education paid for about 90 per cent of the cost of new schools. The Department of the Environment 
negotiated filters to help with the problems regarding the ISPCO (Interprovincial Steel and Pipe 
Corporation) steel plant, neighborhoods, and the prospects of tremendous enlargement of the IPSCO 
facilities, were the background for the election, Mr. Speaker, and it was fought on the issues. Whether it 
is a housing project, the energy conservation house in the constituency, the home for the handicapped to 
be built in Argyle Park, or the new facilities at the Normanview Shopping Centre, Regina North West 
participates and understands fully economic stability and the promise for the future in this province. 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
140 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Well, what about the future of this province. Mr. Speaker, it was my good fortune 
to travel in this province representing the co-operatives in the latter part of the ’40s. It was also my good 
fortune, Mr. Speaker, in the ’50s to travel extensively to negotiate farm mortgages in arrears of taxes, to 
walk over many farms in Saskatchewan, to watch the roads being built, to see the power corporation 
light up the province, and in the early ’60s to be elected to this legislature. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province are honest, sincere individuals, probably the best politically informed group in Canada. For 
years they have worked together to build great institutions such as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the 
utility systems like the Saskatchewan Power Corporation (SPC), the giant network of credit unions to 
finance their mortgages and their loans. Mr. Speaker, they opened up the north. This is why my two 
friends, the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. MacAuley) and the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. 
Thompson) sit in this legislature at this time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — In the years that I have lived and worked in this province, I have watched 
Saskatchewan people work together, build together, enthusiastically participate in every type of 
democratic organization. 
 
If there was one characteristic missing, it was complete confidence in the future. They had discovered by 
working together they could build the only Canadian-owned oil refinery in Canada. They could build a 
giant co-operative wholesale network. They could pave highways and build grid roads and access roads. 
They could build two university campuses. They could run a sodium-sulphate plant that has made $23 
million since it began operation. They could operate an insurance company, an aggressive insurance 
operation employing 1,170 people, with the most all-embracing aggressive insurance operation 
employing 1,170 people, with the most all-embracing program and the most progressive policies of any 
insurance company in the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Leadership for these organizations as in SGIO came, Mr. Speaker, from the people 
of this province. Recently the manager of SGIO, John Green, Q.C., has been placed on the board of 
governors of the International Seminars Insurance of the World, recognition never before given to a 
Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, in the operation of their numerous democratic organizations 
Saskatchewan people learned to work together, to live together and to understand each other. Then came 
the next logical step; ownership and development of their own resources, a challenge they accepted 
although their abilities to do so were pooh-poohed. These people opposite said leave it to Exxon; leave it 
to the multinationals; leave it to the free enterprisers (if there is such a thing). 
 
Mr. Speaker, one recalls the story of the farmer who had a 40-bushel crop but no combine. There was 
only one combine in the area and the man who owned the harvesting equipment wanted 30 of the 40 
bushels to harvest a crop. All the crop belonged to the first farmer and was on his land so this farmer and 
his neighbors got 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
141 

together and bought their own combine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the same way the people of Saskatchewan own their own resources, a rich crop of minerals unequal to 
anywhere in Canada, a crop that will be harvested. When they left the harvesting equipment in the hands 
of the wrong people, those multinationals who owned the harvesting equipment, who had their 
headquarters elsewhere, were getting most of the crop for harvesting it. So, Mr. Speaker, together the 
people of Saskatchewan said, we will get our own harvesting equipment and they are getting harvesting 
equipment in many ways: for their mineral crops, for their coal, oil, potash, uranium, nickel or gold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they decided they would say something about the harvesting of the crop and when the time 
came to fight the election they fought it on their right to get a fair share of the mineral crop of this 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Excuses from the opposition are 
worthless! They are worthless, Mr. Speaker. The cold fact of the matter is that on the real issues, 
whether medicare, public ownership of resources or leadership, the members opposite lost and they lost 
badly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — After the election was over, Mr. Speaker, after the ballots were counted, there was 
a new kind of confidence that swept this province, a confidence in the future. A threat had been put 
aside by the voters of this province. I say to my hon. friends opposite, this confidence is based on the 
realization that the people of Saskatchewan can manage the resources that they own, Mr. Speaker, the 
fact that we own and manage our resources and that it’s a good idea, is quietly acknowledged even by 
Conservative cabinet ministers in other parts of this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, there is a new feeling in the air in Saskatchewan, an attitude of 
philosophy that has always been here. Unless members opposite understand this philosophy, unless they 
know what the people of the province want, they are going to disappear like the other party which 
disappeared from the face of the political front of this province. 
 
I noticed the other day that the hon. member for Nipawin made a speech about what would happen to the 
country if the federal Liberals were returned to power. Mr. Speaker, I would be the first to admit that the 
value of the Canadian dollar is an economic measure that no one can deny. I would be first to agree that 
the unemployment situation in this country is a shameful useless hardship on the people of a vast rich 
land. Mr. Speaker, I would not hesitate to condemn the harbor drudging, Skyshops and the other 40 or 
50 scandals of the federal Liberals. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver) if he could tell me — should give me — 
one good logical sensible reason for voting Conservative, if he can, I am prepared to listen. What is the 
situation, Mr. Speaker? Recall the times Conservatives have been elected federally. In the ’30s, the 
population of Canada, one of the richest countries in the world, was in rags and soup kitchens. The 
police were 



 
 
February 28, 1979 

 
142 

called out to stop the young people; young people were marching on Ottawa because they were hungry, 
Mr. Speaker. Then in the ’50s with the largest majority in the history of the country the federal 
Conservatives allowed the price of farm machinery to go berserk, brought in no economic program. 
Unemployment was on the rise when they were thrown out of office, when they were fighting among 
themselves with more energy than they fought to alleviate the problems of this nation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, if you look across this country now and you pick out your provincial 
governments under their jurisdiction — Ontario, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, New Brunswick, 
Manitoba — there is nothing in the economic make-up of any of these provincial governments that holds 
the solution for unemployment, for expansion of — small businesses, for the organization of resources 
to serve the people, Mr. Speaker, not one of these governments have the imagination, have enough 
courage to stand up to the multinationals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, you can look at any provincial Conservative government in the 
country and, in the name of reason, there isn’t the slightest reason for giving the Conservatives a vote, 
not the slightest reason. Look at Newfoundland, now more than 25 per cent of the young people are out 
of work or Ontario where they get only about 2 per cent of their budget, Mr. Speaker, from minerals. 
Manitoba — Manitoba helped to elect us in this election. The people of Regina and the people of 
Saskatchewan are well aware of what is happening in that province. Without leadership at the provincial 
level in any province, without any evidence of leadership federally in the past or even today voting 
Conservative is just as hazardous as voting Liberal. Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in their record, in their 
make-up, in their program or in their history that justifies giving either party a thought unless you are a 
multinational or a large shareholder in the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway). 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about my constituency, Regina North West. I’ve talked 
about the issues in the recent election and I’ve set out clearly and carefully the substantial reason for 
refusing to give the federal Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, as much as a wink, let alone a vote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion and I will vote against the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, fellow members of the legislature, it 
is indeed with great pleasure and pride that I rise for the first time for a speech in this House. I am proud 
to be chosen the representative of the great constituency of Arm River and wish, at this time, to express 
my sincere thanks to the constituents for their support on October 18 last, particularly those who worked 
so diligently for the two years prior to election date. Now that the election is behind us, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to assure the constituents of Arm River and this Assembly that it is my sincere desire to attend to 
the needs to all the people in my constituency in respect to government regardless of their political 
philosophy. Thus, Mr. Speaker, I feel confident in assuming that from time to time as requests for 
assistance and information come to 



 
 

February 28, 1979 

 
143 

my attention from any constituent that I will be able to bring these problems to any minister of the 
Crown sitting opposite, and he in turn will give these requests the same sincere consideration and 
attention as if they came from a member from the government side of the House. 
 
Let us remember we are the servants of the public and the public is not our servants. We all profess to be 
the great answer to the public’s problems, so let us prove to the public that for every one solution you 
propose to enact in this legislature that we don’t create two problems. Hopefully the government 
opposite will have what is known as the open door policy. In other words, Mr. Speaker, it is my hope 
and I am confident the hope of the majority of the people of this province that the programs and 
legislation will be the responsibility of the members of this legislature and not dictated by a few of the 
huge bureaucracies with which governments of all levels find themselves surrounded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say for one who for many years has been interested in what takes place in 
this Assembly, I could never understand why as an average, interested taxpayer, I could not get full 
disclosure of what takes place here without attending in the galleries or visiting the legislative library 
and reading Hansard after the sessions are over. Mr. Speaker, I am without doubt positive that there are 
literally thousands of people in the province who would be most anxious to receive a copy of the daily 
debates and proceedings of this Assembly. I sincerely say to you under whose authority these debates 
and proceedings are published, why can’t the public receive these publications? I received a publication 
last year for the first time and I can assure you that when I showed it to the members of the public, I 
might add regardless of their political affiliation, they were intensely interested and they asked the same 
question, why can’t the public receive this publication? Even in the judgment of the powers that be a 
small subscription fee would be charged. It is my understanding that the most of the cost of printing is 
the setting up of the print and from then on, of course, it is quite mechanical. By suggesting and humbly 
requesting that you give the preceding idea sincere consideration, I am not trying to put the media out of 
business but what I am saying is let us have more full, factual disclosure about who said what about the 
matters that come before this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to have a free press and the members of the press core to express 
their interpretations of the happenings of this legislature but I think more importantly the public should 
be given information in print. Let them make their own interpretations which may or may not agree with 
the media interpretation. Thus our hot line programs could be much more interesting. Mr. Speaker, I am 
sure the cost factor of such a proposal as I have made will be of concern but really I don’t believe it 
should be when I see government publications in abundance which have been forwarded to small town 
and village post offices far in excess of the number of persons receiving mail at these points. One such 
publication which comes to mind is a catalogue of courses available at community colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I have to say to this Assembly I want the people of Saskatchewan to hear, and as 
many as possible on the air. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 
 


