



















































Hansard: April 02, 1979


1249 
 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 2, 1979 

 

EVENING SESSION 

 

Committee of Finance — Industry and Commerce Vote 19 

 

Item 1 — Continued 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, when we adjourned at 5 o’clock we were on item 1, Industry and Commerce. 

Item 1 agreed? 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Here I thought we were already off item 1. I would like you to undertake 

(rather than supply it tonight) if you would; the Aid to Trade Program. I want to know who went on what 

conferences, if any out of province travel, the amount spent et cetera by each individual? 

 

I would like to know with reference to the Economic Development Program and the special ARDA 

(Agricultural Rehabilitation and Development Agreement) Program about 48 projects. I would like to know 

how much was the break down on the cost per job and whether or not those jobs were full time, the 495 that 

you refer to, or whether they were one year job situations or permanent jobs. I would like to know the cost of 

setting up each one of those jobs. I would like to know how many people underneath that program were 

receiving social assistance that were subsequently hired. 

 

(You know I could make a comment to the Minister of Social Services about the quicker we get them 

working and him out of a job, the better off we all are). O.K. I would like to know that and I would like to 

know how many actually were receiving assistance at the time that the job was created and then brought into 

the job, eh? 

 

I note that some of the jobs created or some of the businesses that you’re investing in (I refer to a cabinet 

making facility, I believe, in North Battleford). I’m wondering, when you set up a project like that, what 

studies you do to see whether you’re in fact competing with other locally owned Saskatchewan businesses or 

not and if you would tell me in specific what the status of that particular project is? 

 

HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Chairman, there are two parts to that 

question, the first one with respect to the tabling of the Aid to Trade program information. We have already 

tabled that information; you have that. The remainder of the information which you require on the projects, 

Special ARDA (Agricultural Rehabilitation and Development Agreement) and what not, we will get that 

information sent to you. But we are at a loss to know what cabinet factory you are talking about. 

 

MR. LANE: — Well I will have to go through and find it for you. It was with reference to one cabinet 

making or furniture making facility or something like that in North Battleford. 

 

I see, for example, you undertook an in-house evaluation of Canadian supply and demand for kitchen cabinet 

manufacturing. I understand that there was some facility now being embarked upon in North Battleford. Am 

I not correct on that? Or am I jumping the gun? 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1250 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member is making reference to the second last paragraph 

on page 7 of the report. The study was not done specifically for any particular manufacturing firm. It was 

done for the information of all manufacturing firms and this is part of the study which was undertaken at that 

time. There is none in particular that we are aware of in North Battleford. 

 

MR. LANE: — The question I asked you was on the special assistance branch and whether they were 

recipients or not. I think the minister may well agree with me that it’s fine to have these programs and it’s 

fine for us to say we are prepared to pay a premium to attempt to get these people out of either the poverty 

cycle or get them some job skills, I think, as well, we’ve got an obligation to monitor that and to ensure that 

it’s not just a one-shot effort and it’s not the same people coming back if it fails, or it’s not the same ones 

that are just using the program. I would like to have this government start to monitor these types of 

programs, to determine how many people we really are bringing out of the poverty cycle and effectively 

breaking them out, and to determine the economic costs of that program. I would hope that the department in 

the future would be monitoring its programs with that in view. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to in that respect agree with the member’s remarks and I 

would hope that we will be able to get that information for you so that you’ll have it. 

 

While I’m on my feet though, Mr. Chairman, under that subvote we have this evening the report of the study 

that was made (that was in question this afternoon) from D.D. Dick Engineering. However, this is the only 

copy that we have — the only copy. With your indulgence I would like to Xerox it before I table it. 

 

MR. LANE: — I note on reading the annual report that you get the Field Services Branch to improve the 

level of management and operating techniques in Saskatchewan business. Planning Division does the same 

thing — management techniques and different departments all seem to be assisting in management skills. It 

strikes me as a serious duplication of supply of services in the way that you’ve set up the department or 

you’re being repetitive in many parts of the department in its annual report. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, it is a fact that although it may seem to the hon. member that we are 

duplicating our services, it is a fact, however, that we are providing more and more services to business 

management and business advising, but we are definitely not duplicating the program as such. 

 

MR. LANE: — Would you undertake to supply to me, from each of your Field Services Branch, the names 

of the advisors — same thing with marketing and those aspects of your department that deal with the 

business community and advising businessmen or those in business or potentially in business in the 

province. I would like to know the names of each of the individuals in your department and I’ll accept your 

undertaking to supply them and the educational background and business experience of each of them. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, that’s no problem although the hon. member realizes that it’s going to 

take a little time but to the best of our ability we’ll give him some of that information. 

 

MR. LANE: — Now, on the matter of intergovernmental affairs — Page 12 of the annual  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1251 

report — can you advise us in what specific areas you were active in the year under review or under this last 

year and in what specific areas your department will be active next year? I’m referring to the economic 

corporation projects in western Canada, industrial energy conservation programs. What specific areas are 

you zeroing in on and what did you do in this year? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, firstly, what we had done in the last year was the evaluation of the 

general agreement on tariffs and trades and the general economic co-operation with the western provinces 

and the co-ordination of the federal provincial activities on industrial adjustments. Those were the activities 

that we referred to that were done and those in the future that we are looking at at this point in time are the 

expansion of the federal provincial activities on industrial development. 

 

MR. LANE: — I think we have shown over the last couple of days that in fact the department is sadly 

lacking in its own ability to be an initiator. Certainly nothing done on FIRA. You sit back and wait for 

Ottawa to make a move and then you decide whether or not you are going to make a decision on it. Now we 

find that on western co-operations that, in fact it mainly comes though federal initiatives by the looks of 

things, and I include in that the general agreement on tariffs and trade because that certainly is not a 

provincial initiative. Sadly lacking in an ability or a capability to be an initiator except in one area by the 

looks of things where you shouldn’t be and that is in an awful lot of those deals like Henninger and some of 

those that are in shaky financial merit to say the least. 

 

I asked you earlier about duplication. One goes to the communications branch. You see in the 

communications branch that they’re doing promotions; help with the various projects and provide brochures 

and organize. Then we get the Aid to Trade Program doing promotions. I am sure there is other areas in there 

doing promotions. It strikes me that we have got different people in different branches all running around 

trying to get as many trips as possible and I don’t know how successful they are. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the Communications Branch does not, on its own, prepare all of this 

information. It is there to provide the services to the various branches that ask for assistance within the 

department. 

 

MR. LANE: — I would like to ask you one final question on this agent general. It has been a perennial 

problem and that is that some time people may want to know exactly what that agent general does. The 

interesting thing about the agent general is that the Office of the Agent General flies right in the face of the 

Premier’s earlier statements in this Assembly, for example, that we leave it up to the federal government to 

deal with other governments, that we don’t think it a proper place for the province to be dealing with other 

countries and that it is a matter for the national government. That is what he said. I know that the hon. 

member happened to be on a good holiday and missed a lot of the House, but when he is here he can 

certainly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . obviously he spent some time there with him when he was there. 

 

The fact is that we can never find out, nor has the department answered (and the question has been asked for 

some years) as to specifically, which companies were encouraged to come here. Which specific contacts 

were made; what were the results of those contracts? I think that this Office of the Agent General, in my 

view, should be wound up unless we start to see some hard results. We would be better advised 

(unfortunately it got a little political a few years ago) to be directing our energies over to the Pacific Rim, as 

opposed to Europe, unless we are  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1252 

seeing some hard and fast concrete results from our expenditure in that area. I think it could be wound up; 

we would be better off having offices in the United States; we would be better of having offices in Japan and 

the Far East than we would be in England. I suggest to you that unless you are able to start determining some 

sound economic benefits and do a sound cost analysis, that it is time for that department to be wound up as 

not doing the job that it was set out to do — that agency. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. members was questioning as to what involvement the Office of 

the Agent General has with the industries and what service they provide. 

 

MR. LANE: — No. I know that. I said, specifically who have they brought . . .  

 

MR. VICKAR: — If you just wait for one half moment I will give you that information. That is the 

information I wanted to provide, Mr. Chairman. 

 

During the year under consideration, or within that period of time, the Office of the Agent General was 

instrumental in bringing to Saskatchewan these marketing outlets that the agent general was able to provide 

for Saskatchewan manufacturers, Flexi-Coil Limited, Senstek Limited and B.T. Johnson Scales Limited. 

Now, there are just three of many that may be around that we are quite aware of at this time. 

 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I will tell you right now that your recruiters in the Department of Health 

have more contacts in England than does the agent general in London. If that is the sum total of the record, I 

have no doubt that the officials in the Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce in Ottawa could have 

made just as many contacts if not more. I just suggest to you that, in fact, we would be better off if we 

decided to contradict the Premier and have contacts with other governments outside the province. We would 

be well-advised to direct our energies to the United States and to the Far East than to Europe. The federal 

government can handle European . . . I notice very pointedly that you didn’t refer to some of the uranium 

companies, of course which came through mineral resources. I think that it is time to wind that one up and 

shift our directions elsewhere. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, for the information of the hon. member, I want him to know that the 

agent general in London does not deal with other governments. He only deals with the various companies 

that we want him to get involved with and that he can seek out for our industries. The agent general’s office 

in London has also been a help in locating and inviting specific types of personnel for the province and for 

promoting tourism. There are many programs that the agent general is involved in which are not spelled out 

in our report, but it is part of the governmental function. 

 

MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Chairman, I want some information, and it may take you a little 

while to get it. I would like to know all of the areas your department has provided assistance to in the past 

year that have generated new jobs within our province. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I gave the House the information yesterday I think, on the various 

programs and the various estimated number of jobs that we think we provided. It is very difficult for the 

department to come up with the specific number of jobs provided by the various types of programs. If they 

are going to deal with every subject, it will probably take them six or eight months to do so. How are they 

going to pin it down on a per job basis? I don’t know. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1253 

MR. SWAN: — I think that you could do better than that. You know when you go out to assist industry to 

come into our province, you must have a point in mind. Otherwise, there is no need for your department. If 

you are going to invest funds in any industry coming into our province you should have some idea whether 

or not they are going to create new job opportunities within the province and that’s the type of information 

we’ve been looking for. You gave us a very broad statement but you didn’t give us anything point by point 

of different industries that you have assisted and different jobs that have been provided because of it. I would 

like to have those figures. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, again I might say that in every area that we invest funds, wherever our 

department invests funds in, I gave you that information yesterday. Other than that we provide assistance to 

the private sector and other areas. We don’t have a record of the exact jobs that are created as a result of that. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Just a couple of questions for the minister. In one of the questions posed by the member 

for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) he asked you about possibly doing away with the agent general and spending 

more time with our expertise in our third world countries; I wonder if the minister can tell me — you 

mentioned three companies that he has been successful in selling overseas on our Saskatchewan market — 

can you tell me what type of work-ups we do towards this agent general? What do we do to acquaint him 

with our products? Does he spend so much time of the year travelling through Saskatchewan with our 

manufacturing . . .  

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please! I am sorry to interrupt the hon. member but I realized when the 

member for Qu’Appelle was asking his questions that I feel these should be asked under subvote 6 of the 

Office of the Agent General but I allowed it to go on while he asked and the minister replied. Now I have the 

member for Estevan following it up on item 6 and I would prefer if you would deal with it when we come to 

that item. I feel that would be the proper place and it would keep things in order. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister what criteria, or what we do in the 

various locations such as Estevan when an industry wants to locate there, like a manufacturing plant? I know 

you have an industry and commerce man there and I think he’s pretty good; but I would like to know what 

happens when somebody moves in and wants to build augers? Just what takes place with your representative 

at that area? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Well, if somebody wants to build augers I would imagine the first thing he would do is 

go to the office if he wants to use our help. He can go it on his own if he wishes; but if he wants to use our 

help he will come to our Department of Industry and Commerce representative at that particular office and 

we will provide the business counselling for him and find out what he requires in order to establish a 

manufacturing industry in Estevan — that could be market studies, that could be feasibility studies, that 

could be many things; it could lead on to the evaluation of properties and what have you. From there, he is 

given an idea of whether he is eligible for various programs or whether he is not. It opens up a complete new 

program for the chap who wants to get involved. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, do you play a part in arranging for or directing these possible new 

industries to financing? Do you have any preference, when they are going for financing? Do you direct them 

say, towards SEDCO, or do you direct them towards the banks? 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1254 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I mentioned earlier this afternoon that our department does not direct 

anybody to any particular finance company. It’s entirely up to the individual. Should the individual ask our 

department, after all else fails, we will make suggestions, if that is necessary, but we will never recommend 

that he should go here or he should go there. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, a few years ago when SEDCO was moving into the banking business, it 

was mentioned that you were using retired people from different segments of industry as the people who 

would advise the industries that were starting up. Can you tell me, is this still the case? Are you using retired 

bankers, retired businessmen to get some of your expertise from in advising these people — such as 

feasibility studies and moving in to a certain type of business? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — I think the hon. member is referring to the case program under the federal department. 

That is nothing to do with our department. We do not necessarily use retired people but we do like to use 

people with business knowledge. They may not necessarily be retired when we employ them. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, are these people who are advising these people who are going into 

business, with regard to feasibility studies, with regard to almost every portion of their business, are they 

experienced and do they generally have a knowledge of the type of business which is being started up? Is this 

where you go for your experience? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — We use our business reps for that information and when our business reps feel they don’t 

have the capabilities or we feel that they don’t, in most cases we farm that out to business consultants. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, the reason I ask this, of course, is the fact that before many of these 

companies start off in business and during their first year, it’s the most important part of their life. If they are 

to receive bad advice or bad direction in starting up, they absolutely have no chance of succeeding. Once you 

get behind the eight ball you absolutely have no chance. I wonder, do you fund some of these people you are 

attempting to help move into a community? Do you fund them in order to see they get the proper direction or 

do you count on your people  whether they are fully experienced in that area or which way do you go on it? 

Do you attempt to help them out to the fullest that your department can? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Again, Mr. Chairman, we bring in consultants to do the work who are experienced if our 

person in the field can’t handle it. We also have cost shared programs — when you’re talking about charging 

the individual client — we have cost shared programs where we will help to maintain the business 

management until such time as he can get on his own feet. We monitor the program along with the 

entrepreneur until such time as we’re satisfied and he’s satisfied that he can go it alone. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Just a couple more questions, Mr. Chairman. Do you immediately, on proving of a 

product, then put this into your chain of goods which you try to sell overseas or does the entrepreneur have to 

make the advancement to you? Does your department approach him with the attempts to help him get into 

the overseas market or even to the American market? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — It varies with the product that is being manufactured. In most cases,  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1255 

though, the manufacturing process goes into our manufacturer’s guide magazine which is distributed widely 

over this continent and in other continents. Of course, it depends on the assistance that the entrepreneur does 

require. If he requires special assistance again, we are prepared to help him. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there are certain areas now, for instance in farm machinery, 

and I think you’re acquainted with that, where we are attempting to sell prairie manufactured goods overseas. 

Don’t you think it takes expertise and not just, for instance a catalogue, to attempt to crash some of these 

world markets? With the proper person promoting these goods in that area, do you not agree that we can do a 

much better job of selling Saskatchewan produced goods? If such is possible, do you encourage cost sharing 

from the prairie manufacturers or do you take the initiative on this or do they have to show you the initiative 

for your department on this? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we take the initiatives to help promote this project but let me tell the hon. 

member — he’s quite aware of this — that the best initiative is taken from the manufacturer himself and that 

manufacturer can make these sales far better than anybody can for him. However, having said that, we do 

assist. Our intertrade program is a good example of what we do to help the manufacturer sell his product 

abroad. 

 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman. A very short question that I’d like answered. This 

afternoon you gave me some salaries — deputy minister, executive director, and one other. Is the executive 

director the second in command of that department, next to the deputy minister? Is that the line of authority? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The management committee consists of the deputy and three executive directors and of 

course if the deputy is not there then there is a directive in the executive positions as to who is to take over. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Who is the senior executive director? So he comes above Wayne Lorch? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes, your question is right. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K. My next question then, who is your associate deputy minister? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Charlie Webster who is retiring at the end of this month. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would that person be your next in command if your deputy minister was not there? 

Wouldn’t it be the associate deputy minister? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — If the associate deputy minister were to be on staff for any length of time, he would have 

been, but because of his retirement (and we knew this quite some time ago) the line of command there has 

changed. He is retiring the end of this month. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — You’ve known that for some time. In other words he has been on the shelf for some 

time and inactive. I take it that’s your answer. Would you give me his salary, answer the same salary 

questions that I had for the previous ones, that is, the 1978-79 estimate, the actual and 1979-80 estimate, 

please? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The 1978-79 estimate was $30,110, the actual 1978-79 was  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1256 

$34,016 and the estimated for the one month, because he retires the end of this month, is $3,050. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Two questions. Are you going to replace the associate deputy minister? Why, if he is 

next in command, would he be that much less than one of the executive directors in salary? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, at this time it does not call for a replacement of the associate deputy 

minister. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, was there a reason why the associate deputy minister who was second in 

command in that department would be — or put it the other way, why would an executive director be $7,000 

or $8,000 higher in salary than an associate deputy minister? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that it’s not uncommon for an associate deputy to have his salary 

less than other branch heads in the department. There’s no particular reason. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, some areas within your annual report I have a couple of questions on. 

 

First of all, you suggest on page 5 of your annual report that you’re assisting manufacturing develop new 

products. Are you suggesting for sales markets or for what purpose? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — No. That program is to help develop new projects for manufacture in Saskatchewan. We 

help the manufacturer develop these projects. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — For example, swathers are a big item in Saskatchewan; all the farmers use them. A 

manufacturer, the only one in western Canada, manufactures a special type of swather attachment, plus the 

canvasses and so forth; would you be assisting him in the marketing of that after he’s developed it or would 

you give him funds to assist him when he was developing it or what’s your effect on that particular project? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Your question would fall into about three or four different categories. First, we have a 

program that would help develop that particular swather that you were mentioning. Second, we would help 

him promote the sale through another program and we would also help him develop the management skills 

to promote the particular industry that he’s involved in and then, further than that, we would help him 

through the Aid to Trade Program to market his product. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, using your third one, the Aid to Trade Program, the one industry I refer to is in 

Saskatoon. It’s the only one in Canada that produces this particular equipment and it’s interesting to watch 

since he tells me that when he made an approach to you people, or agriculture, that they just left him sitting; 

the same with DREE (Department of Regional Economic Expansion) by the way. He’s the only one that 

produces double swather attachments for the market and I’m wondering why you people, with your 

information on agriculture machinery and so forth, are not having information about this particular piece of 

equipment available and printed about. Are you not aware of this piece of equipment? Is that basically the 

problem? 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1257 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, without naming the individual manufacturer (as the member has not 

done), we believe that he took part in our Aid to Trade Program to help him sell his products. We have 

reference here of a particular industry he may be referring to which has received that type of assistance. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, regarding the mode of operation of your department, does somebody 

have to come to you, or when your people hear of a process or a product being produced, do you go to them? 

When DREE gets involved, do you not have a working relationship with them? When somebody goes to 

DREE with a new product, are you not informed about this product possibly coming on stream within this 

province? Or do you totally run your own thing and if they don’t come to you you don’t bother? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — It’s fairly difficult, Mr. Chairman, to have a knowledge of everything that goes on. The 

moment our department hears of any new promotion or industry that is prepared to establish we make 

contact with those particular people. However, having said that, we rely a great deal on the efforts of the 

individual to come to our department for assistance. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well do your people go to shows like agribition, mexibition and others where they see 

people with new products usually available to the public in agriculture, to talk to these people and to suggest 

that you could assist them, or do you just stay away from that? Do you leave that to the Department of 

Agriculture? What are the rules of the game here? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — We do provide the information that is necessary at the agribitions and mexibitions and 

the trade fairs the member is mentioning. As a matter of fact, in many cases, we are co-sponsors of those 

exhibits and we try to encourage the manufacturers to get involved with us and the trade fairs so that we can 

help them promote their products. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Your comment that you assist in sponsoring some different items, makes me think of 

the North Battleford show that we see referred to in your highlights here about all the products, handicrafts 

and so forth and the show that you run there. Could you tell me, because of the handicrafts show in 

Battleford and because of the assistance you give people to have booths at other different hobby shows, is it 

creating any solid businesses? I mean people who have moved from the hobby situation into the employment 

situation — something year round rather than a hobby? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Oh yes, Mr. Chairman, there are quite a number of these that have been established as a 

result of the handicraft promotion in Battleford. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — You indicate, I notice, that the sales in 1977 were approximately $62,000. What about 

the other places where you, for example, paid people’s entry fees into shows and you made up the nice little 

sign card that they hung above their booth and so forth? What are the shows and do you have an idea what it 

cost your department to do this particular type of project? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, for the hon. member’s information, if he refers to the brochure or the 

information I tabled this afternoon, in amongst that he will find the information that he’s looking for, I am 

told. 

 

I’d like to send across to him the magazine Prairie Implement Guide for 1979 and see if  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1258 

he’s referring to this particular manufacturer. Do you have one? 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I have that one and I haven’t found that particular one. Now, another 

question of your program suggests that under Aid to Trade programs, 136 grants were approved costing 

$60,000, which resulted in direct sales impact of approximately $4 million returned to Saskatchewan 

businesses. Can you give me a little more information on that statement? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Again, Mr. Chairman, we tabled that information which gives the hon. member the cost 

to us and the total value of sales that were a net result of the involvement of the Aid to Trade program. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — On page 7 of your annual report you refer to two things. The first one is Crawford’s 

Foods. The Minister is probably aware that Crawford’s Foods was sold the other day. I would ask if industry 

and commerce have any funds involved or were they just there to assist the promotion of these new ideas 

that were started? If you have funds available were you reimbursed or what? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Our involvement there was in a productivity study for Crawford’s Foods. We have no 

money invested in Crawford’s Foods and we were not involved in the transfer of the business. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Productivity study? Are you talking about new products availability or are you talking 

about the best production per man-hour as worked? If you are talking about the second, where do you get the 

experts to be able to assist a company, or do you hire them for that? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The study was for the improvement of the productivity of the plant and we hired 

consultants to do that study who had the expertise. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — What you are suggesting is that you pay for consultants to come in and recommend to 

Crawford Foods ways of streamlining their operation to get a better product to the market or a cheaper 

product to the market. Could you tell me what it cost you and what increase in productivity or do you think 

that study will benefit Crawford Foods Limited? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — We don’t have that information, Mr. Chairman, but my people tell me that that 

information could be made available to you. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I would like to go to another portion of your program which you mention on page 11 

— Operation Recycle. Basically, you indicate that the company that did the contract for several years, of 

crushing cars and so forth, has completed its obligation; but I notice that there are all kinds of little people all 

over the province picking up vehicles and piling them here and there. Who has now got the contract for 

squashing them and hauling them and so forth? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — We are referring here to phase 1 of the program which is now completed; but the same 

contractor has now under phase 2 completed his tender, his bid to us, and is now starting the second phase of 

the program. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Well, let me ask: are each of the tow trucks or people who pick up scrapped vehicles 

around the province, on a formula paid so much per vehicle on a contract? I’ll use my own area for an 

example. There is a fellow out with a little truck and 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1259 

picks up scrap vehicles, hauls them to a compound and there is a crusher comes in every so often, crushes 

them and they haul them to Regina. Is he paid by the area he serves? Is he paid by a basic fee or is he paid so 

much a vehicle or so much tonnage? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The province is divided into about 60 contract areas and in each one of these areas there 

has been a contract let by tender. Whoever is doing the picking up won that contract by tender. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — One question here. Let’s use the Warman area contractor. Do you have his name 

there? O.K. He is paid directly for what he picks up and that’s how he is paid or how does he get paid for 

what he does? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — He is paid by the ton if he delivers to the compound. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is he allowed to charge people for picking up their scrap vehicles when he comes in 

their yard? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — No, we don’t think he is. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — You’re suggesting then if the scrap dealer comes in my yard — I phone him and say 

I’ve got this car I want moved and taken to the heap — that he is not allowed to charge me? Is that correct? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — To my knowledge. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Does he have the option when he takes that vehicle from my place to take it anywhere 

he chooses or he is automatically committed to take it to Operation Recycle? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — He is under contract with us and he’ll only get paid from us based on the tonnage that he 

supplies to the central location. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — My problem is, I’ve been informed in my own area that when the contractor you have 

is notified of the vehicles, he comes in and suggests to the people it should be worth something for them for 

him to haul the vehicles away. I’m asking if he has that kind of right or not. Now the ones he may get paid 

for by the people to take away he may not be taking to your compound. He may take them to a junk dealer 

for all I know. I’m asking does he have that right to make that decision or is anything he picks up supposed 

to go to you people? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — I am told that the operator has to get a release for every vehicle that he picks up and that 

we rely on the integrity of the operator and we rely on the municipal authorities to make sure that everything 

is in order. If there is some discrepancy some place I wish sometime that somebody would bring it to our 

attention. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I will bring the name of the individual and the whole problem to you at 

a later date. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

ITEM 2 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I will start out with the same questions on salaries. I  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1260 

think I might like about three top salaries on that one since there are eight there for $201,000. It seems like a 

fairly heavy salary area; so, you give me at least three of them, will you please? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The 1979-1980 estimate for the three top, I have already given you one. The other two 

are $34,190 and $32,010. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Last year’s estimates and actual salaries of those same two? 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I may, your staff might at the same time go all the way through and get the top of every 

vote as we go. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, can we get this information for you after we’re finished, if we are? 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I’ll accept that if you want to pass it on to me so that we don’t delay the votes 

any longer. I’ll accept that. One other question. In that case, there was an increase of $7,000 on other 

personal services, a decrease of $150,000 approximately on other expenses. But I notice on item 3, there was 

an increase of $150,000. Is there a switch of expenses here or could you explain that please? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Our study which that was taken out of the $150,000 was taken out of other expenses and 

put into the next section under business development. It consolidated our total study funds. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I suspected that that’s what it was; but the other answer to the first part of my 

question, why the $7,000 increase on other personal services under item 2? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Actually, that was only created by the fact of the type of personnel that we’re hiring. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Are there any more personnel or is it the type of personnel? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — It’s the type. There are no more. We’re hiring the same amount of people. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that to expedite matters that under two, three, four 

and five, if you will get me the top salaries of those (estimated ’78-79, actual, and the ’79-80), pass it on to 

me later and I would accept that. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Are you suggesting later this evening or later? 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Tomorrow would be fine. 

 

Items 2 to 5 agreed. 

 

ITEM 6 

 

MR. LARTER: — Just one question on this, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me what the $27,000 increase in 

other expenses is under this vote? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes, that is the rent we are now paying. We are assuming responsibility for this. Prior to 

this, Government Services assumed responsibility for the rent for the  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1261 

property. Now we are paying it. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — How much is that rent? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The rent factor was $45,000. Then there were other incidentals and related factors such 

as the cost of the pound sterling and what have you to transfer, which made up the little difference. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Little different of what? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — If you take the figure that we used last year of $87,820 and $114,530 and subtract one 

from the other it is $46,710 which gives you the . . .  

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — So the extra $1,700, you are saying, is the exchange on the dollar and so on. Could 

you tell me also the salary paid to the agent general and other expenses he’s allowed such as automobile, 

clubs, expense account, etc.? To add to my question also, give me the 78-79 estimate, the actual, and the 

79-80 estimate, for the agent general. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, can we provide that with the other information? 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to have that information now, if possible. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The 1978-79 estimate is $34,110; the 1978-79 actual is $35,710; the 1979-80 estimate is 

$36,150. On top of that he gets a, what we call, representation allowance which is $6,500. Out of that he has 

to pay the same portion as the deputy minister does for the use of the car which is 1 per cent of the value per 

month. Out of this he also has to pay a portion of the rent for his apartment which is $2,400. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Is that apartment in the same building? Oh, it is a separate building. Are the other 

three employees of the Office of the Agent General Canadians, Saskatchewan people, from Europe, England 

or where are they from? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — There are a total of four employees there including the agent general. Two are Canadian 

and two are British. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — So the other — there is one other Canadian besides the agent general and the other 

two are British. Now, you indicated the rent increase was at $27,000. Can you tell us why there is such an 

increase in rent? Why $27,000, making it a total of $45,000? That is the way I understood your answer, and I 

may be wrong. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — It was an increase. I said the rent factor was $45,000. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, the member for Estevan asked you the difference between $114,000 and 

$87,000 and I understood you said it was a rent increase. Is that not correct? 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1262 

MR. VICKAR: — . . . the total other expenses, if you look on the estimate sheet, compared to last year. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Why the extra $27,000? Why have the other expenses gone up by $27,000? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — As far as we are concerned, it is just a straight transfer of duties from government 

services to the Department of Industry and Commerce. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I’ll accept that. Your report indicates a Mr. Merv Johnson is the new agent 

general in England. Could you tell me besides being a defeated member of parliament what his other 

qualifications are for that job? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have Merv’s resume with me but Merv is a graduate of the 

University of Saskatchewan. Merv is a prominent farmer in the Kindersley district and he given the Master 

Farmer’s Award, I remember one year. I could go on and list many, many qualifications and I think I’ll run 

out the clock if you give me the time. 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Minister, could you set out for me in the other expense column — 

$114,530 — could you just simply set out the component parts that came to that total? Do you understand 

what I am saying? Rather than be specific about every one I would take that the financial statement would set 

out so much for this and so much for that and so much for the next thing. Do you have those figures 

available to make up the total of $114,000? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, that figure includes many items and if the hon. member wants each one 

it’s going to take us a little time to give each of them. I can sort of give you the highlights as to . . .  

 

MR. ANDREW: — You can give it to me tomorrow. As long as you’ll undertake to provide me with that 

information that’s all I request. I don’t need it tonight. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, if the minister would give me a copy of that as well, I would 

appreciate that. I want to ask one final question. In your report you indicate that on-the-farm demonstrations 

of Saskatchewan made farm implements were held leading to sales of Saskatchewan farm equipment in the 

United Kingdom, Central Europe and the Scandinavian countries. Ball park — what kind of sales are we 

talking about? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, in those cases the actual sales are negotiated by the companies and the 

value of such sales is not reported to us. We don’t have any figure on that. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Then the next question would be then. It says on the farm demonstrations of 

Saskatchewan made farm implements were held. How many demonstrations were there? Were you talking 

about one or one company, several companies, different tractors, combines, what are you talking about? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — The agent general made the arrangements for the demonstrations for these three 

particular companies that I mentioned earlier. But he was provided the sales, the markets for and we don’t 

have any other information on that. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1263 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, if you are saying that the agent general arranged for demonstrations 

for three different companies, yet you say that you don’t know what resulted in sales, how do you know there 

was any sales resulted from these demonstrations? Were they from other companies, the sales we are talking 

about? 
 

MR. VICKAR: — We have been in contact with these companies, Mr. Chairman, and from the information 

we received from these companies they were very happy with the results of the promotion that was done by 

the agent general’s office. 
 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, would it be asking too much to name the three companies that were 

made these demonstrations in England? 
 

MR. VICKAR: — No, I have already given you those three companies that we were talking about. They 

were Flexicoil Ltd., Sansted Ltd. and B.T. Johnson Scales Ltd. 
 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Scales? Weigh scales? That’s farm equipment? 
 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes it is, sir. 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — One question . . . you know if you would ask a few questions, Mr. Minister, you 

might well find out what is going on in government instead of yapping all the time . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Does the agent general represent the Government of Saskatchewan re the inquiries on 

livestock that are coming into Canada now? Do you represent Saskatchewan when people want to know 

about Saskatchewan livestock and availability for over there? 
 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes, I would imagine he would perform that function if he was asked by the Department 

of Agriculture or whatever — certainly. 
 

MR. KATZMAN: — The Department of Agriculture, I believe, does not have a man there any more. I’m 

just asking if your department now handles those inquiries? 
 

MR. VICKAR: — We handle any inquiries. We direct them to the agent general. 
 

Item 6 agreed. 
 

ITEM 7 
 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I would like a little explanation on that particular area — Portions of 

amounts loaned, the forgiveness, double the previous year. 
 

MR. VICKAR: — In 1973, that program started with the proposition that we would forgive loans that were 

in good standing, 10 per cent per year for five years and also, 50 per cent in the sixth year. We are now in 

that sixth year program and that is why the vast increase in funds repayable or that are written off. That was a 

grant program established back in 1973. 
 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — So in other words, it’s not a receivable that you’ve not been going after; it’s meant as 

such and it was from day one. 
 

MR. VICKAR: — It’s a program that was meant for performance and apparently, everyone of these 

companies are adhering to their program and proving good performance and for that we have granted them 

this money. 
 

Item 7 agreed. 

Item 8 agreed. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1264 

ITEM 9 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, just a very quick question on that one. Why a drop of $200,000 in 

development programs in employment and development? That should have been $300,000, sorry. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — That was in effect, the result of the redistribution of the special ARDA (Agricultural 

Rehabilitation and Development Agreement) Program which is now divided between industry and 

commerce, social welfare and the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Previous to that it was strictly our 

own program. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — With the removal of those other three, does that $1,049,000 then represent the 

equivalent amount of the year before, or is it an increase or decrease from what is left? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — My people tell me it is probably the equivalent to the year before. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — So, the difference between the two is the amounts that went to the other three 

programs?  

 

Item 9 agreed. 

 

 Items 10, 11, 12 agreed. 

 

ITEM 13 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, that is an increase of $100,000. I would like an explanation on that. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes, when that program was introduced originally, we expected to introduce the program 

so that it would become effective on the first of January and that is why the estimate at that time was 

$250,000. Subsequently it was not introduced until, and it became effective, on April 1 and therefore, the 

increase in $100,000 is because of the expectation of the increased activity by the program. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I am not sure I understood that answer. Is it a longer period for that 

$350,000, or are you talking about a year and three months now? What has the time of the year got to do 

with the increase? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — There was no actual expenditure under that program during the year because it was 

introduced on April 1, therefore, under that particular program there will not be any expenditures, at any rate, 

until April 1 this year, because the interest abatement is not paid at any time during the year. It is paid on a 

12-month basis. It is 12 months after the application was received. The program took effect April 1, 

therefore, the first application could have conceivably been effective April 1, which will be paid out April 1 

this year. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, then why have we got a $250,000 estimate in the 1978-79 estimates column? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — That is what I said earlier. The estimates were prepared before the decision was made to 

go it on April 1. We assumed that we were going to start on January 1. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Of 1978? 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1265 

MR. VICKAR: — Of ’78, right. And we didn’t until the following fiscal year which was ’78-’79. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I agree that if the program started on April 1 of 1978, that’s your 

fiscal year — April 1, 1978 to March 31, 1979 would give you 12 months. That doesn’t answer my question 

as to why the increase of $100,000 for the ’79-’80 estimate. We are still talking the same 12 months — we 

are still talking April 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980. I don’t understand your . . .  

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You are confused Paul! 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I am. You are right Ted. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — It’s a very simple deduction. As I said earlier this program only pays itself out after a 

year from the date of application. And because the program was not introduced until April 1, at that time we 

estimated our pay-outs for the ’78-’79 year would have an increased value and that’s why we estimated it at 

$350,000 rather than the $250,000 that we estimated the program would demand based on January 1 when 

we were expecting to introduce it and we did not. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that you didn’t spend the $250,000 last year? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Yes, that’s correct. The moneys which you are talking about were not spent on this 

particular program because they are not being paid out (as I said) from one year from date of application. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Was there any amount spent? Or was the $250,000 not spent at all? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — None of it was spent, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K., well then that just brings up one more question. Then you are saying that 

because of the three months you delayed in starting the program last year you saved $250,000. If you didn’t 

spend any money because of that delay I can’t understand why you’d have the $250,000 there last year. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — That is not because of a delay in the program that we didn’t spend any money. As I said 

earlier, when an application is made for interest abatement, if it’s made today and accepted, then the 

abatement of the interest is not paid out until one year from today. So there’s no money, no transaction, 

whatsoever during the course of the year. That’s what happened in the $250,000 case. No money was spent. 

On April 1st at that time, however, we estimated our programs would need additional funding. That’s why 

we estimated $350,000 for the ensuing year, 78-79 — because of the experience we had from the 

applications that we were receiving in the year 1978-79. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’d just like to get it clear in my mind because — the interest didn’t come due until 

April the 1st of 1979. Is that what you’re saying? On any loan because your program didn’t start until April 1 

of 1978? Okay. But originally you had anticipated the program starting on January 1 of 1978. Then the 

interest on that would have come due on January 1 of 1979. So we’re only talking about January, February, 

March of 1979 on interest abatement. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1266 

You’re saying then that the $250,000 shown for last year was to cover that cost and that period of time, three 

months. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, the three-month period that the member is talking about — gives us an 

idea of evaluating the progress of that program. It has nothing to do with the spending of the money. The 

program was supposed to be in effect January 1 when we estimated we would spend $250,000 that year. 

However, we didn’t bring it in until April 1 of the spring of the year, the fiscal year. That three months gave 

us the time and the experience necessary to realize that $250,000 was not going to be sufficient to cover the 

costs of this program and therefore the increase of $100,000. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you suggest that $250,000, budgeted in the year 1978-79 was not spent 

— none of it was spent and it was all given back to the consolidation fund. Is that correct? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — That’s correct. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So, basically, then, what you’re telling me is that of the total vote last year that you 

were given, $250,000 of that was not spent on the Vote 13, therefore put back into the consolidated fund; so 

basically then, you have part of this money, was it used in any other of your votes? In other words, in your 

estimates from ’78-79, did you use any of this amount of money to balance your department or did you turn 

back the whole $250,000? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — We turned back the total $250,000. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I may be in the wrong place, but if I do, I apologize for that. But what happens if you 

over spend in 12 or 11 or 10 or one of those other programs, do you come in with a supplementary or . . . but 

you can’t use this portion of money, is that correct? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — If we should require additional funds in any one of the other subvotes, we have to go to 

Treasury Board for approval to transfer from one account to the other. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So, any vote, for example like this one where you don’t spend the money, you cannot 

use it in other parts of your department where you over spend. You must go back for additional funds for 

each vote independently. Where the supplementary estimates seem to say the whole department got X 

amount of dollars; It doesn’t seem to break it down to which vote. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — With Treasury Board’s permission, we could use it in other locations, if we needed it. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, that’s exactly the point I was looking for. So, basically then opposition 

members, when we see this figure here, will never know if it’s exactly right. Because you could’ve, with 

Treasury Board’s permission and therefore not coming back to the House for a vote, could’ve moved that 

$250,000 within your department. So, therefore, the members of this House will never get to vote on that 

additional money in each individual slot. Am I correct? 

 

MR. VICKAR: — No, you’re not correct. I suppose that the money could be moved from one place to the 

other, but that’s not the ethics of the program. You don’t do those things. You just don’t do that. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1267 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you suggested to me that with Treasury Board’s permission, you 

could’ve (if you would have overspent in any of your other votes that we’ve handled under Vote 19, if you 

would’ve needed additional funds, you could’ve transferred those funds into those individual votes, 8, 9, 10, 

or whatever with Treasury Board permission and not have to come back to this House for a vote or where 

normally it would come back under supplementary estimates. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — In your 1978-79 estimates, you’ve approved the total amount of dollars period and it’s 

not a necessary thing to come back to the House for a transfer for every odd dollar. And I’m only saying that 

we didn’t have the opportunity to use up the $250,000 in that subvote, should we have required it in another 

subvote, we would have to go back to Treasury Board to make that transfer. But you have . . . the House has 

already accepted the total subvote in last year’s estimate, authorizing us to spend that amount of money. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — I don’t argue with the minister on that portion of his statement. All I am saying, Mr. 

Minister, is when I see the figure in numbers 8, 9, 10, 11, whatever it is, estimated in ’78 and ’79, and when 

you have moved the funds from one vote into others, then I am not getting a true comparison when I am 

going through estimates comparing 1978-79 to 1979-80. My point, Mr. Minister, is when you move these 

funds, should you not have a way of indicating to the House that when it was voted under 13, you have used 

it under 9, 10, 11 or 12, rather than just say it was all in our department, therefore, we can use it anywhere 

we please. 

 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t do business that way. If we had to transfer, we would have told 

you that this was transferred. We are telling you this evening that we didn’t require it. Therefore, we are 

letting it lapse back into the fund. 

 

Item 13 agreed. 

 

Expenditure by Type agreed. 

 

Industry and Commerce Vote 19 agreed. 

 

MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS - Vote 24 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Chairman, I will take the opportunity to 

introduce the officials from the department, starting with Urban Affairs. I think those are the first sub votes 

with which we will be dealing. I have with me on my right, Ray Clayton, the Deputy Minister; to his right 

Dave Innes, the Assistant Deputy Minister; behind me, Don Bennett, the Director of Administrative 

Services; Laurie Joorisity, who is the Accountant for the Administrative Services; and at the back, Nick 

Rudrick, who is Director of the Assessment Branch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

ITEM I 

 

MR. SWAN: — There are a few remarks I would like to make in opening the municipal affairs area. Some 

of them I have made before but I am going to make them again because I believe they need to be said. 

 

To begin with, I am getting many complaints from around this province about the 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1268 

revenue sharing, or the lack of it. It seems if there is revenue that many of the municipalities in the province 

are not receiving enough of it so that they are satisfied. Now, some of them may be receiving. 

 

With your permission, Mr. Chairman, I am going to touch a bit on both urban and rural under subvote 1. We 

will proceed fairly steadily from there on. 

 

In talking to some of the rural municipalities, they have been calling and they tell me that in the first year of 

revenue sharing, they sat back quietly, accepted less money than they had received before revenue sharing, 

said very little, cut staff, cut programs and generally, just sat there, waiting for the day when revenue sharing 

would be in full force and they would start to reap some of the benefits of it. 

 

At the end of the first year, in your wisdom, you decided to change the computational mill rate. As it 

increased, the same municipalities found that this year, when they got the figure from the department, they 

again did not receive as much money as they normally would have with just the ordinary inflationary cost 

increase; so they are naturally not very happy with what they are seeing in the first two years of revenue 

sharing. 

 

I think revenue sharing is perhaps a misnomer. It is really nothing more than a foundation grant program that 

you have established with a shiny new name. I believe that you should inform the people of that — that it is 

just a foundation grant program that you have introduced. Let the people know it; let them realize that they 

are going to have to continue to put in more and more of their own dollars in order to get any money out. 

 

I have mentioned to you before that the rural municipalities are very concerned about the maintenance areas 

that you have established in the province. They feel that you are pushing them into a system whereby they 

are going to operate almost like a small county. They are upset about it. I think that you should be doing 

something to change the attitude in the country, and to change your attitude towards the people of the 

country. 

 

There is a lack of funding for the capital grants, and I have mentioned it a number of times. The comments 

that I got back were that you are waiting for the federal government. The federal government has made its 

move and now I would like to see the provincial government reveal its program for the capital funding for 

the coming years. I think it’s something that is necessary if we are going to see good, solid planning and 

generally good expansion of our Saskatchewan municipal system. It’s interesting to note when you go 

through the estimates that you have provided fairly large increases in salaries in most areas. You’ve provided 

a fair amount of money into the urban revenue sharing pool, a lesser amount into the rural revenue sharing 

pool and still you’re coming up at the end with a fairly large increase in actual dollars — something well in 

excess of 20 per cent for the total budget of the two combined. If you took the amount that you reduced the 

property improvement grant which is about $9.6 million, then it will exceed the 20 per cent by a 

considerable amount. 

 

There are a number of items that I’d like to touch on as we go through, but I would like to ask you, before we 

proceed, for a list of the grants that were paid for 1977, 1978 and 1979 for both the rural systems and the 

urban systems. In providing that information I would like it broken down so that it is meaningful. I would 

like to know the grants for 1977 which those systems received but I would like the comparable grants for 

1978 and the comparable grants for 1979 so that they do show the amount of increase or  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1269 

loss for each system in the province. Now, you won’t likely have that with you tonight but I would ask you if 

you would bring it in later on. 

 

I would appreciate very much if you would start out by telling us why the urbans receive more than the rurals 

in percentage increases? I think that rural Saskatchewan covers a lot of ground. They have a tremendous 

amount of roads to build, a lot of maintenance to continue with day by day and I think they have been cut 

quite a bit short. They feel they’ve been treated as second class citizens in the province and they’d like to 

know why. So, I’d like you to start in that area, please. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I address 

some remarks to both the arguments and the questions put forward by the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose 

perhaps since we’re dealing with both rural affairs and urban affairs in his opening remarks, I can take the 

opportunity to introduce the staff from rural affairs. 

 

Mr. Clampitt, the deputy minister is on my left. To his left, Stan Mingle, the executive director; Mr. 

Gelowitz who is the chief engineer sitting behind Mr. Mingle; Ron Sitter, who is the acting administrative 

officer here and Mr. Ernie Anderson, the bridge engineer, is the other member of the rural affairs staff. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think we are pretty happy with our revenue sharing program and the acceptance of the 

program in the province of Saskatchewan. There is no question that we were introducing a brand new kind of 

program for this country. While there has been an experiment in revenue sharing in the province of 

Manitoba, it has been a very, very narrow program. While there has been a development of revenue sharing 

in British Columbia, it is a fairly complicated program. Both programs simply were not acceptable, in our 

minds, to meet Saskatchewan needs. What we have developed, I think, is a program which is quite readily 

understood as well as being very acceptable. 

 

Now the hon. member made mention that there is a good deal of similarity between our revenue sharing 

program and the foundation grant program for schools. I think we would have to accept that, particularly the 

allocation of a certain portion of the funds out of the revenue pools to both rural and urban municipalities, 

particularly the urban municipalities. There is a good deal of similarity between 40 per cent of the funding 

allocation for urbans with the foundation grant program for schools. I don’t think the hon. member would be 

too surprised at that since the deputy minister of urban affairs here was the grants man in the Department of 

Education. I think (and I think he will agree) that the foundation grant formula for schools was a very, very 

successful program. The allocation of the funds, on a foundation or equalization kind of basis for the urbans 

only takes up 40 per cent of the total allocation. The other 60 per cent is paid out on a per capita basis. The 

proportion of equalization versus road grants on the rural side, is even less a proportion. While there is a 

similarity, it’s not an extensive similarity. Where it does change significantly, our revenue sharing program, 

Mr. Chairman, relates to the issue and the policy of indexing. Because now that the pools of money are 

established, next year we’ll be indexing those pools, or those funds, (and there are two of them) to factors in 

the economy as laid down in the revenue sharing legislation that was passed here in the Assembly a year ago. 

 

Now with respect to the amount of money available to the municipalities, the increase in revenue sharing 

pool to the rurals last year was $7 million. There was $6 million allocated to roads, bridges and equalization 

and $1 million allocated towards what we call the semiconditional portion of revenue sharing such as the 

road ambulance, the  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1270 

fire protection, the recreation which is to come. This year the allocation is an additional $6 million to the 

rurals, broken down into roads and equalization, with a million carried forward for the ambulance program, 

the fire protection program, the recreation program. 

 

So what we have seen is the increase for the rural municipalities going from about $18.5 million to $32 

million in two short years. 

 

The hon. member will recall that SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), in coming 

forward with their position on revenue sharing, indicated to the government that they felt that the objective 

of the fund, or the objective of the pool, should be in fact $33 million. So we’ve fallen a million short of 

their request of two years ago but we’ve come very, very close and we’ve provided a good deal of new 

revenue to the municipalities over a two-year period. 

 

With respect to the urbans, our increase was $12 million a year ago, $10 million for per capita and 

foundation, $2 million allocated for road ambulance, fire and recreation. An additional $10 million is 

provided in this year’s budget, the $10 million going towards the per capita and for the foundation, with the 

$2 million carried forward to bring their total pool to $45 million. 

 

Now, the hon. member indicated a concern abut the level of the funding. I suppose there always will be a 

concern with the amount of money that’s allocated to municipalities. I think there will always be a case to be 

made that there isn’t quite enough. Just as when we do our budgeting process there never is quite enough. So 

I think there can always be a case made for that. We feel we have provided very handsomely over two years 

in terms of funding for the both the rural and the urban municipalities. With respect to the breakdown in 

terms of the amount for the urbans and the amount for the rurals, I think we are pretty well in line because it 

seems to me when you look at a population of about 600,000 people living in the urban communities and, 

let’s say about 400,000 in the rural communities, a $32 million breakdown is about right. One has to 

understand that the rural municipalities have high costs in road construction but one has to also understand 

that the urbans, particularly the larger the urban, have some built in operating costs which must be met and 

our objective is to accommodate both. 

 

With respect to the allocation of funds, our practice has been to provide all members with allocations — and 

I think I provided to the hon. member the allocation to the urbans. We have the rural one ready. He has asked 

for the allocation for last year and the year before. We’ll be glad to provide that information to the hon. 

member, but it will take us a bit of time to put it together. 

 

MR. SWAN: — I think that when you talk strictly on the ratio of people — now there may be 600,000 in the 

cities and something around 400,000, a little under, in the rural — but I think you must also look at the size 

of the province that you are talking about, the amount of road building that is needed in rural Saskatchewan, 

the distance for ambulance travel that you have in rural Saskatchewan, and the cost of fire protection in the 

type of area you are looking at. And I believe that you can’t go on strictly numbers of people to break out 

your figures. 

 

In the high assessed municipalities in the province the grants have actually gone down and I think that your 

minister will verify that. In the lower assessed areas most of them are quite happy. They are getting a fair 

increase. But when I talk to the people in  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1271 

Rosetown, in Milden Lake and in Kindersley, the story is not a story of luxury at all but rather a story of less 

grants today than they received two years ago. I think that that in anybody’s language can’t be fair treatment. 

When inflation is running each year fairly high, approximately 8 per cent a year ago and this last year closer 

to 9 per cent, to get less money in grants than you had received before. It can’t be working out right. I think 

your formula needs to be looked at in order to bring it into line. So I’m asking you if you have given some 

thought to a change of formula that will start to produce some revenue to these areas? They’re paying taxes 

and they’re paying lots of taxes. But they should be getting some grants and they’re getting very little. 

 

They tell me in the area around Rosetown, that they can’t afford to go ahead and build roads since the 

revenue sharing system has come into play. If they’re going to build any new roads, they’re going to have to 

build it completely out of their own money because the extra cost that you demand to engineer the type of 

roads you demand in order meet the qualifications for grid road standards, are so high that they just can’t go 

ahead even with the grant you do pay. They still must pay something like 58 per cent of the cost of the road. 

They tell me that that additional cost is far more then they can ever hope to recover in grant. So, I would like 

your comments on that area. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the road grants, I think the hon. member will know 

that the main road grant is the main farm access grant and there’s a formula for allocation of provincial funds 

towards that grant. I can get that information for the hon. member if he wishes it. But basically, what we 

have done is to set an objective of the construction of approximately 1,000 miles a year in that program area 

and we’ve allocated funds in relationship to getting that done. Last year, $9 million, this year $11 million is 

the allocation toward main farm access. That means their main farm access allocation has gone up, probably 

about 10 per cent or more. 

 

With respect to equalization, I think the hon. member will be aware because I talked about it at SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention, that a year ago there was a concern 

expressed about the equalization formula. We established a committee representative of SARM, of councils, 

of the department, to look at that equalization formula. They took a look at it; they put forward some 

recommendations and when we applied their recommendations to the allocation of funds, we found there 

continued to be a problem. The hon. member will know that we provided what I would call a grandfather 

clause to accommodate that particular problem. The hon. member will also know that I indicated at SARM 

that the equalization examining committee, for want of a better word, will remain in place and I will be 

asking them again to review that equalization formula to see if we can adjust it to accommodate the 

problems that came forward as a result of application this year. 

 

MR. SWAN: — When you spoke of the grandfathering, any time that I have worked with a group that talked 

about a grandfather clause, and that was mostly in the educational field, if you grandfathered somebody he 

didn’t receive less than he had the year before. That is not happening under this grandfather. This must a 

different kind of grandfather and I wish you would explain what he is like. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, as far as the grandfathering, this year, to my knowledge what it has 

meant is that no rural municipality receives less in the equalization formula this year than they did last year. I 

think when I present to the hon. member the list that he has requested, he will see that that is, in fact, the 

case. 

 

MR. SWAN: — I am interested to find out why the figures that I am reading for salaries  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1272 

throughout this estimate, are showing so high. I would like some explanation as to why, in many cases, we 

are seeing salary changes that are running 15 per cent and over. I think we need explanations on them and if 

you would like to provide the list of salaries for many of these areas, at least for the top people, that it would 

assist considerably in the process as we go through. Can you give me some of the top salary figures? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I think that two factors for the hon. member would be the negotiated increase, or 

the increase, and additionally increments. I can give the hon. member the deputy minister of rural affair’s 

salary: for 1978-79, at $42,475; the executive director for 1978-79, $37,806; for the chief municipal 

engineer, $34,991; for the deputy minister of urban affairs, 1978-79, $43,680; for the assistant deputy 

minister, $41,916. As the hon. member will know, the former deputy minister of municipal affairs is a 

special advisor to the minister, on formulas, legislation and so on. That is Mr. Walters. His salary is $41,224. 

 

MR. SWAN: — Could I have the comparable salaries for the estimated year for 1979? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — For the Deputy Minister of Rural Affairs, $44,141; for the executive director, 

$40,500; for the chief municipal engineer, $36,239. The three I gave you: for the deputy minister of urban 

affairs, $44,885; for the assistant deputy minister, $44,885; for the special advisor, (that’s Mr. Walters, the 

former deputy), $42,360. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, would you provide, at your pleasure, tomorrow or the next day, a list 

for all of the items under your department, under urban and rural — all areas of your department where 

salaries are involved — the salaries for every item under your department, including the 1978-79 estimated 

salaries, the 1978-79 actual salaries paid and the 1979-80 estimated salaries for all of the people that I have 

just asked for? At your pleasure. I won’t ask the question again if you will give me your list in the next 

couple of days. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I want to get the question clearly. What you are asking for is the actual 1978-79, 

and the estimated 1979-80? Is that clear? Is that senior staff or all of the staff? 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I will send over a form that I have made out. It will explain exactly 

what I want, but I want the senior staff of every item. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, vote 12, vote 18 and vote 19 of your department all refer to water, so I 

would like to do them all in comparison. They are all involved with water or assistance regarding water. 

Now vote 20 I’m not sure where to tie in, so I might do it under vote 20 separately. But all three of these 

votes refer to the spending of money to assist communities with water supply or grants for water and so 

forth. Could you explain to me, on vote 12 and vote 18, what the difference is between those two? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Municipal Water Assistance program will be pretty 

familiar to the hon. members since it provides grants to villages and towns up to a maximum of 50 per cent 

for water and I think it is 30 per cent for sewage. That program has been around for some time and it is of 

real benefit. Subvote 18, The Water Pollution Control Assistance Act, was just, within this budget, 

transferred from the Department of Environment to the Department of Municipal Affairs, Urban Division. I 

suppose the best way to describe it, Mr. Chairman, would be an incentive for sewage  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1273 

treatment program. 

 

Mr. Chairman, no. 19 refers to special projects involving an agreement with PFRA (Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Act). The $315,000 is the province’s share of those special high-cost projects. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if I have to go to DNS (Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan) on this one or if it is your department. In the North, road transportation is pretty difficult and 

right now the air ambulance is doing most of the flying. Are you giving any assistance to a private — let’s 

assume Lac La Ronge wanted to have a service and yet they have to bring people to Saskatoon. How do you 

assist them on those? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I think I would ask the hon. member to direct the question to the 

Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Byers). Our program covers south of the DNS line, the established 

districts and so on. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Some other questions. As I understand, is it your department or branch of your 

department that pays half the costs of a transit system bus when Saskatoon or Regina buys one? I believe you 

pay some assistance on fire fighting equipment for R.M.s and cities. Could you explain those, too? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — The urban transit program, Mr. Chairman, comes under the Department of 

Highways. There are no fundings for urban transit in municipal affairs. With respect to fire protection, we 

have no capital program. We have an operating grants program where there’s an agreement between 

municipalities to provide fire protection. Now, the municipalities may decide to put it towards capital but it’s 

really meant to be a program to assist with operating. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — That’s the dollar grant, I believe. On that particular grant, Mr. Minister, I believe it’s a 

five-year or you suggest to the people it’s five years but it depends if it comes up to the budget each year. 

Could you correct me if I’m wrong — is it a five-year or is it just each year as we vote it through in the 

House and you can’t change the program? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a dollar per capita with a maximum each year and we’ve made 

no reference at all to the length of an agreement at all. As long as they have an agreement then we’ll provide 

the grant. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So what the minister is saying is as far as you aware any R.M. that gets into one of 

these arrangements can count on those amount of dollars coming each year for perpetuity, basically. Is there 

an end line on this program right now or does the House just cancel it and that’s the end of it? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, I think, there’s no end line. Our assumption is, Mr. Chairman, that once the 

ambulance districts, the fire protection areas are spread throughout the province, those will automatically roll 

in to the revenue sharing pool and will be funded automatically. That’s our assumption and we’ll venture 

into new areas, let’s say, as an example, possibly rat control or garbage disposal. So I think we can assume 

that they’ll continue to be supported for fire protection and it would eventually be indexed. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I want to go a little further on this one because in my  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1274 

own constituency right now everybody is into the fire truck syndrome and making sure of protection for the 

people in the area. My concern is that nowhere do I find anything within the government to suggest the type 

of fire truck, the equipment they should have or recommendations on what they should look like for rural 

fighting. Urban is a different thing and there’s no way that he inspects them. 

 

Mr. Minister, in Ontario, for an example, anybody that has a fire truck is required to be inspected by a 

department of the government to make sure that it meets the standards the province requires and also 

requires that one or two volunteer firefighters are trained. Now I understand that is already being done in 

some department of the government where volunteer fire departments are trained. My concern is the array of 

oddball equipment that we are seeing coming out into the rural areas and the way it is not interchangeable. 

There is no basis for what they are buying. A fire truck is just a fire truck people think — a tank with water 

on it. My concern is that equipment. We should have some guidelines for lack of a better word; they should 

be told. These are the type of things you can look for. A rural fire truck — its concern is to have a large 

abundance of water. A town fire truck has got the hydrant system. Are you doing anything on that line of 

work? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, make it clear that this is a municipal program and there is only one 

condition on our funding under revenue sharing. That condition so far as fire is concerned is that there is 

agreement to provide fire trucks to a broader community than has been the case. The hon. member will know 

of cases where the town fire truck stopped at the edge of town and wouldn’t go out to the country to fight a 

fire. This is to accommodate that particular problem. That’s the only condition. 

 

What is provided through the fire commissioner’s office which is established in the Department of Labour is 

a program of seminars and provision of advice to municipalities seeking both the seminar and the advice. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — My question is would you suggest to the Department of Labour or your own 

department that when they sign this agreement which the minister has to witness before he gives out the 

grant, that the equipment doing the job should at least be capable of giving protection rather than leaving 

people with a false opinion that they have protection when actually a 200 gallon water truck fights nothing 

rurally. Are you considering recommendations or suggesting to these municipalities that go in with an R.M. 

on a joint that the equipment needed is something or another. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I think, Mr. Chairman, at this point in time we have a good deal of confidence in 

the municipalities. I think from what I have seen of their agreements they are building themselves in some 

pretty good equipment. I think we will just maintain the condition of agreement so far as this department is 

concerned. 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Minister, a question from the people in my riding with regard to 

the road maintenance area. They have expressed a concern to me that this program seems to be superimposed 

on them from Regina as opposed to allowing the people from the area to determine whether or not they wish 

to have a larger area to be dealing with in their road program. Could the minister comment on that concern? 

It’s a concern for a lot of the people in the rural municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to get into the history of super-grid or of maintenance 

areas because I have a speech in my desk that I was giving on a motion resolution by the hon. member for 

Rosetown-Elrose. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1275 

We are aware of two concerns with respect to the super-grid program. The very, very broad concern for the 

mileage, both construction and oil, of that program — there is a great deal of concern arising with the rural 

municipalities about particularly the high cost of oil. Additionally, we’re aware of the concern of the 

municipalities with the authorities or the maintenance areas. What has been established is a committee of 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), municipal councils and the Department of 

Rural Affairs, to examine that program. I hope the committee will report prior to the June round of regional 

meetings so we’ll have an opportunity, at those regional meetings of SARM, to discuss their 

recommendations and firm up the policy. 

 

I have indicated to the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose that I believe the request for grid reconstruction 

has some relationship to the possible policy change with super-grid. We can consider that then as well. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — A further follow-up on that question. What some of the R.M. people are saying to me is 

that we don’t agree with this program. A lot of them are perceiving it to be the county system argument that 

was argued a number of years ago in this House. That’s what the people are afraid of and they are concerned 

about that problem. What they’re saying to me is that we don’t accept this county system argument. If in fact 

the county system is going to come there’s going to be larger rural municipalities, larger rural councils, then 

let’s have them directed in a way more relevant to the people of rural Saskatchewan — that the concept of 

coterminous boundaries of this, that, and the next thing sort of fall into place. You are looking at trade 

patterns and that type of thing when you’re determining whether the R.M. of Eston, for example, perhaps 

goes into the Kindersley area rather than down to Elrose and Beechy — down in there where there is no 

trade pattern whatsoever. So that’s the other concern as expressed. I would ask the minister to perhaps 

comment on that. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. member for Kindersley, I make it clear, as I 

do over and over again, that we have no plans as a government for the introduction of a county system or 

modified county system or regional government. 

 

Clearly, the policy of the government is to encourage co-operation with some of the higher cost programs. 

Ambulance is an example of that. Fire protection, that the hon. member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) was 

debating just a minute ago, is part of that. The recreation program, the details of which I hope to announce 

very shortly, is part of that. I think the maintenance of oiled roads, where you have a system of connectors, is 

part of that, but it is not related to a policy thrust of this government to establish counties or regional 

government. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Does the minister, though, agree with me that it does tend to lead towards larger R.M. 

areas? In other words, you know you are joining, perhaps, three in most cases, into the maintenance area and 

really do you start interworkings of the government of those three rural R.M. councils? And really what they 

are seeing is that . . . perhaps, I say county system down the road. I don’t suggest for a minute that you are 

trying to say that it is a county system now. But what we are seeing is a system being forced on the people of 

rural Saskatchewan that says that now you in R.M. 1, 2 and 3 must sort of be into this group together. So, 

what you are, in fact, creating is larger areas for the given R.M. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I think you can say that, as I say, we are encouraging co-operation for the delivery 

of certain programs. The ambulance area it has meant districts, districts 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1276 

involving villages, towns and rural municipalities, cities and so on. With fire it has meant agreement 

between municipalities. 

 

We think, based on what the commission (which was established under the former Minister, Mr. Wood) 

suggested as the vehicle to maintain the system, we are providing that vehicle in the maintenance area 

approach. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, as I said, there is a committee looking at the mileage situation. They will, in that 

examination, be considering maintenance areas. And for my part we are prepared and we are open to look at 

the recommendations that that committee brings forward. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I omitted to ask a couple of questions a little earlier when I was 

asking about salaries. Does your department have any individual companies, partnerships, whatever, under 

contract and have you had any consultants in your department within the last 12 months? Or do you 

anticipate any? Also, I see your department is fairly well staffed. How many vehicles are you providing to 

your department? How many are you renting from CVA? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, in order of the questions of the consultants, the consultants in two 

areas: one, tied to the regional studies which are by agreement with the federal government and the 

municipal governments, Regina, Saskatoon, P.A., that work is ongoing and as soon as it is complete, we’ll 

be releasing the recommendations of those studies. 

 

The other area where we had the consultant of course, as the hon. member will know, will relate to 

Meewasin Valley and that consultant will be familiar to you, to the hon. member as a result of last Thursday 

evening. 

 

The number of vehicles in urban affairs is 44, in rural affairs, 37. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, just to add to those two questions. I take it your deputy minister 

receives a car on the same basis as the other deputy ministers have been getting: one at $75 or 1 per cent of 

the cost? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — In both of these cases, the deputy ministers have preferred to use their own vehicle. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Then are they paid an allowance for the use of their own vehicle? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Each to his own. The Deputy Minister of Urban Affairs is on a $75 per month, 

plus 8 cents per mile. So he’s operating on that basis and that’s his option; and the deputy minister of rural 

affairs is operating on from up to 12,800 kilometres at 13 cents, 13.5 cents per kilometre from 12,008 to 

19,003 - 11.19 cents and over 19,003 - 9.63 cents. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased that the Deputy Minister of Rural Affairs has 

decided to go kilometres. What happened to the other? You indicated 8 cents per mile. Are we using both 

systems in your department? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I will let the hon. member figure out the kilometres. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you. I won’t bother spending too much time on it, but I am  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1277 

surprised you are using both systems in your department. 

 

The other question I have — you indicated consultants in your regional studies and you indicated one 

consultant — Meewasin Valley. How many in the regional studies, at what cost, and what cost is the 

consultant for the Meewasin Valley? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the easiest thing to do is to provide the hon. member 

with a list of the consultants attached to the regional studies and their costs. I think we can do that. We don’t 

have that with us. I think the cost of the consultant for Meewasin (I’ll get that figure for the hon. member). 

Perhaps we can go on, Mr. Chairman, and I will just send a note over providing the figure for Meewasin to 

the hon. member. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will just ask you to include then in your information for 

the regional studies the dollar amount that you are paying out, the number of consultants involved, as well as 

the share costs, (I understand you are sharing the costs with federal and municipal governments) and the 

portion paid by each level of government. 

 

MR. LANE: — I haven’t seen Mr. Franson since the election, so perhaps a question or two on Mr. Franson. 

Did he have leave of absence on election day and if so, did he have leave of absence on any other days 

during the recent provincial election campaign? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the staff here report they are not aware of any leave of 

absence provided to Mr. Franson. 

 

MR. LANE: — I am sure you will want to check that out because if you also check the election returns there 

was a scrutineer listed for that particular poll. Perhaps it wasn’t available to the department at all that day 

and you would want to check that out. 

 

My first question deals (and I raised this with the Department of Highways and received no satisfaction) with 

the Rural Municipality of Edenwold, and I know that the Rural Municipality of Edenwold has been in 

contact with the department. It deals in particular with the Copper Sands Mobile Home Park but it also deals 

with the general problems in the rural municipality, and the same applies to the Rural Municipality of 

Sherwood. It is a matter that I have raised in the past, and that is that they do not have either the funds in the 

rural municipality or a program to supply an adequate access road to that particular Copper Sands Mobile 

Park. The rural municipality has attempted to have it placed in the highway system, without success. They 

have requested special status without success; they have tried the gravel pit, or the industrial access program, 

without success. The area is one of those areas where there are a lot of gravel pits and the industrial usage is 

just tremendously high. The rural municipality and the local people are being made to bear the cost of 

something that is not their fault. I know that this has been brought to the department’s attention, but it strikes 

me that we can no longer say to these people, look, nothing is going to be done or nothing can be done. It is 

causing unbelievable problems to people in some of the villages and it is causing a particularly severe 

problem to the Copper Sands Mobile Home. I would like your response to that, whether you can instruct 

your officials to see if we can come up with some answer, because it is not their fault. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I think I am not familiar with the particular piece of road. The deputy minister 

indicates that it is a mile of existing grid. I think that it could be  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1278 

designated as super grid, but that is not the solution the hon. member suggests because of the heavy gravel 

haul. I think therefore, that he is suggesting an industrial access designation, and I can indicate to the hon. 

member that we will ask the department to look at that road from that kind of designation point of view. In 

other words, you just wouldn’t take a vehicle count, you would take the kind of vehicle traffic that is 

operating there. I think we can do that for the hon. member. 

 

MR. LANE: — If you would consider, Mr. Minister, they had attempted that and the ruling came back that 

gravel is not an industry so it was ruled out on that basis. In fact, there’s over half a million cubic yards of 

material being removed from the R.M. of Edenwold alone, most of which goes into the city of Regina. So 

perhaps the easy way of solving the problem is designing, when you have that heavy usage and removal of 

gravel, that as an industry. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, we’re really trying to develop our industrial access policy. It’s tied 

up until now to industry as we know industry, oil and timber. I think there’s an argument for the kind of 

traffic that the hon. member refers to and we’ll take a count and take a look at it. It’s only a very short piece 

of road. 

 

MR. LANE: — Thank you. With regard now to a continuing matter which you and I have discussed which 

deals with that regional planning study. I notice that the press statement by Mr. Franson indicates that the 

department is in the process of summarizing some 30 studies into shorter, more readable papers for the 

communities. Would the minister be prepared to undertake to supply the opposition and the municipalities, if 

they request, the complete studies as well as the summaries that you are having prepared? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. LANE: — Now, my read of the press statement today would indicate that there’s no consideration of 

an urban transit system for the satellite or bedroom communities. Is that not being considered and if not, why 

not? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I have not seen the release today, but the assistant deputy minister who deals in 

this planning area, and this is one of the specific jobs he has to do, indicated to me, Mr. Chairman, that it 

will be part of the study and therefore part of the final report. 

 

MR. LANE: — Would the minister, both in his capacity as Minister of Municipal Affairs and minister 

responsible for Transportation, undertake to give consideration to, (and I would suggest that it be studied, 

because I don’t know the feasibility), communities like the ones, surrounding Regina, Pilot Butte, White City 

and whether or not STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) couldn’t run a regular commuter service 

to those communities because the traffic volume, I think the minister well knows, is substantial. My feeling 

would be that they would get pretty heavily utilized if they were run on a commuter basis. Now, I know that 

they have some regular stops, but run on on a commuter basis, taking into account the needs of the 

community and their work times within the city of Regina, and I suggest Saskatoon as well. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I think that would be part of the study. I am pleased that the hon. 

member has recommended STC as the vehicle for the service, should one be found feasible. 



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1279 

MR. LANE: — I don’t know why you would be surprised. Now, with regard to belief, and I am referring to 

the release. I have your statement that you have not seen. It refers to the geological study, the cost analysis of 

building on different soil types. There has been a feeling, I believe with the department and certainly with 

some of the surrounding R.M.’s that are faced with the heavy growth and people moving out to the acreages, 

that we could do an awful lot to alleviate the problems the R.M.’s have if we could look at zoning based on 

the soil type and whether it’s for good agricultural land or not. If it is not good agricultural land, perhaps a 

concentration of housing in a non-agricultural land may be much more advantageous than the objective 

criteria that we have now. I am wondering if that will be part of your study, that advantage, and if so, can you 

tell me if any information has gone back to the R.M.’s asking them to direct their minds to that particular 

issue? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, it is definitely a part of the study. No information has gone through 

the R.M.’s as part of the study. It is interesting that I have delivered the same kind of speech in hopes of 

getting the R.M.’s to be thinking along these lines, but insofar as the study is concerned they have not 

received any kind of information. 

 

MR. LANE: — The other area that I notice is not referred to, I would ask whether it is being considered. We 

have some of the regional parks around Regina and Saskatoon. Will they be integrated into that study too 

because they are getting an abnormal usage on a short time hourly basis during the summer season? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Recreation is being looked at in a general sense and therefore an inventory will be 

taken of the parks. 

 

I’m not familiar with any regional park within the vicinity — Saskatchewan Beach, I guess; it’s a way out 

and it’s a regional park. Last Mountain is a regional park. 

 

MR. LANE: — It strikes me that they should be integrated in that study too, because the usage is coming 

not only from Regina but also . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Hon. Minister of Telephones indicated I’m 

becoming a socialist. I think that if he had shown a little more interest in those problems he could be here 

today (or would have been here four years ago). 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — In the budget speech it is indicated, on page 10, $15 million additional for senior 

citizens’ grants for property taxes. That, I assume is your item under Vote 26. Am I correct? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Yes. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that there is no additional $15 million for senior 

citizens in this budget. I give you an example. In Vote 25, this year, you show $40 million. Let’s go back to 

76-77 where it was $42 million and 77-78 where it was $45 million. If we take the increase that would 

normally have come about, and we follow it up to 78-79, which is $49 million, then in the 79-80 budget we 

would have $55 million for home improvement grants, which is exactly the total in Vote 26 in this estimate. 

This means that when you make the statement, in the minister’s budget speech, which says $15 million for 

senior citizens, in actuality all you’ve done is move figures around in your budget. 

 

There is no new money here for senior citizens. You said there would be money for those over 65 to reduce 

their property tax. There is no new money here! If you follow  



 

April 2, 1979 
 

 
1280 

back these last four years you would find the figure this year would be $55 million. Therefore, Mr. Minister, 

I suggest you are playing a hoax on the people of Saskatchewan by suggesting $15 million for senior citizens 

when actually all you have done is move some money around, where normally $55 million would have been 

available under Vote 25 which would be improvement grants but what you are suggesting now because you 

have taken and said election promise — those over 65 — we are going to give them an additional grant. You 

have actually just moved the money out of one area into another and I think you are playing games with the 

senior citizens because there is no new money here if you take the normal rise in that Vote 25 over the past 

three years. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame, shame. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — So I suggest, Mr. Minister, come clean and admit that there is no new money there. 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member knows I always do that. I think I won’t get into 

the debate on what is a hoax and what isn’t a hoax. But I point out to the hon. member that the figures he 

was using for increases in the Property Improvement Grants were based on increases in the grant in itself 

going up from let us say 22, 23 mills to 25 mills, etc. There is no increase in the Property Improvement Grant 

program this year in that sense. I think that under our department budget the senior citizens benefit in two 

areas in terms of new dollars: one, the renter’s rebate program; two, the senior citizen’s tax rebate program. 

The new dollars involved in the senior citizen’s tax rebate program from the information that I have been 

provided is about $8 million. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I suggest that if you look at your figures there is a reduction of $9 

million this year from last year in the one vote so you can’t say the formula’s change is what caused it. You 

add the two votes together you get the same figure that a normal percentage increase would have brought it 

to and therefore, I can say that I suggest that you are playing a hoax on the citizens and especially on the 

senior citizens. I will give you the one point on the rent portion but that was not what was referred to on page 

10 of the Finance Minister’s Budget Speech where he said $15 million for home-owners to reduce their tax 

burden. 

 

So I suggest that either you have been given incorrect information from the Minister of Finance or the 

Minister of Finance is playing a hoax on the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

I call it 10 o’clock. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 

 


