



















































Hansard: February 22, 1979


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 

Thursday, February 22, 1979. 
 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the 

sixteenth day of January 1979, for the meeting of the First Session of the Nineteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan and the Assembly having met: 

 

The Clerk informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary of 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, the Twenty-Second day of February, 1979. 

 

3:01 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant-

Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to declare the causes of the summoning of the present 

legislature until later today, when the Legislative Assembly shall have elected a Speaker according to 

law. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Blakeney, addressing himself to the Clerk moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Romanow, 

that John Edward Brockelbank, Esquire, Member for the Constituency of Saskatoon Westmount, do take 

the Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was resolved that J.E. Brockelbank, Esquire, is duly elected 

Speaker of this Assembly nemine contradicente. 

 

The Clerk, having declared John Edward Brockelbank, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the 

Chair, where, he returned his humble acknowledgments to this Assembly for the great honour they had 

been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Members of the Assembly, I beg to express my grateful thanks and humble 

acknowledgment of the high honour the Assembly has been pleased to confer upon me. And while I 

leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s Chair, I feel I also leave all political partisan 

feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all and to the best of my ability, the various 

and important duties pertaining to the high office of Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

3:11 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor re-entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

2 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 
 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 

important duties thus assigned me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error, I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to me and not to the Assembly, whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable 

them to discharge their duties to their Queen and country, humbly claim all their undoubted rights and 

privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person at al 

seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favorable consideration. 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His Honour, the 

Lieutenant-Governor, to declare to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the 

Assembly to Her Majesty’s person and government and, not doubting their proceedings will be 

conducted with wisdom, temper and prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and 

allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all 

seasonable occasions, and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly 

receive, from him the most favorable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 

 

MR. SPEAKER, 
 

MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 
 

 It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the Nineteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

 This Session marks the beginning of a new term for my Government. Next year Saskatchewan will 

celebrate its 75th anniversary. While celebrating our past, we look forward to the future — a future 

which will mark a new era of growth for Saskatchewan. Income from the development of our mineral 

resources, combined with our strong agricultural base, will serve to protect our traditional Saskatchewan 

values while providing new opportunities and new challenges. 

 

 My Government begins its term of office confident that in the decade to come Saskatchewan’s new 

prosperity will enrich the lives of all our citizens. 

 

CANADA 

 

 A year and a half ago, at the Opening of the Fourth Session of the Eighteenth Legislature, the Speech 

from the Throne began with a statement of confidence that Canada will remain a strong and united 

nation. 

 

 Much has happened since then. The Premiers of the ten provinces met in Regina last August. The First 

Ministers of Canada have met twice to discuss the constitution — 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

3 

once in October and most recently, just a little over two weeks ago. Several meetings at the ministerial 

level have taken place. 

 

 My Government has been guided in these discussions by the need to preserve a diversity of regional 

cultures within a strong, united Canada. This will require compromise on the part of all Canadians if we 

are to meet the aspirations of many different groups — groups such as those who wish to ensure a fair 

return to their province from natural resources, those who wish to see the language rights of English and 

French-speaking Canadians protected in all parts of Canada within the context of a multicultural 

country, and those who wish to see a strong unified Canadian economy. Within this framework, my 

Government believes that these meetings provide grounds for optimism. 

 

 At the most recent meeting of First Ministers, substantial agreement was reached on many 

constitutional issues. Difficult and lengthy negotiations remain, but my Government will work with the 

other governments of Canada to add to progress already achieved. 

 

 This recent history, and the important decisions that will need to be taken in the near future, must be 

carefully weighted and judged if we are to choose our future course wisely. Accordingly, my 

Government will introduce legislation to establish a new Department of Intergovernmental Affairs 

during this Session. This Department will assist my Ministers in the constitutional deliberations we face. 

 

THE ECONOMY 

 

 As we turn from the national scene to this Province, we note with satisfaction that the Saskatchewan 

economy grew strongly in 1978. 

 

 Last year’s grain crops surpassed expectations, beef prices rose substantially, and grain deliveries in 

the first half of the year set new records. Farm cash receipts increased significantly, in sharp contrast to 

the previous year. 

 

 The value of mineral production — mainly petroleum, potash, and uranium — went up considerably. 

Mining investment also increased sharply. 

 

 This strong growth was reflected in higher personal income in 1978. Retail sales increased at a much 

quicker pace than in 1977. At the same time, Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate remained one of the 

lowest in Canada. 

 

 We can be proud of our record in Saskatchewan. Nevertheless, my Government recognizes that 

inflation is a national problem, which continues to create hardships for people in Saskatchewan. 

Unfortunately, the national economy is still plagued with difficulties and Saskatchewan is necessarily 

affected adversely. My Government will take a number of measures to assist those who are the most 

hard pressed. The Minister of Finance will outline these proposals in the budget Address. 

 

AGRICULTURE 

 

 Saskatchewan agriculture strengthened in 1978 and a modest improvement can be anticipated for 

1979. To maintain the prosperity of the Saskatchewan farming community, however, my Government 

recognizes that solutions must be found to the twin problems of the grain transportation system and 

rising costs in relation to farm 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

4 

income. 

 

 My Government, since the last sitting of this Legislature, has instituted a major program to deal with 

the farm cost-price squeeze. The Farm Fuel Cost Reduction Program will provide grants to farmers of 

up to $300 per year for the years 1978 and 1979. This program will assist all farmers in the Province. 

 

 Mid-term prospects for grain sales appear bright, based on Canadian Wheat Board projected sales. 

These prospects are clouded by the railway companies’ continuing inability to deliver grain to export 

positions to meet even firm sales commitments. This problem must be solved in the national interest. 

 

 The projected demand for agricultural products will require increased production. It will be necessary 

to put more emphasis on technological skills. Much research is required into improved seed varieties, 

more effective use of fertilizers, better land use, and a more intensive search for new and 

environmentally safe substitutes for some weed and insect control chemicals. 

 

 My Government is keenly aware of the need for adequate agricultural research if our farm economy is 

to remain strong. You will be asked to approve new legislation entitled The Agricultural Research 

Funding Act, which will provide a framework for increased provincial funding in this key areas. 

 

 My Government is pleased to report that the Land Bank program, since it was introduced in 1972, has 

assisted more than 2,300 new or small farmers in obtaining an adequate land base. Last year the first sale 

under the Land Bank program took place. You will be asked to make further improvements to this 

program through amendments to The Land Bank Act. 

 

 Amendments to The Conservation and Development Act, The Watershed Associations Act, and The 

Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute Act will also be placed before you. 

 

TRANSPORTATION 

 

 My Government is particularly concerned about the federal government’s recently released report of 

the Prairie Rail Action Committee which concluded that over 2000 kilometers of prairie rail lines should 

be abandoned. 

 

 Should this recommendation be adopted, the burden of grain transportation costs will be imposed on 

the family-operated farm and the many small communities of this Province. Their hope of stable and 

prosperous development will be severely limited. 

 

 My Government is opposed to basic approach of the Prairie Rail Action Committee. In the coming 

year my Government will support the efforts of the farmers and the towns and villages of the Province in 

their fight to save prairie rail lines. 

 

 My Government remains active in many areas of transportation. 

 

 The Toby Nollet Bridge at Maidstone has been officially opened. The Gronlid Bridge and the bridge 

causeway at Buffalo Narrows are under construction. Work will soon begin on the Meridian Bridge near 

Lloydminster. 

 

 The Highway Traffic Safety Program begun in 1977 substantially reduced the 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

5 

number of injuries and deaths on our highways. As part of a concerted plan to improve highway traffic 

safety, the four-lane highway between Regina and Saskatoon has been completed. 

 

 My Government is concerned about the level of air service facilities at Saskatchewan centres and will 

continue to urge the federal government to make improvements in this area. 

 

 You will be asked to approve the amendments to The Highways Act. 

 

ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES 

 

 The wise management of Saskatchewan’s mineral resources has been a major priority of my 

Government. In the years to come, these resources will greatly enrich our province. 

 

 1979 will likely see record expenditures in uranium exploration. A major explorer will be the Crown-

owned Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, which exists as part of my Government’s 

policy of encouraging public involvement in resource development. 

 

 The uranium mining soon to take place will be influenced greatly by the report of the Bayda 

Commission on uranium development. The report, released in June, 1978, and Government policy 

statements which followed its release established a stringent set of economic, environmental and 

northern employment requirements for the development of the Amok mine at Cluff Lake. Other mines to 

come on-stream will have to meet similar strict conditions. 

 

 A new Mines Pollution Control Branch will be established in the Department of the Environment to 

monitor, control and regulate uranium mining activity and to administer the Pollution Prevention 

Regulations formerly administered by the Department of Mineral Resources. 

 

 In the second half of 1978, a number of significant announcements were made with respect to 

Saskatchewan’s heavy oil deposits. A consortium of three companies has announced a heavy crude oil 

exploration and development program which will take place over the next eight years in west central 

Saskatchewan. Husky Oil has also announced that in 1979 it will start a five-year program for the 

accelerated development of its heavy crude oil reserves in Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

 

 These heavy oil developments are a reflection of the greatly increased petroleum activity in this 

Province. Nearly a thousand oil and gas wells were drilled in 1978, almost double the number drilled in 

the previous year. As well, record revenues were received for the sale of rights to explore and develop 

Crown-owned oil and gas. 

 

 The future for Saskatchewan’s potash industry is also bright. Production and sales in 1979 are 

expected to break the records set in 1978. It is likely that production will exceed 7 million tons, and 

sales will surpass half a billion dollars. Discussions are underway with a view to resolving outstanding 

issues concerning potash taxation. 

 

 My Government is pleased to report that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the largest potash 

producer in Canada, is expanding to increase its share of both the domestic and export markets. 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

6 

 In the next few years, the activity in all these areas will create new employment and increased 

prosperity for Saskatchewan. 

 

 Legislation amending The Natural Gas Development and Conservation Board Act and The Pipe Lines 

Act will be placed before you. 

 

REVENUE SHARING 

 

 In this Session, my Government will be introducing Phase II of our Revenue Sharing Program. 

Through Revenue Sharing, our urban and rural municipalities have enjoyed great autonomy while 

receiving the benefits of an expanding economy. Under Phase I of Revenue Sharing, my Government 

increased funding to municipalities by 45 per cent. This made it possible for municipalities to hold the 

line of mill rates and, in some cases, even to reduce them. Under Phase II of Revenue Sharing, my 

Government will again significantly increase its contribution to municipal governments. 

 

INDUSTRY 

 

 Over the next several years, the development of Saskatchewan’s rich resources will provide many 

opportunities for Saskatchewan businesses. Seizing these opportunities will be a challenge for 

Saskatchewan businessmen and their entrepreneurial skills. 

 

 My Government intends to help local businesses and communities to take full advantage of this 

opportunity. 

 

 In particular, my Government plans to assist those businesses and industries in a position to provide 

services and products for resource development companies and for the Alaska Highway pipeline. 

 

 The Small Industry Development Program and the Small Business Interest Abatement Program will 

continue to help retail and manufacturing businesses, and smaller communities will continue to be 

assisted by the Main Street Development Program. 

 

 You will be asked to pass legislation amending The Trust Companies Act and The Business 

Corporations Act. 

 

 My Government will undertake several initiatives to promote and encourage co-operation and co-

operative ventures. 

 

 The co-operative housing program will help families obtain suitable and affordable living 

accommodations. Saskatchewan-oriented educational materials on co-operation and co-operatives will 

be developed and made available to our schools. 

 

 You will be asked to approve amendments to The Co-operative Association Act, The Co-operative 

Marketing Act, and The Co-operative Production Act. 

 

HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

7 

 In the coming year, my Government will take several new initiatives to maintain the high quality of 

health care which Saskatchewan has enjoyed. 

 

 A Health Research Fund will be established to provide a continuing and stable source of support for 

health research conducted in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan researchers. 

 

 A Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation will be created to replace the Saskatchewan Cancer Commission. 

The new Foundation will possess greater autonomy in the operation of the cancer clinics as well as the 

cancer program in general. 

 

 Legislation to accomplish these objectives will be introduced. 

 

 You will be asked to approve a Community Health Unit Act, which will allow an urban centre and one 

or more adjacent municipalities to be designated as a health unit with the authority to administer, under 

one community board, a range of community health and related social services. 

 

 My Government continues to review methods of mitigating the rising costs of health care, but has 

rejected proposals such as deterrent fees, advocated in other provinces, as an unfair and ineffective 

method of pursuing this objective. 

 

 You will also be asked to pass legislation to amend The Mental Health Act. 

 

 My Government will implement a review to determine the best approach for controlling the cost of 

nursing home care. 

 

 Amendments to The Social Services Act and The Special Care Homes Act will be placed before you. 

 

THE WORKPLACE 

 

 My Government takes pride in Saskatchewan’s workers’ compensation system, which is widely 

recognized to be the soundest and most equitable in Canada. To remain a leader in this field, however, 

we must seek constant improvement in our treatment of injured workers. To that end, a committee 

chaired by Judge Alistair Muir has completed a thorough review of the entire workers’ compensation 

system. During this Session, my Government will be considering the recommendations of this 

committee and proposing appropriate action. 

 

INDIAN LAND ENTITLEMENTS 

 

 My Government will continue to work with the Government of Canada to resolve unfulfilled treaty 

land entitlements for the benefit of Indian people. During the last year my Government has transferred, 

or agreed to transfer, more than one hundred thousand acres of land in settlement of these claims. 

 

JUSTICE 

 

 In this Session, my Government will take several steps to extend the principles of equity and justice 

for all citizens under the law. 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

8 

 You will be asked to approve a Human Rights Code which will be a consolidation of The 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Act, The Fair Employment Practices Act, 

and The Fair Accommodation Practices Act. 

 

 In a continuing effort to increase the efficiency and the quality of the judicial system, my Government 

has set up a committee to consider and report on the consolidation of the District Court with the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. 

 

 Recently, my Government received the report of His Honour Judge McClelland on the legal aid plan 

in Saskatchewan. In order to improve further the system of legal aid in the province, amendments to The 

Community Legal Services (Saskatchewan) Act, 1974 will be placed before you. 

 

 My Government has given careful consideration to the question of matrimonial property. As a result, 

legislation will be introduced based on the principle of deferred community property. 

 

 You will be asked to consider a new Personal Property Security Act which will deal comprehensively 

with the entire area of personal property security. 

 

 You will also be asked to approve amendments to The Conditional Sales Act, The Bills of Sale Act and 

The Assignment of Book Debts Act. 

 

RECREATION AND CONSERVATION 

 

 You will be asked to consider a new Regional Parks Act which will make changes in the capital and 

maintenance grants to be paid by the Province to regional parks throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

 In this Session, you will also be asked to approve legislation setting up the South Saskatchewan River 

Edge Authority. This authority will bring together the Province, the City of Saskatoon, the Rural 

Municipality of Corman Park, and the University of Saskatchewan in a major project to protect and 

develop the Saskatchewan River and its banks. 

 

NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 

 

 My Government will continue to improve health services in Northern Saskatchewan by introducing a 

road ambulance program designed to meet the needs of northern people. 

 

 1979 will see the completion of major access roads to most communities south of the Churchill River 

and the completion of an airstrip to Pelican Narrows. A number of community facilities, including fire 

halls, will be started. My Government will continue to work on its commitment to provide sewer and 

water services to northern communities. 

 

 My Government is also pleased to report that progress has been made in forest management and 

development programs. More than eight million trees were planted by government and industry in 1978, 

and it is expected twelve million trees will be planted in 1979. 

 

 Significant progress was made by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

9 

developing poplar log operations for use in constructing log buildings. There is a good and growing 

market for such material. Other development opportunities will be investigated while ensuring that our 

forest resource is protected for future generations. 

 

 You will be asked to approve amendments to The Northern Administration Act, further strengthening 

local government in Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF THE CHILD 

 

 My Government has proclaimed 1979 as The Year of the Child in Saskatchewan, in order to join 

people throughout the world who are celebrating the International Year of the Child declared by the 

United Nations. This year will provide an opportunity to re-examine our existing education, health and 

protection services for children and to provide some special programs for children. My Government has 

provided a grant for the Saskatchewan Commission for the International Year of the Child to assist 

communities and organizations to celebrate the year. 

 

CELEBRATE SASKATCHEWAN 

 

 My Government has established a program called ‘Celebrate Saskatchewan’ to co-ordinate and 

promote our 75th Anniversary celebrations and to help communities develop their projects. These 

celebrations will be divided into three segments: the recognition of our heritage through a salute to our 

pioneers, a celebration of the cultural and economic strength of present-day Saskatchewan, and a 

segment in which local governments and individuals will be encouraged to look into the future. My 

Government is making the one million dollars available to Saskatchewan communities to assist in 

anniversary activities. It is my Government’s intention to make this a memorable birthday party for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1979, will be submitted to you. 

 

 I leave you now to the business of the Session with the full confidence that you will favourably 

discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

 May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its 

deliberations. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Notice from Chief Electoral Officer 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 

received from the Chief Electoral Officer lists of the names of such members as have been returned to 

serve in the legislature. 

 

Introduction of Pages 
 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

10 

MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Geraldine Austring, Allison Cronk, Cathryn 

Nash, Debbie Palmquist, and Vonne Prpick will be pages during the present session. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Messer 

(Minister of Mineral Resources): 

 

That the Speech of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor be taken into consideration on Monday. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek (Minister of Finance): 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first having been perused by 

Mr. Speaker; that he do appoint the printing thereof and that no person but such as he shall 

appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Members to compose lists for Select Standing Committees 
 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of Labour): 

 

That Messrs. Dyck, Mostoway, Pepper, Birkbeck and McLeod be constituted a Select Special 

Committee to prepare and report with all convenient speed, lists of members to compose the 

Select Standing Committees of this Assembly, provided under Rule No. 86; 

 

That the said Select Standing Committees be severally empowered to examine and inquire into 

all such matters and things as may be referred to them by this Assembly and to report from time 

to time their observations thereon with power to send for persons, papers and records to examine 

witnesses under oath; and 

 

That the Select Special Committee consider the size of the Select Standing Committees and to 

report thereon with all convenient speed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Deputy Speaker 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman 

(Minister of the Environment): 

 



 

February 22, 1979 
 

 

11 

That James Auburn Pepper, Esquire, member for the constituency of Weyburn, be Deputy 

Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before I put the question on the motion just moved by the Premier I have a few 

comments I would like to make. 

 

I know that all members from previous legislatures will join me in welcoming new members to this 

newly refurbished Chamber. We are most fortunate to have a new sound system, a modified air 

conditioning system in a Chamber redecorated from the paint on the ceiling down to the rug on the floor. 

Renovations to desks, chairs, the Speaker’s dais and the Throne have served to preserve and enhance the 

historic character of this Chamber. This section of the Speaker’s dais has been returned after an absence 

of about 50 years. The first Speaker’s Chair is now the Chair of the Saskatchewan Legislature. 

 

In order to photographically record the beginning of the Nineteenth Legislature in this renovated 

Chamber I would encourage all members to be present, on time, 10 a.m. tomorrow for the picture 

immediately after prayers. The public will be excluded from the galleries until the picture is taken, 

approximately 10 minutes and the question period will be extended accordingly. 

 

Immediately upon adjournment there will be a Speaker’s tea in Room 218. In this the International Year 

of the Child you will notice that your tea will be served by young people from all over Saskatchewan 

who have volunteered to be here on this occasion. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:44 p.m. 


