






















































Hansard: December 12, 1979


(348) 349 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 12, 1979 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. D.M. BANDA (Redberry): – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you and 
members of the House a visitor from Winnipeg, the executive director of the Churchill Development Board, 
Mr. Ed Guest, who is visiting us this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BANDA: – For information of the members, Ed is the executive director of the Churchill Development 
Board which is made up of representatives of the three western provinces and undertook the job to try to 
promote the use of Churchill to our advantage. We certainly welcome Ed here today. We hope that he enjoys 
his stay with us and certainly wish him a safe journey home tomorrow. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Cornwall Centre 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): – Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister responsible for the 
Cornwall Centre again. Mr. Minister, did you discuss with Mr. Fred Hill the possibility of his company 
becoming involved with the development of the Cornwall Centre? If you did, did you indicate to him that 
you would entertain a proposal from him? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): – Mr. Speaker, I received a phone all 
on Sunday afternoon (this is last Sunday) at 2 o’clock at my home from Mr. Fred Hill. He said that he had 
just returned from out-of-town and heard that his name was implicated in the legislature in respect to the 
Cornwall Centre. Mr. Speaker, I told Mr. Hill that to the best of my recollection his name was not mentioned 
in the legislature but I did hear on the new media that the hon. member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) made 
reference to Mr. Fred Hill and that perhaps he might want to check the newspapers and with the media. 
 
Mr. Hill asked me whether there was a chance for him to participate in the Cornwall project. I told Mr. Hill 
that if he wanted to get in contact with Chartwood and Eaton’s and in some form they can work out an 
agreement that would be acceptable to them and acceptable to us, we would certainly be prepared to consider 
any proposal which would include Mr. Hill. He also mentioned Denro; he had apparently talked to the Denro 
people. It is interesting that those are exactly the names that the hon. members opposite have been bandying 
about in one form or another. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the minister. In light of the information you 
have just given us, Mr. Minister, you indicated that only if he were 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
350 

to contact Chartwood and Eaton’s and perhaps go into partnership with them, would he be welcome to do 
that. Well then, why did you then misinform this House last week (and I refer you to your statement in the 
House, in Hansard, where you were asked the question by the hon. member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane), and 
your reply) and I will read it in part, ‘If they can come up with the same kind of proposal and carry on 
through’, (if you want to, refer to page 144). To save a little time here, Mr. Speaker, I will drop to the last 
part, ‘and perhaps certainly we will be prepared to consider it’ – intending the government to consider a local 
developer. Will you answer that question, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, certainly I don’t think there is any contradiction between what I said last 
week and what I said just a few minutes ago. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister would like to clarify for me, what he means when 
he says that Mr. Hill or other local developers can go to the developers in Toronto and perhaps become 
associated with the, and last week he said that the government would entertain a local developer to deal with 
the project here, not in conjunction with the developers in Toronto. There is a difference, Mr. Speaker, if you 
can clarify that position. 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): – Mr. Speaker, whether it is taking into 
partnership or whether it’s acquiring the interest of Chartwood or Eaton’s, it must include Chartwood and 
Eaton’s. After all, we do have an agreement with them. They cannot be excluded. Obviously, the hon. 
member has had very little business experience to be able to fathom the kind of simple agreement that has to 
be negotiated with this kind of understanding or whatever it is. The hon. member – apparently it is just 
beyond his depth to fathom those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – I’d like to direct a question to the minister responsible for the Cornwall 
Centre. Your government has followed the policy in the past of breaking agreements, and I’m referring to 
some like that with the forest industry and re-negotiating leases. I can remember a broken agreement with the 
Meadow Lake pulp mill that you cancelled so merrily and arbitrarily. Would you now be prepared to cancel 
the agreement with Chartwood and give to local developers in Saskatchewan, the same opportunity and the 
same financial opportunity to proceed with the Cornwall Centre that you have given to the eastern 
developers? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, perhaps I might direct a question to the hon. member and maybe he might 
help me to deal with it. Is he now advocating that agreements which have been signed should be broken? 
Perhaps the hon. member may clarify that before I respond, and if that is the case, could he state that clearly? 
 
MR. LANE: – I will answer it, Mr. Speaker. I am sure the minister is aware of legislation called The 
Unconscionable Transactions Relief Act, that the public should be able to take advantage of in this case. 
Would the minister now be prepared to tell us whether Chartwood is able to deduct as an expense, for 
example, its fees charged for leasing the property, any management fees that Chartwood or the developer 
charges? Are those all items that are an expense before the so-called net cash flow is determined? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, all legitimate expenses are chargeable. I do not have the agreement in front 
of me and I am not in a position to answer the detailed questions that the hon. member is pursuing at the 
moment. 
 
MR. LANE: – Would the minister not then admit these are reasonable expenses and 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
351 

common expenses that are normally deducted. Will the minister not then admit that if Chartwood is charging 
a leasing fee, which would be normal for Eaton’s or any other national company that it gets in, that in fact 
Chartwood would probably have recovered its initial investment of $2 million to $3 million before the 
project even gets off the ground and in fact Chartwood is not putting up a penny? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, no, I am not prepared to admit that. 
 
MR. LANE: – Mr. Speaker, would you now be prepared (you indicate that there are amendments going on 
in the leasing agreement between the developer and Eaton’s) to table the existing agreement that you have so 
we can compare it with the amended one whenever it is to be released as you have made that commitment? 
So that sometime the public can start to get the truth of this rather bad business deal that in fact does not help 
local Saskatchewan developers? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, I have provided the answer to that same question the other day and I stand 
by the answer that I have given. Further to my answer, Mr. Speaker, the deal that has been made is a good 
deal for Regina; it is a good deal for the government; it is a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan and 
certainly it is a good deal in terms of revitalizing the city of Regina. I regret, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Conservatives are that opposed to the revitalization of our urban communities, particularly our capital city. 
 
MR. LANE: – A question to the minister. Can the minister explain to the general public how Calgary, 
Edmonton, Vancouver, Winnipeg and Saskatoon are able to have a revitalized downtown core (in Saskatoon 
in particular) with a local developer (by the name of Mr. Wiss) and you saw fit not to be able to manage the 
same type of project in the city of Regina and why Saskatoon is able to have a revitalized downtown with a 
local developer and you can’t get one in Regina? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order, order! I’ll take the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau). 
 

Tabling of Cornwall Centre Agreement 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): – Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for Cornwall 
Centre. A moment ago you indicated to the member for Qu’Appelle that the agreements were signed. You 
ask if we’re suggesting you should break a signed agreement. Then why did you last week suggest to us that 
you would provide the agreements once they are signed and completed? I’m quoting from Hansard again. 
Could we get some truth from you, Mr. Minister, on what is actually going on with this development so 
everyone can know? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, I provided the truth last week and I’m providing the truth this week. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, I have given two different contradictory statements on what you actually 
said. A minute ago you said they were signed. Her you said you would provide them once they are signed. 
Now are they or are they not signed? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the members of the legislature that we had agreements. 
Those agreements at the present time are being revised because of changes in the project. I also indicated to 
the members that I’ll give consideration to tabling the agreements. I have also said that would check with the 
partners, with 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
352 

Eaton’s and with Chartwood, before any agreements are tabled. And, Mr. Speaker, I stand by the answer that 
I have provided. 
 

Discrimination Against SGEA Members 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): – A question to the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Koskie). It has 
been brought to my attention by a member of your department that the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees Association members are being discriminated against when they come to your department for 
financial assistance, particularly in the food, clothing and personal allowances area. Is this true? 
 
MR. M.J. KOSKIE (Minister of Social Services): – I could give you a rather short answer like no, but I 
can in fact elaborate on it and say that it is not true. In fact, any person has the right to come to the 
department to make application for assistance, as has any other person – a striker is included in that – and the 
application is processed as is any other application. Accordingly if benefits are payable the striker will 
receive them. 
 
MR. SWAN: – Supplementary to the minister. Did you not in fact instruct your employees to be less than 
generous with SGEA members? This is the exact statement the gentleman made. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Well, I can hardly comment on your source and verify the statements which you are 
purporting to make in the House. Categorically I say there have been absolutely no instructions in that 
respect. I repeat again that we are processing all applications on exactly the same basis. 
 
MR. SWAN: – Supplementary to the minister. During the time when IPSCO (Interprovincial Steel and Pipe 
Corporation) – you knew it was on strike, about one year ago – your department was granting to the IPSCO 
members food, mortgage payments, clothing and personal allowances, the whole bit. Will you guarantee this 
Assembly that these same privileges will be granted to the Saskatchewan Government Employees 
Association members? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Since processing previously the IPSCO workers, there has been no change in policy and 
accordingly we will continue with that policy. 
 

SGEA Strike – Hospital Treatment 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): – Question to the Minister of Health (Mr. Rolfes). Reports indicate, 
Mr. Speaker, that there is a possible escalation of the SGEA strike which may include the employees of the 
Wascana and Palliser hospitals. Mr. Minister, have you a contingency plan ready to be put into effect to 
ensure that the therapy and rehabilitation of the patients in these two hospitals will not be disrupted? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): – Mr. Speaker, I think the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) 
has just volunteered. He was talking about some crazies, so I accept his . . . I think it was a cheap shot, a very 
cheap shot on his part. And you should inform him of that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I do 
not intend to answer a hypothetical situation. I have no indication that the strike will escalate . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . would you mind, if you want to ask a question get on your feet. The answer is that I have no 
evidence that the strike will escalate, but I can assure the member from Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that our 
contingency plans I think will be 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
353 

able to take care of a light escalation in the strike. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: – Supplementary Mr. Minister. You are probably aware that a recent strike at the Palliser 
Hospital in Swift Current caused hardship and suffering, not only on the patients but their families too, and 
yet your department didn’t step in to help alleviate the situation. Will you give us your personal assurances 
that should the strike include the Wascana and Palliser hospitals, you will immediately implement a 
contingency plan if the workers walk out in support of the SGEA? 
 
MR. ROLFES: – Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member again that our contingency plans, I believe, are 
sufficient to take care of any escalation in the strike as it pertains to Wascana or the Palliser, as eh refers to 
them. I’m not quite certain what strike she was referring to – I believe it was way back in October of 1978 at 
the Palliser. My understanding is that the Department of Health at that time did move contrary to the facts 
that you may have. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: – Could you table contingency plans? 
 
MR. ROLFES: – No, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Land Bank 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, my question period was almost 
spoiled and it was saved only by the arrival of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy). Question to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Last April an Aneroid area farmer exercised his option in the purchase of land bank 
land – three quarters of land – which I suppose is O.K. except that there is a rather unique little twist to this 
one and that is that he had it sold twelve days before he paid land bank for it with a capital gain of $53,000 
for hip national Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how many similar such instances have gone on in 
Saskatchewan that you may be aware of? 
 
HON. G. MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): – Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that I’m not aware of 
any other incident of that nature. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the former minister of agriculture. Would you be 
aware of any other such instances? 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural)): – Well, Mr. Speaker, on the spur of the 
moment I’m not aware of any. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy). Would 
you agree with the statement by Mr. Wesson that no action would be taken against this individual or . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well, because he broke the law. Mr. Speaker, would you agree with the statement 
made by Mr. Wesson that there would be no action taken against this individual? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: – Mr. Speaker, I have not discussed this particular matter directly with Mr. Wesson. If 
the hon. member would permit me to pursue the matter I’ll be glad to do that with Mr. Wesson, and I’ll 
report back to the hon. member by letter as soon as I have pursued it and have an opportunity to discuss it 
with Mr. Wesson. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: – Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would you not now agree, Mr. Minister, that your 
land bank program has in fact run counter to your stated intent and 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
354 

that in fact your land bank program to a large extent is responsible for the reduction of numbers of farmers in 
Saskatchewan by 6,000? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: – Mr. Speaker, I would not agree with the hon. member. The intent of the land bank 
was to assist young farmers getting on the land. In fact that intent has been fulfilled. I think if the hon. 
member would listen and listen carefully. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: – If the hon. member had listened carefully to my remarks in this assembly yesterday 
he would have noted that land bank and FarmStart have contributed to young farmers getting on the land far 
better than any programs in existence in Alberta or in Manitoba. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Affairs – Rural and Urban 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): – Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Rural Affairs 
(Mr. Kaeding). Since the split of the municipal affairs department into urban and rural, rural affairs has been 
left without its own assessment, community planning, auditing and accounting branches. What action, if any, 
have you taken to correct this situation? 
 
MR. KAEDING: – Mr. Speaker, there will be coming forward in this session a couple of bills which will 
outline the responsibilities of the Department of Urban Affairs and the Department of Rural Affairs. 
 
MR. PICKERING: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As early as last July you were made aware of this by the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and don’t you agree that at the time of the split 
they should have voiced their opinion and looked into the situation of setting up such services for this 
department? 
 
MR. KAEDING: – Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the requests of the SARM in that regard and certainly 
those requests are being considered in the setting up of the legislation. 
 
MR. PICKERING: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you going to have the department or not? 
 
MR. KAEDING: – Yes, I am. 
 

Division of Municipal Affairs Department 
 
MR. PICKERING: – New question, Mr. Speaker. It is not true that in fact you now admit that you are 
actually the minister of nothing and that the split was made by the Premier solely to save your face? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order, order. I’ll take the next question. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
355 

Air Service 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): – Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources (Mr. Gross). Mr. Minister, in this Chamber the other day your Premier stated and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, at the hon. member will know, air traffic is not a responsibility of the Government of 
Saskatchewan but is a responsibility of the Government of Canada and if there is any need for air 
service between Regina and Saskatoon the Minister of Transport (Mr. Mazankowski) is the person 
who has the responsibility. 

 
Mr. Minister, do you agree with that statement by your Premier? 
 
HON. MR. R.J. GROSS (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resource): – Yes. 
 
MR. GARNER: – Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Will you also not agree that the only job of the 
Government of Canada and the CTC (Canadian Transport Commission) is to license and regulate all air 
traffic in Canada? It is not their job to run around the provinces looking for air carriers to provide service in 
the provinces. 
 
MR. GROSS: – Mr. Speaker, the job of the Canadian Transport Commission is to license aircraft or air 
carriers in the province and that is their job. I think that answers the question. 
 
MR. GARNER: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The provincial government should be aware of the 
inadequate air service in its own province. Has the minister met with Norcanair since last spring, and if so, 
when is his government going to start accepting the responsibility to provide air service in the province for 
the tourists and the businessmen who come into this province on the weekend and want to travel back and 
forth between the two cities? Start doing your job. 
 
MR. GARNER: – Mr. Speaker, it is the job of the federal government and more specifically the Minister of 
Transportation of the federal government to license and to promote, if that is necessary, where he sees fit, the 
licensing of aircraft carriers. If there is a need between Regina and Saskatoon, provided there are applicants 
available for that, the needed steps are to be taken by the federal government. He should be directing his 
questions to the Minister of Transport in Ottawa. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I’ll take a new question. 
 
MR. GARNER: – Mr. Minister, in light of your press release dated November 15, where you welcome a 
proposal by Frontier Airlines on a link connecting Saskatoon and Regina with Minot and North Dakota – if it 
is the federal government’s responsibility, were you in Denver? What are you doing with the taxpayers’ 
money and why don’t you start accepting your responsibility? You keep passing it to the federal minister and 
yet you are doing the job. Who is paying the bill for this? 
 
MR. GROSS: – Mr. Speaker, I have trouble making my reply with the members opposite yapping like they 
are. Mr. Speaker, it is the job of the department of tourism in my respective area to promote tourism in the 
province. One concern that we have is getting the proper connections into Saskatchewan and that’s the only 
interest we have in that area in that capacity. If you are talking about the connection to Denver – yes, we 
would 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
356 

like to see a connection for Regina, Saskatoon to Denver. Very much we would like to see that connection 
and if we have anybody who is interested in those connections we would like to follow up those leads and 
give them the sort of moral support that is required. In this case I want to underline that if the member would 
read the press release in its entirety he would find that when we are doing is promoting a Canadian carrier 
first. We would like to see a Canadian carrier do it if it is at all possible and failing that, we would lend our 
support to another carrier be it the American carrier or whoever it may be. So we are looking after our end of 
the business of promoting tourism to this province and we would like to see a proper connection to Denver. 
It is very important that we have that connection and that is why we were down promoting that the Frontier 
people consider it. We are following up a lead given to us that they were interested. They had been up to 
visit us a number of times before and we were returning the call they had made. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Resignation of Deputy Speaker; Appointment of New Deputy Speaker 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I have a letter in my possession which I am sure all members of the House will be 
interested in hearing. It is addressed to me as the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and it says: 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 
 
Circumstances make it necessary that I ask the Legislative Assembly to allow me to retire from the 
post of Deputy Speaker, a position which I have felt greatly honored to have occupied. 

 
I have endeavored to uphold the traditions connected with the office and if any success has been 
achieved therein, it is because of the support and co-operation received from yourself and the other 
members of the Assembly. 

 
Please convey my sincere thanks to them. 

 
Yours very truly, 

 
J. Auburn Pepper 

 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): – Mr. Speaker, I would like first to address a word or two to the 
Assembly and then to make a motion with respect to a successor to Mr. Pepper. Mr. Pepper had advised me 
that he was going to retire from the office of Deputy Speaker. 
 
I am sure that all hon. members will agree that Mr. Pepper has served the Assembly with distinction, that it 
will be acknowledged by members on both sides of the House that he served with ability and impartiality and 
that neither his ability nor his impartiality particularly when he was chairman of the committees of the whole 
of this Assembly was ever in doubt. I’m proud to have been associated with him in this Assembly. I am 
proud that one of my colleagues could serve this Assembly with such obvious merit and distinction and that 
in so doing he could serve the parliamentary form of government which serves us all. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
357 

As I have said on other occasions, Mr. Pepper is a person who is held in the highest regard by his political 
friends and his political opponents, and is held in that regard by his constituents whether or not they find it 
possible to support him at the polls. He has again, the same measure of respect, I suggest, to this Assembly. I 
am sorry that circumstances have suggested that he retire from the position. I know he will continue to serve 
his constituents well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now called upon to consider a person to fill the post and I move, seconded by the Hon. 
Mr. Smishek (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)) that: 
 

William J.G. Allen, Esquire, member for the constituency of Regina Rosemont, be Deputy Speaker 
of this Assembly. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say a few words 
regarding the services of Mr. Pepper as the Deputy House Speaker. As last session was my first session in 
this House, I must say that I found Mr. Pepper to be most co-operative. I think he was very fair and I feel that 
his services will be missed. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – I agree with the Premier in that Mr. Pepper is a member who is held in high regard by 
both sides of this Chamber. 
 
I would like at the time to congratulate Mr. Allen on his appointment. We look forward to working with you 
in this session. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – I would like to join with the House Leader of the opposition in 
congratulating and thanking the member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper). I hope my comments last night about 
your finding the bottle of booze and putting it in the new Weyburn City Hall didn’t do anything to precipitate 
your resignation from the particular position. If so, I regret my comments, Mr. Member. 
 
As the senior member of the opposition I wanted to join with my colleagues in congratulating you, sir, and 
thanking you for your service to this Assembly. I know with the appointment of the new Deputy Speaker that 
there are a number of disappointed people in the backbenches over there, having been passed over for many 
other positions. I know that that puts added pressure on the new appointee. 
 
I would like to say to Mr. Pepper that as far as the opposition is concerned, Sir, we have always sympathized 
with your position. You have had a difficult chore with that crowd always causing you so many problems, 
particularly during estimates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): – Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I will certainly accept the 
Premier’s nomination . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I should say there is a reduction in pay, but we all do 
this to serve our constituents and province. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
358 

I want to say that I will accept the nomination but before I do so and sit down I think it would probably be 
appropriate to say a few words about the former deputy speaker, the hon. member for Weyburn constituency 
(Mr. Pepper). 
 
The hon. member for Weyburn has been in this House for a long time – a lot longer, I think than most of us 
with a couple of exceptions. I see the member for the Battlefords (Mr. Kramer and the Premier (Mr. 
Blakeney) down there, but longer than most of us in this House. In those years I think he can look back and 
say that he has never done or said anything that he need be ashamed of. I am not sure there are many others 
in this House who could do that. His actions and his words have always been such as to bring great credit, 
Mr. Speaker, to both himself and to this legislature. I want to say in closing that if I can serve you, the 
members of this legislature, as Deputy Speaker with one half the ability and one-quarter of the dignity of the 
hon. member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) I think I’ll have served you well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The Speaker is in a very unenviable position because he’s not allowed to speak on 
anything in the House. However, if I were allowed to speak on something in this House, I would 
undoubtedly echo the words of commendation which have been said from both sides of the House with my 
own personal comments as well. However, in order to preserve the impartiality of the Chair, I shall not utter 
those words at this time. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion before the orders of the 
day dealing with the report which has recently been received concerning the passing of a former member of 
this Assembly, John Thiessen. Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Taylor, the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former member of this Assembly 
and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he has made to his community, his 
constituency and to this province. 

 
John Thiessen, who died on March 25, 1978, was a member of this legislature for the constituency 
of Shellbrook from 1956 to 1964. He was born in 1906 near Aberdeen, Saskatchewan, where he 
received his education and later took up farming. Active in municipal affairs, he spent a total of 42 
years serving as councillor, reeve, secretary-treasurer for the R.M.s of Aberdeen, Canwood and 
Insinger. For 34 years, he served as a justice of the peace in his community. He helped to organize 
the local community health clinic and was also a member of the school board. Other community 
activities included involvement in organizing a local park and golf course, teaching Sunday school 
and working as an Elks lodge member. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, may I add something to the formal motion of condolence. John Thiessen 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
359 

was a person with whom I served in this legislature from 1960 to 1964. He was a person who had a 
particularly distinguished career in the service of his community, using it in a broader sense. He did so 
through his church, the community organizations and this Assembly. He was the son of a pioneering couple. 
He worked not only to better the quality of life in Saskatchewan but also to build the institutions which are 
part of the fabric of this province. 
 
John’s service to the people of Saskatchewan took many forms as the formal notice of condolence indicates. 
Most of it was really in municipal work. The span of his career of 42 years included over four decades as a 
councillor, a reeve and a secretary-treasurer of the R.M.s of Aberdeen, Canwood and Insinger. He served in a 
multitude of other capacities: a justice of the peace for 35 years; a trustee of the Saskatoon East School Unit; 
founding member of the community health clinic in Canwood; secretary of four local telephone companies; 
member, president and treasurer of the Aberdeen Board of Trade. We see that his interests span many 
organizations. The list is long. The spirit of John’s career in municipal work was one of practicality and 
generosity. As one of his colleagues recalls, John was good at just about anything he set his mind to and he 
tried about everything there was in the communities in which he lived. Accordingly, he was called upon by 
and large, to be secretary treasurer of the municipality, or the telephone company, or the board of trade, or 
his church, or as the case may be. He was, of course, an active member of our political party. He was active 
in the CCF for many years and became a member of the local organization in his constituency in 1948, 
attended the national convention in 1952 and the founding convention of the New Democratic Party in 1961. 
He ran in 1952 in Rosthern and was not successful. He ran against Walter Tucker, the then Liberal leader, 
but he got a large vote and made a good showing. He entered the Assembly in 1956 as the member for 
Shellbrook, was re-elected in 1960 and was defeated in 1964. He brought the same spirit to his work in this 
Assembly as he did to his work in the community, concerning himself with such issues as education, the 
advancement of Indian and Metis people and generally the concerns of his constituency. 
 
He was a good-humored, quiet-spoken man. He was well liked and respected by his colleagues. He was 
serious and thoughtful and played his full role, particularly in the committees of the House. John’s family 
life, like his public life, was a full one. He and his wife Marie raised a large family and built a strong home 
life. I found him, when I was his colleague here in this legislature, to be a helpful colleague and a 
co-operative friend. I turned up, for the sake of auld lang syne as one might say, the last statement he made 
in the Assembly in the Hansard just before the election of 1964. He was introducing a resolution: 
 

That this Assembly urges that no rail line abandonment be permitted until the federal government 
establishes a proper agency to study the full economic and social consequences suffered by farmers, 
businesses and residents of rural and small urban communities, and the adverse effect on the 
financial position of local government; and urges further that before the abandonment of any branch 
lines shall be authorized, the railway companies shall have implemented plan for national 
reorganization of their system. 

 
All this indicates is that the more things change, the more they are the same, since we could more than 15 
years later be introducing a not dissimilar motion. This indicates – and the remarks of Mr. Thiessen which I 
had an opportunity to read and peruse indicate – his concern for his constituents and the possibility of 
adverse effects on them from rail line abandonment. That is typical of the concerns he brought to this 
legislature and 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
360 

characteristic of the service which he rendered to his constituents. I know that others on both sides of the 
House would join with me in recording our sense of loss and in expressing our sympathy to all members of 
the surviving family of John Thiessen. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier (Mr. 
Blakeney) in expressing sympathy to the Thiessen family. Although I never did have the opportunity of 
meeting Mr. Thiessen I can see by the record that he certainly had an enviable life in community service. To 
have 42 years at the municipal level, I think, is a very commendable record, along with eight yes in this 
Chamber. Added to this, Mr. Thiessen served on the school boards, health clinics, church organizations, 
telephone companies, and community services of many types. I think that is an outstanding record of 
achievement and I believe that the province of Saskatchewan is better for the lives of men with this 
dedication to service, as did the late John Thiessen. I, therefore, would like to express my condolences to the 
bereaved family. 
 
HON. MR. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): – Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few brief 
remarks to those who have already spoken. Much of what has been said and will be made a matter of record 
is that which could be repeated again by myself. I was personally acquainted with John Thiessen and his 
family. Canwood is very near to what I would call my home town. John was indeed a widely respected 
citizen in his community. There’s no question about that. Those who rubbed shoulders with him on a daily 
basis recognized him to be a typical, rural Saskatchewanian. Of his 42 years in civic government, the larger 
part of it was spent in the community of Canwood. It’s already been said, not only was he involved in rural 
government but also he was as man who involved himself in all aspects of community life – telephone 
company, community clinics, and so on. 
 
I distinctly remember the medicare dispute of 1962 and among many of the interesting activities of those 
days, perhaps one of the greater honors that could be attributed to John Thiessen, with respect to the 
Canwood community, is that he was the main force in the building of the new community clinic building in 
Canwood, and obtaining a doctor for that town and for the community. That clinic is still active. It’s very 
active today with a resident doctor and has been in continuous operation since its inception in the days of the 
medicare dispute. I think this speaks well for the town of 400 population and the community surrounding. Of 
course it speaks well for the original developers, one of whom was John Thiessen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, without dwelling further on the points which have been enumerated here, I want to extend 
to his wife and family my sincere condolences. I’m sure that as we remember the life and activities of John 
Thiessen as a member of this legislature, it can be said that the efforts which he put forth, not only here in 
the legislature on behalf of a broad constituency of people, the Shellbrook constituency, and others in the 
province, he dies so in a very honorable way in terms of his local community. 
 
MR. N.E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): – Mr. Speaker, I want to join other members of the Assembly in 
paying respects and tributes to John Thiessen. I did not know John Thiessen until he had retired from 
provincial politics. After he completed his service in this legislature he moved to the then village of Insinger 
in the Kelvington constituency and served until his retirement from the municipal field as the R.M. secretary 
at Insinger. I had occasion to visit John and Mrs. Thiessen on a number of occasions. He was residing in the 
Kelvington constituency at the time of my election to the legislature. So my association with him has been 
not as long as some other members of 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
361 

this legislature. John Thiessen was certainly a true and dedicated servant of the public. You had to meet John 
to really appreciate how much he enjoyed working with the people of his community. He was a very kind 
man, a very warm man, a very dedicated person and one who had a very good sense of humor. I don’t recall 
what wise person once said that he would sooner be first man in a little Armenian town than second man in 
Rome. I think that very much characterizes John Thiessen, who gave most of his life to working in the 
smaller communities of this province. I certainly got the impression that this description is an apt one for 
John Thiessen. 
 
He was a member of this legislature and served the public at the local level when many of the institutions 
like our power system and our grid road system were put through – services that we now take for granted. 
 
John Thiessen retired from municipal work in Insinger and move, I believe, to Saskatoon. I was not aware of 
his passing until we learned of it a few days ago, but I certainly join other members of this Assembly in 
expressing sympathy and condolences to the members of the family of the late John Thiessen. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 
words of condolence to those of the Premier and others who have spoken. John Thiessen (sometimes we 
called him Jack), came and went during my sojourn here in the legislature. This legislature was better and 
Saskatchewan is better for John Thiessen having been here and at other places in the province. 
 
It wasn’t by accident that John had these progressive thoughts and that he acted always in the best way 
possible to serve his community. He came by it honestly. His father was a wheat pool delegate, a reeve of his 
municipality and a leader in his community. John Thiessen again proved that the apples never tool too far 
away from the tree. I am sure that his family will continue making the same kids of contributions, due to the 
leadership and the teaching and the influence of a father like John Thiessen. 
 
I remember is hard work; in fact there was a period of time in the ’50s when I shared a room with him and I 
got to know him very well. I can say that John was a friend of mine and I am proud that he was. I remember 
when there was one member of the family who rolled a little further from the tree than John. It was prior to 
the 1960 election, I believe, that his brother in Rosthern (a younger brother ) stood for nomination as a 
Liberal candidate, would you believe. There were some catcalls across the floor of the House when John was 
speaking one day and they said, what about your brother, John? What about your smart brother, John? John 
looked across and smiled and he said, well, he may be smarter than I am but he’s not as wise. And you’ll 
find that in the record. 
 
Anyway, I believe that his wife and family will be pleased that we have noted John’s work. It was mentioned 
by my colleague Mr. Byers, and I want to say too, that he worked hard in the legislature for certain things 
which have now become institutions. 
 
It was during the ’60s when John was here in our caucus that we fought for and pushed for, as caucus 
members, the grid road system which was of course a new departure, committing the government of that day 
to multimillions of dollars which have continued to grow since that time, but have provided a secondary 
highway system in Saskatchewan that is second to none anywhere on the continent. 
 
Those are the kinds of ideas which grew from members like John Thiessen because he knew the needs and 
felt the needs and understood the needs of rural areas. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
362 

There were other things. Farm sewer and water – our caucus committee worked on that and it came to 
fruition. Today, because of that forward thinking of people like John Thiessen, thee are very few homes that 
aren’t served with modern facilities such as sewer and water because of the farm modernization plan which 
was introduced during that period of time and has continued to serve the farm areas of Saskatchewan since 
that time. 
 
John was part of these and many other things which have been mentioned. I can say again, Saskatchewan is a 
better place; the community John lived in is a better place and I am sure the members of the family he has 
left behind are going to continue in that tradition of making their communities a better place to live in 
because of the co-operative community-serving type of people they are. They should be proud to have had a 
sire like John Thiessen. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman (Minister of the 
Environment): 
 

That the resolution just passed together with the transcript of oral tributes to the member of the 
deceased member be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): – I move, seconded by my seatmate the 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman (Minister of the Environment): 
 

That when his Assembly do adjourn at the end of the sitting of the day on which this motion is 
adopted it shall stand adjourned to a date set by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government and 
that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days’ notice, if possible, by wire and registered 
mail of the said date. 

 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – I feel that we’ve been summoned to this Chamber for this 
fall session and I would hope to conduct the business of this province. It seems to me that there’s been very 
little that has taken place to date. I have not seen any significant bills being introduced. Those that have been 
introduced to this point in time have been pushed down, shall I say, in the most abrupt manner in that we, as 
members of this legislature, are being asked to approve bills that are landing on our desks just prior to the 
questioning on these. I don’t think that’s in the best interests of this province. I don’t think that’s what the 
people of this province want to see in the legislature of this province and I don’t think that we as the 
opposition are willing to stand for that kind of slipshod government. 
 
I also feel that there’s a very important strike on in this province of Saskatchewan. Since the opening of this 
House, we have asked questions repeatedly of the minister in 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
363 

charge and of the Premier that they would assume the responsibility of their portfolios and try to bring about 
a settlement of this strike. At this point in time I have seen very little progress, very little progress at all. I 
have many more question to ask of the members not only on that topic but on other important topics that are 
facing this province of Saskatchewan. I can’t see that an early closure of this House would be in the best 
interests of this province or of the legislators in this province. I came here to do a job. I’m willing to stay 
here to do that job and I can’t see that trying to put bills in front of this House without due deliberation can 
be in the best interests of the province of Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think we should stay in 
this Chamber, discuss the issues and do the job that the people of Saskatchewan elected us to do and not run 
out on the first occasion . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – . . . not to run out on the first occasion because some of the situations in this province are 
embarrassing to the government opposite. I think we should come up with some solutions. You claim to 
have the great mandate. Let’s see you bring about some solutions to the problems that are facing this 
province today. And that solution, Mr. Speaker, is not to be leaving this Chamber at the first opportune 
moment but to stay here and debate in due deliberation. I think those are the words that I would have to say 
and I’m expressing the views of my colleagues here, that we came here to do a job. I’m not sure that you did. 
From your actions I can’t see that you’re doing your job at all my friends, and therefore we will want to stay 
in this House until some of these solutions are arrived at. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): – Mr. Speaker, since this session has started we have made repeated 
requests to the Minister of Finance (Mr. Tchorzewski) for the tabling of the public accounts. And the reason 
for the request for the tabling of the public accounts is to that the public accounts can be referred to: (1) the 
opposition, (2) the public accounts committee. Surely the whole function of the opposition in the legislative 
process is to make the government accountable, to make the government accountable to the people – that’s 
the function. They are the executive branch of government; the legislature is the function of government to 
make the government accountable. And all we simply ask for are the accounts. Where are the accounts? If 
we can’t have the public accounts between now and the time the session comes in, that type of work, the 
opposition can go through those accounts, can do some inquiring as to how the money was spent last year 
and in that sense of the word try to bring the spending of this government under control. Surely that’s the 
function. What do we want to do? We come in here for seven days for a Speech from the Throne debate that 
says nothing, that gives no direction as to where this province is going. It simply comes out and talks about 
their dogmatic views about how great they are. It advances virtually nothing in terms of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. In terms of the Meewasin Valley Authority they have the audacity to lay on the Table after question 
period starts, less than an hour ago, the amendment to the legislation. It has been covering the news in 
Saskatoon for perhaps two or three weeks now and they have the audacity to lay it on the Table less than an 
hour, less than an hour before! And now they want to get out of the House. 
 
The government made a big to-do last year about their great line that it is the function of the government to 
open this House and it’s the option of the opposition as to when it closes. It strikes me that you fellows over 
there can talk about that, with all your pomp and ceremony and in all your self-righteousness, and then you 
turn like this. So what I say to you gentlemen opposite is number one, bring the public accounts before this 
thing instead of wishy-washy, back and forth. And then you can stand up – you 43 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
364 

or 44 of you – and say whether or not we are going to close this House. 
 
HON. G. MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): – Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to point 
out to all of the hon. members here in the Assembly the real purpose of the fall session, why it was 
established and the benefits that have accrued as a result of it as it has developed. I think the original intent, 
Mr. Speaker, of establishing a small portion of the session was to do three things. 
 
1. To introduce the throne speech and have the debate. 
 
2. During the debating period, to introduce a number of the bills to be passed during the session. 
 
3. To introduce legislation that requires passage in the fall in order to meet a particular problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fall session under those kinds of structures has worked very well indeed. We have had 
throne speeches; we’ve had excellent debates. I thought the debate yesterday in the Assembly was just 
outstanding. We had good speakers – you and I spoke. We had a number of bills introduced. There has 
always been a cry from the opposition members during my stay in the Assembly that they did not have 
enough time to look at the legislation, they weren’t properly prepared to debate when second readings came 
up, they had to adjourn, there wasn’t enough time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We have introduced so far 
some 46 bills. Now there are more bills to introduce and they will be introduced when we pick up the session 
come late February, as is the tradition since we started the fall session operation. There will be more bills 
introduced but the opposition, during the Christmas break and January, will have an opportunity to look at he 
bills that have been tabled and then when we come back, it will be prepared to debate them and debate them 
fully. As we introduce new bills they will also during that period have time to examine them and consider 
them and debate them fully. I think those two procedures have worked well, albeit there have been sessions 
when it has been necessary, when it has been in the public interest to introduce legislation and have it passed 
and we’ve had lengthy sessions as a result. But I don’t think that’s our case during this fall session. Our case 
is a normal kind of case where we have the throne speech debate, we introduce the bills, we have some 
second readings, adjourn and give the opposition time to prepare for the spring session with a number of 
bills before them. I think that’s just an excellent route to follow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – This session has been an absolute waste of time and the legislators of this 
province deserve to be condemned for walking out of here without dealing with some of the pressing 
problems, without being able to hold the government to account for its handling of the SGEA (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees Association) strike, without being able to hold the government to account on its 
public expenditures and the record as presented by the provincial auditor, without being able to hold the 
government to account for what looks like bad business judgment on the Cornwall Centre. 
 
You know the highlights of this session to date have been the throne speech party, the announcement that the 
government opposite, the Premier, is going to hold a New Year’s party at the public expense and the new 
and first time that we’ve ever had a members’ wives’ tea. That’s the sum total of the record of this particular 
session of the Legislative Assembly. Let me tell you, that’s something to be proud of. And the members 
opposite think that they’ve accomplished something. They’re pretty proud of 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
365 

what they’ve brought forward. Let’s look at some of the legislation. Let’s look at some of the legislation that 
we’ve got all winter to consider. 
 
Let me take a look at item 8, the amendment to The Arts Board Act. This is a biggy. This is a controversial 
one that you’ll want input on from everybody and I challenge every one of you to take 50 of your 
constituents and tell them how serious the matters are that you debate. Each member of the board shall hold 
his office for a term of one year until a successor is appointed, but may be removed for cause by the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council. That’s the serious problem as seen by the government opposite. 
 
Then they have another biggy! They have another pressing matter that requires the full consideration of all 
legislators. The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act. They’re going to make a major amendment to The 
Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts Act – subject to subsection 2, each member of the board on his first 
appointment holds office for a term of one year and until his successor is appointed. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – There’s no work to do. Why do you want to sit? 
 
MR. LANE: – Oh, I’m going to make a suggestion on that for the hon. member. Then, Mr. Speaker, let me 
tell you the one that I know is just going to take the full study of each and every one of us. I know, Mr. 
Speaker, you’re going to be most deeply concerned about this yourself because the controversy that’s going 
to rage in this Assembly when it comes up is going to be some of the most heated debate that this Assembly 
will ever see. It’s going to tear apart, it’s going to divide this province from one end to the other. It’s going to 
pit family against family. It’s going to pit neighbor against neighbor. It’s going to pit community against 
community. Let me tell you what that vital piece of legislation is. The amendment to The Public Libraries 
Act says the annual meeting of the board must be held between January 1 and May 15 in each year. Now, 
have you ever heard, Mr. Speaker, of a more controversial, vital piece of legislation in your years in this 
Assembly? I know, that’s the record. There is only one bill that meets the criteria as set out by the Minister 
of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy). That is The Personal Property Security Act. That is going to take some 
serious study. But let me tell the Minister of Agriculture that that is the same bill we had last spring. We 
could have introduced it last spring and tabled it. We could have debated it this fall. 
 
It is the same on the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) tabled before the Assembly. In fact, every criterion 
that you raise has not bee met. If we take the argument of the Minister of Agriculture. that the sole purpose 
of this fall session is to debate the throne speech, then I’m going to suggest to the minister that we cancel it 
from now on. Do away with it – not have the fall session of the Assembly. Since the institution of this 
practice we, in fact, have done nothing but increased the cost to the taxpayers of this province . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s right and I’m going to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that you hear me out because 
you know, he is typical of the members opposite. 
 
He can only do one thing. He can’t walk and chew gum. He can’t talk and listen and, Mr. Speaker, it is time 
for listening for the members opposite – particularly the member for Kinistino (Mr. Cody). What I’m 
suggesting and what the Conservative Party is suggesting is that we do away with the fall session. We are in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, wasting the taxpayers’ time and the taxpayers’ money. If we had the throne speech debate 
and the introduction of the bills in the spring, we would cut and we wouldn’t extend the time of the spring 
session. 
 
It was the normal practice until five or six years ago that both the throne and budget 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
366 

speech be held in the spring. In fact, I saw the light and I hope you guys see the light this afternoon. You 
certainly haven’t indicated any degree of concern about the public expenditure when you won’t bring in 
public accounts, when you give the minister responsible for the Cornwall Centre (Mr. Smishek) the ability to 
go and spend money. I mean, even his wife doesn’t do that for heaven’s sake. You are giving him the 
opportunity to go and spend $37 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been no justification. In fact, this session is an embarrassment to the government 
because nothing of any significance has been dealt with by the legislators. In fact, the only major issue of 
concern (and I question how much concern it is to the general public), is the matter of the SGEA 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees Association) strike. In fact this has been an absolute waste of time 
and an absolute waste of the taxpayers’ money, and the responsibility for that waste lies with the government 
opposite. It lies in particular with the Premier. It also lies with his House Leader (Mr. Romanow) when, after 
several months of inactivity, all he can bring forward are amendments to some of the legislation that he is 
proposing now. In fact, we say if the government has a mater of vital and pressing public importance, that it 
indicates to the public, that be the sole justification for a fall session. Until we get a commitment (and we all 
deserve some responsibility) we are wasting the taxpayers’ money; we’re charging them more by bringing 
people in for two sessions instead of one. I say to the government members opposite, you haven’t done 
yourself very proud with this session. You haven’t done yourself credit with this session. In fact, as I say, 
you deserve and you take the responsibility for the silence of the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) who 
refuses to participate in the debate on the SGEA, refuses to ask question. You take the responsibility for the 
evasions and conflicting statements of the minister responsible for the Cornwall Centre, and I say that that’s 
all we’ve got to show for this. It’s a nice happy little list of parties, and some bills that in fact could be tabled 
in the spring without causing the public any inconvenience whatsoever. I hope the minister opposite when he 
gets on his feet, is going to justify calling this Assembly as a member of the Executive Council and is going 
to justify to the public the expenditure of funds for this session, and the reason for this session. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): – I always did have a difficult time with you noticing me. I thought 
maybe when I was sitting a little closer to you you might have been able to see me more adequately but 
apparently not. Now, Mr. Speaker, surely the members opposite would like a good speech and just keep up 
your yip-yap and I’ll be sure to give you one. Mr. Speaker, when I got word that this motion was moved in 
this House by the Regina member responsible for urban affairs, seconded by his seatmate. I was deliberating 
on a bill, Mr. Speaker. I introduced by the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Hammersmith), the 
minister responsible for Northern Saskatchewan. It was a bill which I was hoping might bring some benefits 
to northern Saskatchewan. It was a bill which I was hoping might bring some benefits to northern 
Saskatchewan. That’s what I was doing, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the members of the opposition are doing. 
They are studying the legislation as it comes before them, and I just got this 20 minutes ago in my desk. And 
you bring in that kind of a motion! 
 
Now then, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy) who usually, in his own boisterous 
way stands up there and gives a speech and just reads . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I tell you that you make 
an argument that’s an awfully weak argument. The member for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. 
MacMurchy) tells this House, tells this opposition that we have to have bills before us to study all winter 
long. Mr. Speaker, I tell that member and the Minister of Agriculture, nonsense! Absolute nonsense. Because 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) said only moment before you took your place that he 
required documents from the public accounts so we 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
367 

could review them. Now how is that argument consistent from the Minister of Agriculture? Mr. Speaker, you 
know, I know, the members of the opposition know and the members of the government know that is not at 
all consistent – not at all. If we require the bills before us to study all winter then, Mr. Speaker, we have got 
to have the public accounts documents so that we can keep you people accountable to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. Doesn’t that make a little bit of sense to you? Certainly it doesn’t make any sense to the 
backbenchers. Mr. Speaker, surely the member for Regina North-West (Mr. Solomon) newly elected to this 
Assembly, would like to have an opportunity to say something other than to move the Speech from the 
Throne. Surely! But oh no, he’s going to be just like all the rest of the backbenchers out there. They are 
doing nothing in here so they figure they might as well do it at home. Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition in 
this House doesn’t do nothing in the House and it doesn’t do nothing outside the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: – Now then, Mr. Speaker, you would notice that the backbenchers applauded and the 
front benchers did not. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s because the front benchers, being slightly more intelligent 
than the backbenchers understood what I said. Of course the member for Pelly (Mr. Lusney) hasn’t heard a 
word yet; he hasn’t heard a word since the day he was elected in here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just take a look at the ministers we have and the backbenchers who are attempting to 
move up a few rows – the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg (Mr. Engel) as I said – the only cabinet that 
he’ll find is in his kitchen. We have problems, Mr. Speaker, in the government benches. If there’s a reason 
for this government to want to get out of here, Mr. Speaker, it’s because the opposition is doing its job. It’s 
doing its job and it’s an embarrassment. They thought, Mr. Speaker, they could come into this House and 
they could put their stuff on the Table and gain some more political mileage with the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that has not been the case. 
 
The opposition has raised substantial issues which have, Mr. Speaker, created an embarrassment to this 
government. The Cornwall issue – I’m sure the minister responsible for urban affairs (Mr. Smishek) would 
love to get out of this House, absolutely love to, because he has to face that tirade. He has to keep coming up 
with these inconsistencies; he’s saying one thing one day and another the next. The Minister of Urban 
Affairs obviously doesn’t know what he’s doing in his department. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, further to that we have a Saskatchewan Government Employees Association strike, 
although you would think that the government members didn’t know it at all. The Minister of Labour (Mr. 
Snyder) sure could not care less. He hasn’t done a thing. He hasn’t responded to a question in the House. On 
one day, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this government took five notices on questions. Five notices. Why? 
Two reasons: because his ministers aren’t in the House on the one hand and because he doesn’t have the 
answers on the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now surely, if I were a government with the ineptitude of this government, I’d want to get out of here too. 
But my constituents know and I suggest the constituents of the opposition elected us to do a job. Now if 
you’re going to expend taxpayers’ dollars to call us in here, then why can’t we do the job? Doesn’t that make 
sense? No, not to that bunch of people over there. Not at all. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
368 

Mr. Speaker, maybe another reason they want to get out of here is because the throne speech addresses itself 
to absolutely nothing and they know it. The opposition has had a difficult time in picking something when it 
has nothing in it. But we have drawn that fact to the minds of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, and 
they know, the opposition knows, and the government is fast becoming knowledgeable of the fact that there 
is nothing in the throne speech. A government is supposed to have all the answers, the social justice policies 
. . . It’s a said sight. I say to the people of Saskatchewan – a sad day indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, well now, it’s always interesting to know that you’re finally 
waking a few of them up on that side of the House. But I’ll just make one more statement her to the minister 
responsible for northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Hammersmith). If you can justify to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan that you come in here for a short two weeks and can do the business on behalf of northern 
Saskatchewan, well, I’ll tell you, you will be doing something pretty shoddy up there, just pretty shoddy. I 
don’t know how you’re going to get away with that. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I may spend more time in 
northern Saskatchewan this year than you do and we’ll see what happens when the spring session opens. I’ll 
tell you, we’re not getting out of this House until you give us some answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset of my remarks. it’s absolutely appalling that a government would bring in 
such a motion. Mr. Speaker, I can only say that I’m glad that it’s on their shoulders and not ours. The 
opposition would like to do a job. We’re obviously outnumbered, but what more can I say. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to the comments 
made by the members of this House. I listened a few minutes ago to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
MacMurchy) explain why we needed a fall session . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Take the cotton out of 
your ears Paul, you might hear. If you would ask the other members around you to keep it quiet, then you 
will be able to hear me. It’s as simple as that. I’m sure that my voice is carrying through very well . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Are you ready? Mr. Speaker, they’re the ones that went to leave this Assembly. I 
can be here till next month if they want. So it’s up to you, gentlemen, if you want to continue your yapping, 
keep it up. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture has failed to convince me that there was a need to call this session this fall. 
There isn’t a piece of legislation that has been introduced (as the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) has 
indicated) that couldn’t have waited until next year. 
 
This government has become so arrogant in their replies to questions from the opposition. I don’t blame the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban) (Mr. Smishek) for having made the motion he has. For one week, we 
have been asking, questioning the minister about his responsibilities in the handling and the mismanagement 
of the Cornwall Centre and so far, we’ve had double answers. We haven’t had one answer yet that we can be 
satisfied with. I’ll tell you how arrogant this government is. I have been waiting since last year for 
information that was promised to me in this House – photocopies. If the Minister for the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. Hammersmith) will listen, I asked last year and you promised that information 
within three weeks. I’m still waiting for it – the photocopies of the logbooks of the aircraft. 
 
We’ve asked questions in this House in this session that we’ve had absolutely no answers to. You have been 
skating everything. You refuse to be responsible to your 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
369 

duties. You’ve been unaccountable to the public, to the taxpayers of this province and yet you want to walk 
out of here. You’ve been unaccountable to the public, to the taxpayers of this province and yet you want to 
walk out of here. Why did you call it in the first place? I say the Premier of this province has been 
irresponsible in calling the legislature without doing something. We have an emergency in this province. The 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) refused to intervene, refuses to bring both sides together for negotiations 
and does absolutely nothing. We are now sitting with . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – They’re together right now in the Hotel Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Well isn’t it about time! We have been asking you to do it for two weeks. The minister 
suggested the farther I could stay away from it, the better it would be and that’s exactly the attitude that you 
have taken. If you had come closer to it, there wouldn’t be a line-up at the welfare bureau today waiting for 
their welfare cheques from your employees. That’s what the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Koskie) is 
refusing to recognize. Again, we have the evidence that $108 a month is what you’re offering. So that you’re 
really being . . . You’re putting a squeeze on. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order. As the warm feeling of the Christmas season settles about our shoulders, I’m sure 
all member want to try to conclude whatever we’re on now. However, I realize the latitude allowed on this 
resolution is quite wide because of the nature of the resolution but I can’t allow members to get into details 
about something that is not pertinent directly to this resolution that is before us. The resolution basically 
deals with the adjournment of this House to a time unspecified. I realize members, if they feel compelled, 
must refer to reasons why they need more time to discuss issues or why they may not need more time or why 
we have a fall session and the purposes for the fall session, but I can’t allow members to get into detailed 
discussions of contract negotiations or bills or resolutions that happen to be hereabouts that might be 
discussed at some time in the future. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize for using the specifics that I have and I’ll 
stick to more generalities on this motion. 
 
I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition has been stonewalled since we came in here two weeks 
ago – stonewalled by every minister and every member opposite. We have been refused answers and we’re 
not getting them and they are asking us to adjourn this Assembly today. 
 
The SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees Association) strike, in our opinion, was serious. It was 
an emergency. The 11,000 members who are out there on strike collecting no funds are going to have a very 
bleak Christmas to say the least. We’ve questioned several ministers. I can talk about SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). We could talk about the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
(Urban) (Mr. Smishek). We can talk about tourism and natural resources are the prime example of today. We 
can talk about the DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan). I can talk about all of these – the public 
accounts which we’ve asked for and you have continuously refused and yet at that point in time you have the 
nerve to turn around and ask us to approve a motion to adjourn this House when we’ve done nothing, 
absolutely nothing for the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is their responsibility and certainly we on this side can sit here till next year, until you can 
prove to us why we should be adjourning or prove to us why you called this session to begin with. And as 
the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) said it’s about time we started looking at the fact that we need a 
session maybe in the spring, not 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
370 

twice, Mr. Speaker. I oppose the motion. 
 
MR. KATZMAN (Rosthern): – Mr. Speaker, we have a motion before us to adjourn this House. Yet when 
we were called to this session by a throne speech that was lacking in many areas, it is interesting . . . oh, I’m 
just informed that presently there are members from the other side of the House basically packing their 
baggage to go home. I would hope that wouldn’t be. That’s the arrogance we’re seeing from the NDP in this 
House. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me start by making the comments re the throne speech – why we were all 
called here and yet we have not seen this type of legislation brought into the House. I refer, during the throne 
speech, to page 5 where the Department of Environment has suggested that it has not done its job in the past 
and will be bringing in legislation which will effectively change the environment act of the province of 
Saskatchewan. That being the case, I would assume that that is urgent and pressing legislation because of the 
government’s involvement in the northern Saskatchewan development area and because of what may happen 
in the Warman area and other parts of the province. 
 
WE have seen the Government of Saskatchewan’s total disregard, as was mentioned by the member for 
Estevan (Mr. Larter), or the Coronach projects. We have not seen an environment bill. That was maybe the 
reason this session would be called – one of the possible reasons – to discuss the environment and the 
protection of it for the future generations of this province. That might be pressing legislation in light of what 
has happened in the Department of the Environment. They have sort of forgotten to do their job in the past 
and we’ve had the PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) spill and several other areas and as my desk mate 
referred, to the water problems that they’re having in Regina with PCBs. Maybe we expected some 
legislation in this area – pressing and urgent – urgent for the health of the citizens of Regina and Moose Jaw 
and those of us who drink the water of Regina. There’s no legislation and not hint of what that legislation 
will be. We don’t know how big, how thick – no time, they didn’t bring it in so we could study it during the 
break. Now, when I make that comment I remember that prior to being a member in this House, the reason 
explained to me by the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) that they had a fall session was to bring in pressing 
public concerns and once again the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy) said the same thing in his little 
speech on this issue. He said public interest – things that people will have an input into. 
 
We go through all the bills that have been presented and where are the bills of public interest? Well, the first 
bill with some public interest, in my constituency and around the city of Saskatoon is Bill No. 46 moved by 
the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) today. He hasn’t suggested that tomorrow he would get up on his feet 
and rise to speak on the seconding of The Meewasin Valley Authority Act. He hasn’t suggested what he is 
going to do so people can consider it while this House is adjourned until the call of the Speaker. Also, he is 
not listening to the concerns of the public in Saskatoon. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – He never has. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: – One of the members says he never has – well he listens to his political friends in 
Saskatoon but I don’t think he listens to the people who are affected by legislation. Last year some of us in 
this House had a piece of legislation slip by us because we didn’t see all of the ramifications. But the bill was 
passed last year; the ramifications are now visible today. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
371 

The member for Saskatoon Riversdale, The Attorney General (Mr. Romanow), when asked on Monday, the 
former minister of finance suggested – oh here is the notice we are bringing in amendments. In he rushed to 
put it on the table and we have amendments. Shortly after 3 o’clock today we received these amendments. 
Obviously we are not prepared to discuss them today and pass them or amend them because it takes time to 
study. He must remember the public in Saskatoon is concerned. Why are they concerned? Because there is a 
stamp on their title. Because the money lenders say that because of that stamp we will not loan you funds to 
assist you in improving your property or to buy the farm machinery you may need. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Will they lend it to them now Ralph? 
 
No, they still won’t loan it to them because the bill hasn’t changed. We have put a hardship on people in the 
Saskatoon area affected by the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
MR. LARTER: – You mean they have done this to people . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. KATZMAN: – Yes, member for Estevan (Mr. Larter). It’s another people issue where they have 
forgotten about the people As I was starting to say, the Attorney General suggested through his former 
minister of finance, the member responsible for the Cornwall Centre and what else, on Monday, that on 
Wednesday we would see a bill which would correct the problems within the Meewasin Authority. Well we 
haven’t. We got a bill, as I have said, at approximately 3 o’clock this afternoon. But if we adjourn as the 
members on the other side are suggesting when they moved their motion, they are saying to heck with the 
people of Saskatoon who are financially in trouble and don’t know where they stand on legislation now that 
it has been brought to their attention. These people don’t know if they can sell their land without offering it 
to the government first. We have the chairman of the authority standing up and saying, I am requesting the 
Attorney General to bring in legislation to correct this, correct this and correct this. 
 
The Attorney General brings in legislation (and he has had plenty of time to bring in legislation for us to 
consider). He could have had this bill in here for us a week ago; he didn’t have to wait until 3 o’clock today. 
But that’s not the way the Attorney General and the NDP government seem to want to work. They want to 
ram it through. They don’t want to give it to the opposition with plenty of time to study, and that’s what is 
important. We need time to study the bills. I agree with the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy) when 
he made that statement earlier. 
 
We also must remember when we, as legislators, cause a hardship on the private citizens of Saskatchewan – 
in this case the private citizens affected by the authority surrounding Saskatoon’s river bank – we should be 
prepared to correct it as best we can to take the burden off their backs. But no, that’s not what we are going 
to do. We are all going to go home for Christmas, for a New Year’s party paid for by the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the first time and forget about these individuals. That’s not what we are here for Mr. 
Attorney General. What we are here for is to work on legislation for the benefit of all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. When we pass legislation that causes hardship we should be man enough to stand up and say, 
hey fellows, we might have made a mistake here. How do we correct it? Let’s get down and discuss it. Let’s 
find a way to improve the situation when we put a hardship on individuals. The Attorney General (Mr. 
Romano) isn’t suggesting that. The chairman of the Meewasin Authority suggest that and goes to him as a 
member of that authority. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
372 

AN HON. MEMBER: – Are you talking to Mr. Devine (Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party)? 
He’s listening. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: – Is he? Well, you know, the member for Regina North-East (Mr. Smishek) makes 
comments about our leader. Let me make a comment. At least our leader listens to the people who are 
concerned, not like you members. You don’t listen to anybody. You do what you think is politically the best 
thing. You don’t worry about the people who are affected. You don’t worry how you dig into their pockets 
and tie up everything they own, what they’ve worked a lifetime to build. You don’t worry about that. That’s 
not important to you. What is important to you, Mr. Minister? Is it that $2,000 donation we heard about that 
you got for the NDP as was indicated? That’s what’s important. That’s why you gave that nice little fixed 
deal over here in Regina. No private developers involved. That must be what’s important to that minister. 
 
Let’s get back to the one item I’m talking about. Let’s talk about this authority in Saskatoon that is affecting 
the rights of private individuals. Private individuals have brought their concern to that authority. That 
authority has stood up and said yes, we agree, we should make changes. The Attorney General sits on that 
authority. Obviously I would assume the Attorney General, being a member of that authority would bring 
before the House legislation to correct these problems. No, he wouldn’t be involved in legislation to get us 
out of this House before we cure the problems. That’s what we have, Mr. Speaker. We have the Attorney 
General suggesting that those people back in Saskatoon aren’t important. The people in Riversdale, 
Saskatoon Centre, Saskatoon Mayfair, the Sutherland area, they’re not important . They don’t count. We’re 
not worried about the farmers in the Biggar constituency or the Rosthern constituency. All that matters is, we 
said we would bring in something; we’ll discuss it next March of whenever. We’re not going to worry about 
it presently. Not at all. You see, we brought in this bill and we thought everybody needed time to study it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Oh, I’m glad to pick up the comment from the member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen) who is presently 
trying to become the Speaker of the House. He made his first move today into that Chair, Mr. Speaker, and I 
suggest be careful. as he checks out your office when he comes to visit you. He suggest do we want this bill 
passed today? Let suggest to the member that maybe the Attorney General who had lots of time could have 
brought it in on Friday, given us the weekend to study it and then I could have answered our comments. Yes, 
I’ll tell you this much: I want the inequalities that are hurting the private citizens of Saskatoon fixed, the 
inequalities that were forced upon their backs by us, you and us, when we voted in favor of the Meewasin 
authority. The Attorney General sits on that authority which has passed a motion – nobody argues – and their 
chairman has spoken out and said we want it fixed. But he’s not coming in to get it fixed until the last 
minute and then he can go out and say I tried. Let me suggest to the minister that I don’t see within the bill 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that I’m getting all this assistance because you know, I can use the fresh breath 
of air every so often and a drink of this PCB water. Well, Mr. Speaker, we just heard from another section of 
the government on the other side. I’ll get back to the Attorney General a little later, but let me first get to the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). The minister who is responsible for nothing. He’s responsible for nothing, 
the minister says. When you ask him whether he will assist this – no keep me out of it. When you ask him 
about this – don’t ask me about that – the minister of some people would say, no comment, no answer and so 
forth. The Minister of Labour suggests that in the labor legislation in this province as it affects the SGEA 
(Saskatchewan 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
373 

Government Employees Association), he makes no comments because he might be charged with an unfair 
labor practice because they are his employees. He refers to other unfair labor practices that were suggested 
against him but I suggest to the minister, let’s look at the circumstances under those and remember what 
happened there. They are totally different situations. I suggest that when two cabinet ministers phone people, 
I’m not surprised they get attacked with unfair labor practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I started to say when I stood on my feet, the environment issue, I thought would come under 
a bill. We have an uranium issue that is very involved which the people will be speaking to in Martensville 
and Saskatoon during the month of January on how it affects them, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t see the 
environment changes coming in that would have changed the act so that we all would know where we stood. 
We might have discovered in the new environment act that it was not a proper thing to have a uranium 
refinery beside a public park which is basically what we are developing with the authority and the uranium 
refinery side by side. Maybe the legislation would have said in the environment act that these aren’t 
compatible, therefore, they cannot be. Then it would have solved the problems of an expensive hearing and 
we would all know where we stand. But we don’t see this environment act. They might decide, well we’ll 
bring it in after and put that in but because that refinery is already approved we’re not going to change it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me refer to one more item that has been talked about by the members on this side. As you 
are aware, when this fall session was originally though of, the idea was for the public accounts and the 
annual reports of all the departments to be tabled in the fall, so that during the adjournment portion all 
members would have a chance to study these and come back for the spring portion of the session. Even that 
isn’t happening any more. We now see a motion that we forget about that 15 day period and we bring them 
in later, either because it’s a strike in the printers or some other reason. We don’t see a total attempt by the 
Government of Saskatchewan to try to bring in all these reports, the public accounts which are the large 
volumes which take a great deal of study. The Minister of Finance (Mr. Tchorzewski) hasn’t tabled these yet 
today. That is part of the reason the fall session was originally started by the NDP government. But now the 
fall session has become a total embarrassment to them because they don’t want to give any answers; they just 
want to come here and get the thing started. 
 
You know, Mr. Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) if you were a little less worried about Mr. Crosbie and 
worried about the boards that you sit on and the people whom you represent, it might be a little bit better. All 
you worry about are the things that are political. You don’t worry about the concerns of the private 
individual. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, as I was saying earlier to you and I said I would come back to the point, the MVA 
(Meewasin Valley Authority) asked you just after the House started to correct certain missing portions – 10 
days ago the minister said. Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Has the member for Rosthern concluded his remarks? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: – No, the member is just waiting until he can have the floor again. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The member has the floor and has had the floor continuously. If he could continue his 
remarks. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
374 

MR. ROMANOW: – . . . irresponsible opposition tactics . . . 
 
MR. KATZMAN: – Mr. Attorney General, before I take my seat let me suggest to you that you have totally 
bungled your job representing that board. You have totally forgotten about the concerns of the private 
individuals and land holders in the area of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and the riverbank area. You are saying 
to them all as you move to adjourn the House, you don’t matter; I don’t care about you; it’s not important 
that you are going to suffer because we can’t make up our minds and correct the mistakes that we made last 
spring in moving a bill. Where’s the minister? Mr. Minister I suggest that you have bungled our job and the 
people of Saskatoon will remember this. Therefore, I will not be voting for this motion, because I think it is 
irresponsible of the government. As you are saying in Ottawa when the Conservatives suggest something – 
irresponsible. Well you are the irresponsible members in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Morse): – Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks to make on this motion. Don’t leave 
Roy, I won’t hurt you today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this legislative Chamber is called into session for a nothing session, I know the 
government opposite is not going to be able to explain it to the people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, we’ll let the people judge what it is when it comes from a nothing minister. Maybe, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why this session was called in – so the Premier could try out some of his nothing 
ministers. Mr. Speaker, we have a very crucial situation in Saskatchewan today with the SGEA strike. We’ve 
got fighting in the government cabinet. The Minister of Labour will not accept his responsibility. he fights 
with the Minister of Highways. The Minister of Highways isn’t here; he’s skating up and down the 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students, the young people of Saskatchewan are being affected by this strike today. They 
are not getting their education. The parents are footing the bill. The government, typical of this socialist 
government, could care less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer is this government going to continue caring less about the young people of 
Saskatchewan? It’s no wonder we don’t have them in the province – that they go to Alberta because they 
know in Alberta they are taken care of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been promised the public accounts would be tabled. We still haven’t received them. 
Mr. Speaker, we need the public accounts tabled so we can find out how this socialist government is wasting 
the money of the people of Saskatchewan. We have many more questions to ask of this inept government 
today and throughout the rest of the week. But no, they want to close the session down. We don’t want to 
close the session down, Mr. Speaker. It’s the government opposite that wants to close it down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this session will be known as the government’s party session – not a session where there 
was a great deal accomplished, just renewing the old acquaintances. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this government is getting to be more of a closed door government. They 
would just as soon not have the legislature sit at all and would just like to run it like a dictatorship which 
they’re trying to do right here today. I will not be voting for the motion. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
375 

MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): – Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that any one of us in this legislature could 
justify leaving here today and going home to our constituents when we have, as far as I am concerned, a 
number one concern and issue, and that is the issue of the SGEA strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney General would just give me a few minutes and remain silent, I will explain what 
I would like to say here. Mr. Speaker, if there is one word that comes to mind in explaining my feelings with 
respect to this session, this sitting and this government, that word is disinterest, disinterested in the strike. 
We have watched and listened to members either making statements off the cuff, or statements, considered 
by some members of the government, that have gotten them into serious troubles. Other ministers, the 
seatmate of the one I’m referring to, is sitting silent when he should be involved. Public accounts have been 
expected and demanded, Mr. Speaker, and we haven’t seem them. Nothing bills have been introduced, 40 
some nothing bills that could have been saved for the spring session – a lack of interest and laughing off 
during question period and goofing off, in some cases. But I think probably, Mr. Speaker, what is more 
typical of a disinterested government is the example this government uses on a day-to-day governing basis, 
and that is, government by order in council rather than government by legislature. 
 
I think that is the reason we shouldn’t be here, Mr. Speaker. That is why we are asked to go home. This 
government is not interested in listening to the opposition or the people of Saskatchewan. Let’s sign the 
orders in council and govern the province that way. It was so typified today, Mr. Speaker, by the answers of 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban) (Mr. Smishek) or referred to as the minister of nothing. He has 
had the department for several months and even yet the legislation is not introduced. In fact, I suggest the 
way this government passes orders in council wasn’t even significant enough to come to these Chambers. He 
is the minister of nothing today. 
 
We as legislators in Saskatchewan, in my opinion, are shirking out duty if we leave this chamber today. We 
have witnessed this disinterest by the government not exhibiting any kind of leadership with respect to the 
SGEA strike. I watched the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) in this House, not more than two years ago 
during a dairy strike, run back and forth to that seat, nearly wear the carpet out, and listen to the bells ring 
while the strike was being settled downstairs. Why was it settled? Because the people of the province were 
concerned, Mr. Speaker, and I’m afraid it may have tainted the fine image of the NDP, but the people of 
Saskatchewan aren’t quite so concerned about SGEA and they know that over there. They are not so 
concerned, so they are not so interested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have suggested what we would do. We have asked and begged the Minister of Labour and 
others in that cabinet to exhibit some leadership to bring the sides together, use his good offices (if I 
remember the terms used by some of our members) to bring the people into this building and sit down and 
negotiate. He said earlier today that they are sitting at the table negotiating now. That’s fine. I’m happy. We 
are all happy. So what happens if the negotiations break down and we are not here, what then? Who takes 
you people to task then? 
 
The irony of this fall sitting, Mr. Speaker, (and we are now being asked to forget what is happening and go 
home) is that really what has happened with respect to the SGEA strike is that it is a fight between one 
branch of the NDP and another branch of the NDP – the labor union bosses and the NDP government. It is 
ironic, and I think worse than that, Mr. Speaker, aside from the fact that it is Christmas, I believe to a great 
degree that 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
376 

the government is using the SGEA and the strike to help offset a deficit budget, if you can imagine. I don’t 
know how long they are going to do that though, Mr. Speaker, if the social services minister, as indicated in 
question period today, is giving welfare to these people. I think that it is a slap in the face to the union 
movement in this province, when they have to go to your government, the people who are keeping them off 
the job through a lack of concern and interest for social welfare. You should be very proud of yourselves this 
close to Christmas. Mr. Speaker, again I repeat the need for us to remain in these chambers for the next 
several days, or even several weeks if necessary. This government to date has yet to give us what we 
consider – and I’m sure the press will repeat the same thing, will agree with these statements – adequate, 
reasonable, leadership answers with respect to the strike. We see the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) who 
sat on his hands for the last two or three weeks, sitting beside an antagonistic minister who in fact I can’t 
understand, who has been at least muzzled if not taken from this cabinet by the Premier (Mr. Blakeney). 
 
Mr. Speaker, disinterest by the government and lack of accountability are so typical of the reasons we’re 
being asked to leave this fall. What’s indicative of that sort of situation was that the independent member for 
The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) this past session received a letter from yours truly, not a critical letter, a letter 
of inquiry with respect to highways in this province, May 2. May 4 I received an acknowledgement that my 
letter was received by him. June passed. July passed. Finally in late July I contacted his office again and I 
was ridiculed by his staff. I shouldn’t be making inquiries about letters I had never written. I then forwarded 
a copy. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order. I think the member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham) must more than tangentially or 
peripherally related to the subject before us, and that is the adjournment of this House. For the member to go 
astray and talk about certain subjects and then come back and make a brief . . . order . . . and then make a 
brief reference to the adjournment of the House, is not sufficient. The member must talk on the resolution 
and any side comments can be peripheral to that about some other subject, but he can’t spend time talking 
about letters that have been sent to ministers and whether answers have been received or not. The subject is 
the adjournment of the House, and I think I must try and hold the member to discussing the adjournment of 
the House. 
 
MR. HAM: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Actually it’s just one example of several dozen I could cite as 
arrogance and disinterest on the part of the NDP government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this session has 
been, I think, best typified by the word stonewalled. In question period time after time either we received 
ridiculous answers, foolish answers, evasive answers, or in the case of the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) 
no answers. To this point I can’t understand why his hands can even function from sitting on them so much. 
Mr. Speaker, again I repeat we as an opposition party cannot walk away from this legislature with the very 
serious problem facing the people of Saskatchewan, that being the strikers that are at this present time 
walking in the cold around this building and other government buildings of Saskatchewan. We’d be viewed 
by our constituents and the public generally, and the government viewed the same way, as shirking our duty. 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no way I can support this motion. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a great deal about the willingness of the opposition to sit 
and to do business. We have heard the opposition say this motion was ill-conceived be cause it would have 
adjourned the House today, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday, whereas normally the House would have been 
adjourned on Friday – two days later. The Premier (Mr. Blakeney) indicated well in advance of the opening 
of the session that the House would adjourn before December 14, which is a normal period. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
377 

He has indicated . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the hon. member opposite for Moosomin (Mr. 
Birkbeck) is extremely aggravated these days – politically nervous and edgy. I understand why that’s the case 
I just wish he would not bring the anxiety of his, his political anxiety, to this House. Agitate your leader out 
in the corridor but don’t bring it to this House, unless you take part in the actual debates. Now I say, Mr. 
Speaker, here are the facts. The facts are that the Premier indicated the House would adjourn before 
December 14. The facts are that always, always in a fall session, the House has adjourned on a Friday, two 
weeks after roughly the calling of the House. This would close it down in two days. The fact of the matter is 
that the government has indicated that the major purpose of a fall session is to get the Speech from the 
Throne before the people of Saskatchewan, get the debate before the people of Saskatchewan, table as many 
of the bills as we can, have those bills stay over for public comment and debate, to be dealt with in the 
spring. We’ve done that. We have 46 bills. I want to say quite candidly, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to 
have had more. I think we could have more. We are hindered by the obvious fact there is an employees’ 
dispute going on. I think that is indicated by everybody. Any person who would be fair-minded about this 
(and I’m not talking now of the opposition because their minds are made up) would understand that to be the 
case. But we have 46 bills. I would like to see a longer list and bills which can be of more meaty substance in 
this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the fall session has been met except for two extra days which I say have been 
curtailed for the reasons I have already articulated. The opposition says nonsense. Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition would like us to believe the House should sit because there is a strike in progress. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask the public to consider those words very carefully. The member for Swift Current (Mr. Ham) 
just now said public accounts. I’ve indicated to the hon. member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) that public 
accounts will in all likelihood be tabled, as it has been every year, in the fall session – every year. We’ve 
never had such a partisan chairman of the public accounts committee as we have this year, Mr. Speaker, in 
the history of this House. No, we haven’t. We’ve had Mr. Ken McLeod, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . We’ll deal with that at the spring session and elsewhere – the actions of this hon. member. 
The business but the flying of executive aircraft? I don’t quarrel with that. That’s his right. 
 
But when the hon. member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) got up in the House and said remember 
about the exchange on the aircraft, about the phone call returns, his answer was in the press. We’ll find out 
about that in public accounts. I say, we do have a very partisan political chairman who has, in a way, 
indicated regretfully the direction of public accounts which is different from the way it was. But we’ll deal 
with that at a later date. There’s going to be lots of time to do this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have done all of this. I say to the members of the House, public accounts will in all 
likelihood be down. If they want the assurance, I will assure the members of the House that if we were to 
adjourn today (I don’t know whether we are) we would undertake to table them today or tomorrow. We 
would undertake to table them. But I don’t hear that, Mr. Speaker. I hear they want to hold this House 
because of the strike. That’s what I hear. I heard that from the hon. member for Swift Current. I heard it from 
each and every member including the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) – because of the strike. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want you to listen to why they are opposing these grounds for adjournment. I ask the 
public and the strikers and the people of this province to consider why it is that an opposition wants to keep 
the legislature sitting, the legislature 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
378 

whose prerogative it is to pass laws while there is a strike? You know what the answer is, Mr. Speaker? The 
answer is this government believes in the process of free collective bargaining. That opposition believes in 
back-to-work legislation. That’s what the answer is. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative opposition wants this House . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I ask . . . I cannot hear myself because of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor). I 
don’t know about Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order, order. I tend to agree with the member now and with members before that there is 
some difficulty in hearing what is going on. I take it this is a serious debate and members will treat it 
accordingly. That means you are going to listen to the other side’s point of view. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, I am making the point which has been made by each and every PC 
speaker this afternoon. The record shows that. Surely, nothing that I say here can be said to be a perversion 
or twisting of their statements. The press knows that to be the case. Every speaker here says that they’ve got 
an SGEA strike and they want this House to sit. Now, I want to ask you, why do they want this House to sit? 
Someone says for accountability. They can’t ask the question if the House is not sitting. They can’t make 
their comments to the press if the House is not sitting. Mr. Speaker, they have been indicating that they make 
their statements when the House is sitting or not sitting. They can’t get answers. The member for Swift 
Current (Mr. Ham) just said that even when the House is sitting, according to him, they don’t get the 
answers. yet they want the House to sit. Mr. Speaker, they want the House to sit. Now I am saying to the 
trade union movement and the people of the province of Saskatchewan that there can only be one logical 
reason why they want the House to sit. They want to introduce themselves, as they do by private members’ 
legislation and other precedents, back to work legislation to compel the workers to go back to work. That’s 
what they want to do. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the answer is not that they want to sit, surely the answer is not 
that they want to sit because of the devastating questions they’ve been asking us during the course of the 
strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite you and the press and the public to consider the record. Friday, the first day after the 
Speech from the Throne, we had a strike full-going. Thursday, the day before, we had demonstrators outside 
the entire Legislative Building. Was there an emergency debate raised by the opposition with respect to the 
strike? Not a word. That’s how concerned they were about the strike. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, because we 
have a course. Our policy is collective bargaining, our policy is collective bargaining and not political 
rhetoric inside this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – I want you, Mr. Speaker, to look at the record. Take a look at the record during 
question period. I invite the press to take a look at the record of questions on the strike by the opposition. 
What are the questions invariably, Mr. Speaker? Invariably the questions show at the end of the question to 
somebody or other, what are you going to do about it. Please use your good offices is what they just finished 
telling the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder). I have heard about the dairy strike, Mr. Speaker. He said, ah, the 
Minister of Labour was beating a hole in the carpet going back and forth between the dairy strike. I remind 
you, Sir, and the members and the public and the  



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
379 

press in the House that the dairy strike, the conciliator, Mr. Sig Walter, in that dispute requested the attention 
of the Minster of Labour to take part in the negotiations of the dairy dispute and the Minister of Labour 
complied with a request to the conciliator and they are stretching that into something totally different with 
the SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees Association). There has been no such similar request, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask the members of the press, not the opposition because they already committed this point of 
view, to take a look at the questions. What have they suggested should be done? What have they suggested 
be done other than that somehow the Minister of Labour should be using his good offices, Mr. Speaker? He 
has been using his good office; he has directed his conciliators to deal with the strike. Where are the 
questions? Where are the proposals by the PCs? You know why they have not put a specific proposal and 
you know why they want this House to sit? Because, Mr. Speaker, their proposal is, make no mistake about 
it, back-to-work legislation. That’s their solution and that’s what they want to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that that’s the position the Progressive Conservative Party is in. They have not 
indicated a position. They have not asked questions of any substance in the framework at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Finance (Mr. Tchorzewski) raises this. I haven’t had a chance – 
obviously I’m on my feet looking at this – I invite you to take a look at today’s question period. Was there a 
question on the strike? Cornwall Centre – the first 20 minutes of the question period was Cornwall Centre. 
That’s why they want to sit here. How about the air travel between Denver and the like? That’s what 
question period was. Mr. Speaker, there may have been a question on the strike; I don’t know. There may 
have been a question on the strike; there may have even been two questions on the strike for all I know. But 
this is not an opposition, nobody should be fooled, who is coming in here full of vim and vinegar about the 
problems of the strike and leads off question period every day on the strike because they don’t even raise 
those questions themselves. Mr. Speaker, I say that that argument is the most shallow and irresponsible 
cover-up for the true intentions of the PCs that I have ever heard. That’s what I say it is. I say, Mr. Speaker, 
more than that. I say the argument is mischievous. It’s an argument to keep this House going to so they can 
politically cloud the dispute. They know how sensitive the discussion are now with the conciliator. They 
know the conciliator is going back and forth between the public service commission and the employees. 
They know that. And yet they want this House to sit so they can inject their partisan political comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of workers out there. There’s a public service commission out there. We’re 
all struggling for a settlement. There’s a conciliator struggling for a settlement. That is not good enough for 
the PC opposition. What they want is this House to continue so that they can continue to make their partisan 
political comments, such as they are. I say it has been suggested there’s going to be back to work legislation 
around the corner. That’s what they want the House for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am saying to the members of this House and to the legislature, I have never heard such a 
mischievous and phony reason in this House, and I’ve been around for 12 years. This fall session, Mr. 
Speaker, has been working now for eight or nine years on the same pattern with the exception this year of 
two days – two days which I think are perfectly justifiable given the circumstances. And the opposition 
knows about that as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in this 10 days we haven’t heard one proposal. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
380 

They’ve had 10 days of this House to put their solutions for the strike on the table. They haven’t. Ten days – 
they haven’t given us one concrete operation. They’ve had a question period today and not more than one or 
two question on the strike. 
 
They’ve had proposals on everything else. Cornwall Centre (which by the way is something – not that it 
matters – but even our good old friends at the Leader-Post say is a necessary action for core revitalization) – 
it’s a peripheral to may argument, but I mean this is the kind of an argument which is of urgent pressing 
importance where even the media, which is traditionally opposed to us, find support for the government in 
this area. 
 
In 10 days this is what they have done. Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say they are here to do 
work. They say they are here because they want to work. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am here to work also. Every 
one of the members on this side of the House is here to work as well. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have 46 bills on 
the order paper and Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to take up the words of the opposition at their face value that 
they’re here to work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, I am also prepared to take the opposition at their face value that they’re 
not going to introduce back-to-work legislation tomorrow or the day after. That’s what they say. I’d be 
prepared to take their word on that as well. And I’m also prepared to take their word, Mr. Speaker, that 
they’re not going to cloud the negotiations with partisan political remarks. That’s what they say, so I’m 
going to take their word for that too. But more importantly, what I’m going to do, Mr. Speaker, is I’m going 
to take their word that they don’t believe in adjourning debates and wasting the taxpayers’ money with 
respect to the bills. 
 
They’re anxious to remedy the wrong we committed on Meewasin Valley. We have the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. You’re ready to work. We’re ready to work. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! Let’s go to work. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) has asked me to adjourn the debate. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order, order, order! The members are proclaiming that they’re anxious to get to work. 
Order! I’m trying to call attention to the fact that the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Kaeding), the Minister of 
Rural Affairs, is on his feet and has the floor. However, I cannot do that as long as the members keep up a 
constant barrage of back talk. Now the member for Saltcoats has the floor. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation) moved second reading of Bill No. 3 – 
An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act. 
 
He said . . . Mr. Speaker, before I move this bill I want to make a few comments. The municipal employee 
superannuation plan was initiated by a committee of rural 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
381 

municipal secretary-treasures back in 1930. It wasn’t until July 1, 1941 that the rural municipality secretary 
superannuation act was adopted by this Assembly. The statute in question was applicable to rural municipal 
secretaries and to all rural municipalities. The adoption of this act formulated a nucleus of the municipal 
employee superannuation plan as it is applicable to the municipal employees of today. It was not until the 
years of 1948-49 that executive members of various urban associations namely the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association and the School Unit 
Secretary-Treasurers’ Association began co-ordination of efforts and resources towards the preparation and 
drafting of a superannuation plan for all employees and respective employers of these associations. The first 
draft with the proposed requirements to be applicable to these employees and employers was ready in 
November of 1949 with the rural municipal associations secretary-treasurers’ superannuation plan being the 
basic source of reference in the preparation. It is not surprising, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that the characteristic 
requirements contained in the urban draft were similar to provisions contained in the rural municipal 
secretary-treasurers’ pension plan. In 1959 the two pension plans were amalgamated into one pension plan 
which at that time became commonly known and referred to as a money purchase type of pension plan. The 
rate of contribution established by that act was at the rate of 5 per cent of salary earned by an employee with 
a matching contribution made by each employer on behalf of his employees. 
 
Members of this Assembly will recall that the economy in the ’40s and ’50s and even into the ’60s was not 
as buoyant as it has been during the 1970s. Because of low salaries paid to municipal employees during 
those periods, accumulation of funds for retirement purposes was considered by a vast majority of employees 
to be most inadequate. In 1973 the former act was repealed and a new municipal employee superannuation 
plan became effective on July 1, 1973. The new act made provision for substantially improved pensions to 
retiring municipal employees. This act, Mr. Speaker, made provision for a pension earned by a retiring 
employee to be based on six calendar years of average highest salary on which contributions had been made 
to the plan and multiplied by the number of years of service provided by that employee. 
 
You will recall that during the last session the six calendar years of highest average salary for calculation of 
pension earned at retirement was reduced to five years. As a result of that change approved by this 
government, retiring employees will now receive between $6 and $30 per month more pension depending on 
the highest average salary applicable to that employee at retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to members of this Assembly that the new approach in respect to 
pensions earned by municipal employees is now based on a concept or principle that retirement is directly 
related to the last five years of salary earned by each employee. This new approach under the act is 
commonly known as the unit formal benefit pension plan having in mind the fact that this pension plan is 
also fully funded. 
 
The new municipal employees superannuation makes it compulsory for all municipal employees to become 
participating members of the plan following one year of actual service with a municipal employer or 
employers. The act also provides for other groups or organizations to become participating members of this 
plan as well. At present, all rural municipalities, school divisions, school districts, villages, town and cities, 
with the exception of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and Weyburn, are employer members of this plan. On 
January 2, 1979, the city of Yorkton also became an employer under 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
382 

this plan. 
 
There are several significant important amendments which are being proposed to this act and I would like, 
Mr. Speaker, to emphasize that all associations representing the employers and respective employees, have 
endorsed the necessity to amend specific sections of this act to ensure that equitable benefits will be made 
available to all participating employees at normal retirement age. 
 
It is equally important to consider the fact that representatives of commissions and staff who are responsible 
for the administration of this plan, make it their duty and responsibility to meet and discuss with groups of 
employees, rural or urban, all details in respect of this plan. These representatives attend and speak at annual 
conventions, outlining in detail the benefits that will be made available at retirement to municipal 
employees. As a result, proposals are submitted to the commission requesting desirable changes that would 
have to be made to the plan without detrimentally affecting the financial solvency of the plan. Evidence to 
that effect has been made available to my department. The commission, all associations, members, staff of 
the plan and my department work in close harmony toward achieving improved benefits on behalf of 
municipal employees who are members of this plan in this province. 
 
As I stated earlier, there are several very important amendments which are proposed to this act. Because of 
the numerous changes involving the names of municipal employers that are subject to this act, it was 
considered important the amended definition should contain correct terms as used in respective acts that are 
applicable to these employers. You will note that the rural health region as a municipal employer has been 
deleted by this amendment because health regions as employers have never been participating members of 
this plan. 
 
You are probably aware that rural telephone companies are being gradually assimilated into the 
Saskatchewan telecommunications system. Therefore, the need for representation on the commission has 
become negligible. The amended sections now provide for representation on the commission from the 
community colleges association. 
 
It should be noted that subsections (5) and (6) of section 14 of the act are being repealed because these 
subsections tend to discriminate against employees of certain age. It is desirable, Mr. Speaker, that the act 
provide equal consideration to employees of all ages in respect of services rendered to municipal employers. 
Section 16 of the act, comprising of subsections (3), (4) and (5), is amended for the very same reason. 
 
I should emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that based on requests received from respective employee associations, it 
became imperative that the vesting schedule as applicable to employees previously, had to be amended to 
ensure that pensions earned by municipal employees after five years of service would be available to such 
employees at retirement. You will note that employees now will obtain vesting rights to employer 
contributions for retirement purposes after three or more years of service, rather than the former minimum of 
six years of service. 
 
Deferred allowances which are covered under section 35 of the act had to be amended to comply with the 
newly-established vesting rights under this bill and because subsection (2) serves no purpose now, it is being 
repealed. Because full vesting rights to employer contributions have been amended from ten years to five, 
section 37 which deals with refunds, had to be repealed and a new section has been drafted to take its 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
383 

place. 
 
Provisions contained in the act under ‘postponed retirement’ are unclear. Section 42 in that regard has been 
repealed and a new section 42 clarifies whether or not an employee may continue making contributions to 
the former plan with a matching contribution which may be made by his employer. You will note that an 
employee who postpones his retirement may use the salary earned during his postponed retirement for his 
five calendar years of highest average salary when he actually retires. 
 
Finally the act in question provides for an executive secretary to record minutes, sign investment vouchers 
and make other payments including pension payments. Any absence due to the illness or annual holidays 
makes this phase of work extremely difficult or inconvenient to administer if no such person were available. 
 
The amendment proposes in subsection 6 of section 9 and section 60 of the act, remedies to present 
difficulties in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – Both of us have done the work on this thing and that’s what we have been 
trying to tell you. We now know why the government wanted out. They didn’t want to listen to the long 
speech of the minister opposite. 
 
As the minister has indicated the various associations have in fact supported it. We had checked with them 
knowing full well the government wanted to get this particular bill through this session. It’s the same thing 
with the teachers I might add, when you bring that forward this afternoon. 
 
The opposition has checked with the various organizations and we will be supporting the bill. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): – Just a short comment to substantiate what the member for 
Qu’Appelle has said. 
 
In principle we do support this bill. We are prepared that this bill be made into law this session. There are, 
however, a couple of points raised by the urban municipality association concerning the qualifications, but 
that question is better put in committee of the whole investigation on this matter. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 11 – An Act to amend 
The Municipal Hail Insurance Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to have an opportunity, unexpected as it is, 
to introduce this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I must say I have enjoyed some of the things which have been going on in the House today. I note that 
members opposite are living up to their name, which in itself is an anomaly. The member for Qu’Appelle 
(Mr. Lane) never wanted the session to start and the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) doesn’t 
want it to end. I do hope they will get together on this sometime in the next month or two and let us know 
what they 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
384 

would like to see happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I am introducing is a bill to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance act. This bill adds 
triticale, lentils, canary seed (for the members opposite) and potatoes to the kinds of crops that may be 
insured by the Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Association. 
 
The association has receive request to insure these kinds of crops and desire to make this protection available 
to farmer. 
 
Further, the bill enables the association to fix the period during which insurance coverage is to be in force. 
The period need not be the same for each kind of crop. 
 
Under the act the basic amount of insurance is $10 per acre but the board may provide an additional $25 per 
acre referred to as additional indemnity. This bill increased the amount of additional indemnity from $25 to 
$40 per acre, thus increasing the maximum indemnity to $50 per acre. The amount of additional indemnity is 
determined by the board but may not exceed the amount stated. 
 
The Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Association remains in a sound financial position. Its surplus 
and reserve as at January 31, 1979 exceeded the $19 million. These reserves provide the association with an 
annual investment income of over $1 million. The income from reserves tends to stabilize hail tax 
assessment while the reserves provide protection in the event of a bad experience in any year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a bill that I think the Municipal Hail Insurance people would like, if possible, to see 
passed at this session so they could make the necessary preparation for the upcoming crop year. 
 
It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of a bill to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): – Mr. Speaker, on this Bill No. 11, the Municipal Hail Insurance 
Company has been around for a long time and I think it has been an excellent company. This is indeed a 
good bill and it’s a pleasure to have a good bill come from the government side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that this bill came forward because the cost of production is up and with our 
increased prices from grain, I think it fits right in with our times. We will be supporting this bill. However, 
when the bill comes to committee of the whole, I will have a couple more questions for it at that time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 1 – An Act to amend The 
Attachment of Debts Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the request for this amendment initially comes from the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan. The commission has undertaken an extensive study of consumer credit legislation. As part of 
the study, they have examined The Attachment of Debts Act in detail. In the opinion of the commissioners, 
the exemptions 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
385 

were inadequate the they recommended legislative action to remedy those. Section 22 which set out the 
exemptions was last revised in 1973. Since that time the value of the dollar has dramatically decreased, as 
we all know. In addition, in comparison with other provinces, Saskatchewan exemptions are low. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that we regard this amendment as an interim measure. The law reform 
commission realizes that the method of providing for exemptions requires revision in some way or other and 
we need seem further policy study about this. However, the law reform commission is in the midst of its 
study on unsecured creditors’ remedies and is not able to make a specific recommendation to us at this time 
and thus, the interim measure. 
 
The amendments set out in section 4 will increase the basic exemption to $500 and allow an additional $100 
exemption for each dependent a person supports. Although the increase may seem large. I am sure all 
members will agree that this amount is essentially the necessary amount for goods and services at today’s 
prices. The amount of exemption is kept above the amount of social assistance payments to ensure that an 
employee, whose wages are garnisheed, is not induced to quit his job and thereby seek social assistance 
payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend the Attachment of Debts Act. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – Just a comment. We have no objections to the particular bill. But the 
Attorney General didn’t advise the Assembly of the need for the speedy approval of the interim measure. I’m 
not sue that the amendment couldn’t have awaited the full report of the law reform commission. Again, I 
really see nothing that seems to be pressing on this particular matter and could find nothing which would 
indicate it is a matter of pressing public importance. I wonder if the Attorney General would, when he’s 
losing debate, indicate where the pressing public importance came on this particular amendment? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The thrust for this amendment as I indicated in my second 
reading remarks resulted – I don’t want to say exclusively – primarily from the law reform commission and 
their survey of other legislation related to the attachment of debts in other parts of the country. The survey 
revealed, for example, that in May of 1979 it required approximately $1.90 to purchase the same goods and 
services that would have been purchased in 1973 for $1.13. Another aspect of the survey indicates that the 
exemptions in Saskatchewan are really among the lowest in Canada. 
 
The amendments here would increase the exemption in Saskatchewan and elevate them, placing them 
between Manitoba’s which are slightly higher still than ours – even with these amendments passed – and 
Alberta’s, which would be slightly lower than ours once we passed the amendments. Now we could have 
withheld this particular aspect until such time as we’d gotten the comprehensive report from the law reform 
commission on the larger policy aspects of the attachment of debts. But that report is not expected until at 
least next fall, so our choices are to do nothing until we get the report and keep at low levels, maybe among 
the lowest in Canada, or to try and move up and find a median there which is reasonable between Alberta 
and Manitoba. We felt, for the reasons I articulated in my second reading speech, that it’s better to move for 
the median approach, and await the report in the fall. I think that makes eminent good sense, and I hope it 
answers the member’s question. 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
386 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 2 – An Act to amend The 
Attorney General’s Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, in my judgment this amendment to the act is of relative housekeeping or minor 
importance. The section is necessary in order to give the Attorney General express legislative authority to 
make grants to justice organizations. Each year, as members opposite would believe, my department receives 
a number of requests from organizations for grants. Last year we paid money to organizations much as – and 
this is a category of grants we are looking at – John Howard Society, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Provincial Court Judges, the Canadian Association of Police Chiefs and the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Association, voluntary citizens groups. 
 
The section as set out in section 2 of the amending bill is substantially the same as those which allow the 
grant-making powers in other pieces of legislation for other ministries. The Attorney General may make 
grant for purposes of his administration for which he is responsible to an amount of $10,000. If it is over 
$10,000 then, of course, the Attorney General would have to go to the cabinet to seek approval for this. All 
of the grants of course, I hasten to add before I take my place are dependent upon budgetary approval. You 
can’t give grants without having a budgetary allocation for the grant which comes up in the normal treasury 
board and budget bureau mechanism. Accordingly to a large extent, this is really an academic exercise 
because you have to get the approval financially first, and then legally, to be able to make the authority for 
the grant. There are many organizations of this kind which are petitioning us for funds. We need to sift this 
out in the budgetary process. I’d like to have the opportunity to be able to make those grants to the individual 
organizations to assist them as we all struggle in this question of improving the justice system in 
Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 2. 
 
MR. LANE: – The Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) by his comments indicates a surprising lack of 
comprehension as to the expenditure process. My understanding is that historically it was the legislature that 
approved expenditures and not treasury board. In fact that was the reason for the existence of parliament at 
one point. Now the Attorney General makes a surprising statement that all of his justification for his 
expenditure depends on treasury board, now what the elected representatives say. That attitude is a matter of 
concern. I think it should be a matter of concern to all of us. Not only did I read the bill to the newly 
appointed Deputy Speaker, but, in fact, we want to start indicating to the government opposite that the 
absolute discretion members of the executive council have been getting over the last few years to spend 
amounts as they see fit is contrary to the parliamentary tradition. Secondly it is not a practice to be condoned. 
 
So, as a matter of record, we are opposing the blanket granting of expenditure powers to any cabinet 
minister. We will assume all of the supplicants for grants are in fact deserving. It still should be a matter of 
approval by members of the Assembly and for that sole reason we will be opposing the bill. We will be 
opposing such general blanket powers of expenditures. It’s obvious for all members to see when you start 
with this which may be well and good. I have great faith in the Attorney General’s ability to spend the 
moneys wisely. I don’t have the same confidence in the Minster of Urban Affairs (Mr. Smishek) or the new 
Minister of Health (Mr. Rolfes). 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
387 

MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like the hon. member to, once again, peruse the proposed 
amendment particularly sub (3) of the amendment, section 3 which says grants authorized (the grants of 
which I seek approval) under this section shall be paid out of moneys appropriated by the legislature for the 
purpose. This is obviously the situation. It comes to the House for an appropriation. It’ll come up during my 
budget consideration. The hon. members opposite may say under vote 1 – do you have any grants 
appropriated for John Howard or whoever? Give us the list of grants you seek to appropriate. I’ve got to 
pony that up and explain it. If I don’t, then obviously they pursue their own estimates. That is the case. The 
reference to treasury board is purely a reference in the situation that before a payment is finally made out as a 
check and control to make sure that proper spending is carried out by government, it requires budget bureau 
and treasury board approval. It is not intended or meant in the way the hon. member has interpreted it. In any 
event, the effective answer to his interpretation is subsection (3) which says it’s got to be voted on and 
appropriated by this House. 
 
So I really do suggest to the hon. member opposite that there will be an awful lot of people in Saskatchewan 
who will be disappointed if the PC Party takes the position that the Attorney General’s department, or any 
other ministry department . . . presumably we should do away with the Department of Social Services and 
other departments which had have this for a long time, which have had this authority. We should do away 
with this and out of all the various grants that are existing to the organizations. I really invite the hon. 
member to reconsider because I think that is a bad argument in the light of the fact that subsection (3) is 
there. Perhaps he just overlooked it or forgot it in his remarks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I beg second reading of Bill No. 2. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 24 – An Act to amend 
The Administration of Estates of Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 
 
He said . . . This amendment is necessary to solve a problem the administrator of estates experiences from 
time to time. While a husband wishes to sell, lease or mortgage land, The Land Titles Act requires that he 
comply with The Homesteads Act. This amendment, as all members opposite know and this side of the 
House as well, I intended to deal with a situation where the land being sold by the administrator of estates is 
not the personal homestead. The administrator does not possess the personal knowledge necessary to swear 
an affidavit pursuant to The Homesteads Act. Therefore, this amendment is intended to permit him to go to 
the Court of Queen’s Bench on the facts known to him and thereby request an order to the effect that the land 
being sold to the Court of Queen’s Bench on the facts known to him and thereby request an order to the 
effect that the land being sold is not a personal homestead. 
 
The amendment does not limit an any way the rights the wife may have under the planned personal property 
security act. It merely facilitates the transfer of property. It will be necessary to get the wife’s consent still to 
transfer the homestead and where the wife refuses, the administrator of estates will then have to apply to the 
courts which I think would be an adequate safeguard in order to allow the administrator to discharge his 
duties under the bill. I move second reading of Bill 24. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): – I am sure the legal profession initiated this bill. With the 
implementation of this bill, and I hope all the members of the legislature appreciate that, there are going to 
be a lot of people in this province who are going to be happy with this type of legislation because it goes 
toward keeping the costs of legal fees down 



 
December 12, 1979 

 
 

 
388 

for people in the community. I’m sure the legal profession is indeed trying to do that and for that reason I 
think everybody should support it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is hardly worth making a major point about but I want 
to correct the hon. member for Kindersley. Indeed this has not been suggested by the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan or members of the profession. The amendment has been suggested to us from the 
administrator of estates. I don’t want to make a big issue out of it because I have respect and support in my 
profession as well, but the fact of the matter is that it ought to be known the recommendation comes from the 
administrator and not from the hon. member for Kindersley or other members of the profession. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:00 p.m. 


