






















































Hansard: December 06, 1979


(140) 141 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 6, 1979 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. R.G. MR. LONG (Cut Knife-Lloydminster): – Mr. Speaker, I would like this afternoon to 
introduce to you and through you to this Assembly, 25 Grade 12 high school students from the Cut Knife 
High School; their teacher, Mr. Rooke, chaperones, Carol Grier and Pat Gartner. I would like to, on behalf of 
this Assembly, welcome them here this afternoon and I’m looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with 
them after the question period. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Cornwall Centre 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle ): – A year ago, the matter of Cornwall Centre was first raised in this 
Assembly and I’m going to direct my question to the minister responsible for Cornwall Centre. At the outset, 
our questions to you were to the effect, why did you not make such a generous, if not unconscionable, offer 
to local developers as seemingly you have made if the evidence in today’s paper is in fact accurate, to the 
developers Chartwood (with no background, no experience and in fact non-existent at the time) who got this 
project for only putting up $2 million to $3 million? 
 
HON. W.A. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): – Mr. Speaker, initially, we, as a 
government, at the possibilities of developing the total project ourselves. Members of the legislature will 
know there was need for head office space for two Crown corporations – government insurance and Sask 
Tel. We were aware and at the request of the city of Regina, there was need to revitalize the downtown core. 
We considered it and look at the possibility of doing the total project under our own auspices. In examining 
the possibilities, we realized that we did not have the skills and the expertise to develop the retail and 
commercial component of the project. 
 
MR. LANE: – That’s the answer you gave last year. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – We’re not changing our answers, Mr. Speaker. We also said last year that the time when 
the concept and the development of the projects were initiated, there were no proposals, no requests from the 
local merchants to the effect that they were interested in developing that project. In fact, Mr. Speaker, even 
today, there are no local proposals for the development of the complex. 
 
MR. LANE: – Supplementary to the minister. What is now becoming know as Blakeney’s boutiques and in 
fact it’s what the Cornwall Centre is becoming known as, can the minister now attempt to justify, in his 
usual ambiguous manner, the fact that it’s quite clear (his past statements make it quite clear) that he invited 
non-existent Chartwood and eastern developers and Timothy Eaton but no such invitation was given to local 
developers except the co-op movement, if I recall the minister’s statements? 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
142 

Can the minister now explain to this Assembly how such a sweetheart deal and invitations were not offered 
to local developers and in fact invitations were given to eastern Canadian developers with no track record? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. member will know that Eaton’s is a well-known, 
well-organized company in this Canada. I thought the hon. member was raised in the city of Regina and in 
the city of Regina, Eaton’s has had a store for many, many years. They’ve had stores throughout this 
province and they’ve had stores . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order, order, order! 
 
I know all members agree with me we should make the question period as productive as possible and it 
becomes difficult to do that if members are interjecting to such an extent that it drowns out the person who is 
replying to the question. You may not like the answer but that’s not my problem. I’m only here to conduct 
the question period under the rules laid down by the members and it doesn’t include interjections of the 
nature that we are witnessing. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, if I may continue. I’m not sure at this stage when it was that T. Eaton 
Company started retail operation and department store operation in the country. But they are a well-known, 
reputable department store company in Canada. I am glad that they will be a part of the Cornwall Centre 
development. Chartwood is a major reputable developer of shopping centres in Canada and has been in 
business for over 25 years, Mr. Speaker. Chartwood, formerly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the hon. 
member asked me a question and I would hope that he would give me the courtesy to reply to the question, 
otherwise he is not serious about the questions that he poses. I presume that he is serious and that he will 
give me an opportunity to give him an answer. 
 
Chartwood formerly operated under the name of Cambridge Leasing Holdings which is now a division of 
Oxford, Mr. Speaker, shopping centres in Edmonton. Chartwood re-established itself as an independent 
operation in 1975 and has been involved in shopping centre development throughout the country. They are a 
well-known reputable company as well. They are experienced in shopping centre development. We were 
glad when both Eaton’s and Chartwood accepted the proposal to develop the project. In terms of its viability, 
we have examined the project very carefully. We believe that the project will indeed be viable, as a 
government. We have assembled the land. We have invited Eaton’s and Chartwood to develop the 
department store in the retail project and I believe that project will become the envy of downtown 
redevelopment through the this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: – A question to the minister. How can the minister account for his so-called glowing 
statements as to the viability with the need for massive government subsidies to develop these particular 
Blakeney’s boutiques? I’m referring (for the member for Watrous, I believe) to the effect that it’s a 
subsidized interest rate, that in fact you had to amend The Expropriation Procedure Act to allow you to 
acquire more land because you couldn’t do it by purchase or by negotiation. Will the minister not, in fact, 
admit that if it weren’t for massive government subsidies and the government having to put up the moneys 
that this would be a financial disaster and probably will be. If the public is 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
143 

forced to or get account for the subsidies? In fact, we have a financial boondoggle here at the request and 
with the acquiescence of our Premier. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, on a long-term basis this project will do nothing but produce revenue for 
the Government of Saskatchewan, in particular, Sask Tel. The arrangements that are made to provide for a 
lease rental plus 5.1 per cent of the cash flow over and above that amount and on the long-term basis there is 
no question that the project will net a good deal of revenue and income and profit for the province. 
 

Winnipeg and 8th Property Development 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): – A question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. The 
Minister of Urban Affairs (Mr. Smishek) responsible for the Cornwall Centre has just today admitted that 
your government does not have, in his words, the skills or the expertise to develop this project and yet two 
days ago in this House, Mr. Minister, you indicated that SEDCO alone would do the 35 acre project on the 
corner of Winnipeg and 8th. If you don’t have the skills and expertise to do an eight acre project how can 
you do a 35 acre project on Winnipeg and 8th? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): – Mr. Speaker, I don’t remember the exact 
quotation. I haven’t read Hansard today, but I am quite sure I never told the hon. gentleman that we are going 
forward with the project. I said we are instigating a study; we are doing a study and that is exactly what we 
are doing at this particular time. 
 

Chartwood Development Interest Rates 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce if he is responsible for the development of the Cornwall Centre, or is it back to you? Anyway, 
one of you can answer the question. Will you indicate to this assembly today what interest rates you are 
charging Chartwood Developments for the mortgage of $35.4 million on the project? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, there are two agreements. One is in case of the interim financing which 
will be for a period of about 20 months from the time the construction starts, and the money that will be 
available for the short-term or the bridge financing as it is often referred to, will be the going short-term rate. 
At the present time it is about 13.6 per cent to 14 per cent. That is for the bridge financing, if that is what the 
hon. member is asking about. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, another question directed to the minister in charge of development of the 
Cornwall Centre. You indicated and the article indicates in the newspaper that the province annually gets 51 
per cent of the net cash flow after expenses, starting one year after the centre opens plus an undisclosed 
amount of money for the ground lease. What date are you referring to? When the centre opens? After the 
official date, the day the first store open? Can you clarify that point, please? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – It is on completion of construction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Of what? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Of the project. 
 
MR. LANE: – A supplementary to the minister. What do you mean by the completion of 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
144 

the project? Are you referring specifically to perhaps the completion of the SGIO Building in which case you 
have been paying moneys now for some period of time? Part of the project, Mr. Premier you may have 
missed it, but my question more basically to the minister – are you now prepared to table these agreements 
that you have signed with Chartwood that are going to cost the public of Saskatchewan literally millions of 
dollars? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, just for added clarification, we are talking about in the case of completion 
of the project. We are talking about completion of Eaton’s and retail space which is being developed by 
Chartwood. In case of agreements, Mr. Speaker, we will take that under advisement. I can tell the members 
of the legislature some of those agreements are at the present time being revised. Well, the hon. members 
may laugh, but the fact is that in the initial proposal, Mr. Speaker, there was a plan to have a large food store 
included in the complex. On surveying the market and other conditions it was decided it would be advisable 
not to have a retail food store when the initial agreement was entered into. Incidentally, the members are 
wondering why we provide interim financing. Initially the agreement didn’t provide for interim financing, 
and later on they came with a proposal. We thought it was advisable; it’s not costing us as a province any 
money. Some of these things require revision to the initial agreements and there are some changes in the 
plans that are taking place on a regular basis. No, the agreements have not be finalized. We will certainly 
take into advisement, Mr. Speaker, of providing the agreements once they are signed and completed. 
 
MR. LANE: – New question, Mr. Speaker. If the agreements are not finalized are you saying then that there 
is still an opportunity to have this project developed by local developers on at least as favorable or as 
generous terms as you’ve given, as I say a non-existent Chartwood Development or Eaton’s? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: – Mr. Speaker, if they can come up with the same kind of proposal, the same kind of 
return to the province, I suppose, and if they would be prepared to pay the costs to Eaton’s and Chartwood, 
the costs that they have assumed . . . a great deal of cost in terms of . . . remember the construction has 
already started. For example, the basements have been dug, and some contracts have been let go. If they 
would be prepared to bear all the local developments, to bear all those costs and to provide the assurances 
and the agreements that will return to us as partners in this project, as well as the city of Regina, then perhaps 
certainly we will be prepared to consider it. 
 

Condition of Highways 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): – Mr. Speaker, with hopes of not being stonewalled again today I’d like 
to ask the Premier (Mr. Blakeney) the following question. In view of your answers yesterday, Mr. Premier, 
would you now agree that minimal staff during this strike is inadequate and less than acceptable to provide 
reasonable highway safety and the probability of serious accidents is increased? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): – Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if I understand the question. If the 
question is, is minimal highway service less than adequate, the answer of course presumably is no. If the 
question is, is the highway service now being provided adequate, the answer is yes, because it is well above 
minimal standards. 
 
MR. HAM: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I guess we have a new Minister of Highways across the way. 
Would you kindly tell the House, Mr. Premier that if members of SGEA highway department will not return 
to work in an emergency as apparently, as I  



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
145 

understand, is happening, and as a storm is predicted today – if not here already – what contingency plans do 
you have or does the department have to maintain our highway system to minimal safety standards? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – Well, Mr. Speaker, there obviously is a large number of contingency plans for a 
highway system of this kind, but we certainly propose to take such steps as we believe will maintain 
essential transportation services with management staff, and with those members within the bargaining unit 
who are reporting to work, and if the situation appears to require it, such other assistance as we can muster. 
There is a good number of management staff on standby – not all from the Department of Highways – some 
from other departments. We are prepared to use such staff as we can muster both from out-of-scope staff 
within the Department of Highways, out-of-scope staff from other departments, in-scope staff from the 
Department of Highways who are reporting for service, and other facilities and services which may be 
available to the government to maintain the highways in as good a condition as we can in all the 
circumstances. 
 

Lakeside Nursing Home 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): – Mr. Speaker, I’d like to pose a question to the Minister of Social 
Services (Mr. Koskie). There’s been a problem in the Lakeside home that has developed through the 
administrator holding the power of attorney for some of the residents in the home. This man has siphoned off 
in excess of $10,000 from the residents of that home. What are the plans of your department to make 
restitution of funds to the residents of that Lakeside home? 
 
HON. M.J. KOSKIE (Minister of Social Services): – Mr. Speaker, in respect to the particular situation 
that is indicated by the hon. member, I just want to say as I am informed, that the individual, the 
administrator, was charged as part of the decision of the court. It was indicated that restitution was a part of 
the sentence and the administrator indicated to the court that restitution would be made in respect to the 
funds that were misappropriated. 
 
Oh, be quiet Taylor – have you got the floor? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order, order! The members of the Assembly may be prepared to squander the question 
period. If they are, I’m prepared to go along with them but I sill have to maintain the position that I have to 
maintain a certain bit of order during the question period. The minister is honestly giving an answer and 
several members are interrupting him while he’s on his feet, with what appear to be supplementaries. If they 
want to have supplementaries, they’ll get a chance when the minister sits down to ask him a supplementary. 
Now if the minister has a further response to the question, he may conclude. Otherwise I’ll take a 
supplementary. 
 
MR. SWAN: – Supplementary to the minister. Has your department given any thought to using a locally 
elected person or perhaps a member of the legal profession to hold the power of attorney in circumstances 
such as the one in the Lakeside home? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – No, we have not. Within the set-up for the administration of the funds, there are guidelines 
laid down which give the essential basic protection. There are guidelines which have been recommended by 
the provincial auditor and those will be put in place. 
 
MR. SWAN: – Supplementary. I’d like to question – you say the guidelines were laid 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
146 

down by the auditor – the Lakeside home has a budget in excess of a million dollars a year and it’s been five 
years since they’ve had their last audit. They’ve been audited since this occurred. Now I wonder, how many 
other homes do you have in the province that are operating on very similar budgets that have had no audit in 
the last five years? How many more are you carelessly operating like this? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Well for your information, this is the only special-care home that is under the auspices and 
operated by the government. So obviously we don’t have others. The rest of the special-care homes 
throughout the province are incorporated under societies acts, operated by an independent board and 
accordingly they run their home. 
 
In respect to the particular one, I just want to say that line departments do not themselves have the auditing 
facility. It’s done through the comptroller’s office. The overall auditing for the province is done by the 
provincial auditor. 
 
MR. SWAN: – A question to the minister. You say this is under the provincial auditor and that’s true. But, 
the government of the province assigns the staff the provincial auditor is allowed to have, or at least assigns 
the budget for the staff. He tells me that he doesn’t have enough staff to do the audits on a yearly basis, so I 
think the government maybe should be looking at this as a concern for the taxpayers of the province. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – I think that the provincial auditor and the question of his staffing is not particularly under 
my department. And it’s not really relevant to the question to my particular department. 
 

Uranium Development 
 
MR. R.L ANDREW (Kindersley): – Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that the provincial debt now stands at 
$2.6 billion or $6 billion or somewhere around there, in view of the fact that personal incomes in 
Saskatchewan are below personal incomes in both the province of Alberta and Manitoba and below the 
national average, and  in view of the fact that we’re even at this point in time importing hamburger from the 
province of Alberta, can the Premier justify pumping hundreds of millions of dollars into uranium 
development by the government, in view of the fact that the international market on uranium appears to be 
soft for at least 10 years and perhaps 20 years down the road? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – You will forgive me, Mr. Speaker, if I regard that as something of a hamburger of a 
question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – The debt of Saskatchewan on a gross basis is the second lowest in Canada, second 
only to the province of Prince Edward Island on a per capita basis. On a fair analysis of net basis it is the 
second lowest again but second lowest in this case to Alberta. Alberta, obviously, has assets which ought to 
be balanced over against their liabilities. We also have very considerable assets in the form of a power 
corporation, a telephone corporation and a natural gas utility and no other province has that range of assets – 
certainly not the province of Alberta, which does not own a power utility and so on. So I think on any fair 
analysis (and certainly any analysis put out by the investment dealers) you will find that Saskatchewan is 
listed as having the second lowest debt, either gross or net, in Canada. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
147 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – There is accordingly no cause for alarm about the debt situation in Saskatchewan 
unless you are much more alarmed about the other provinces. 
 
With respect to whether or not we should invest in resource industries, Mr. Speaker, these are clearly 
industries where there may well be a risk. No one should deny that. Oil companies take risks. They get rather 
handsome profits in compensation for their risks. Potash companies take risks and we believe people who 
own potash mines will be compensated for those risks. Uranium companies take risks. We believe the 
uranium companies in the future will be compensated for the risks and we do not accept the market analysis 
of the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) as definitive on the subject. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW: – A supplementary to the Premier. In view of the rather soft uranium market would the 
Premier be prepared to table in this Assembly market studies prepared by your government and other market 
studies which you have in your possession as it related to uranium markets and the world production 
estimates of uranium in the future? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member is really directing his questions to investments 
by the Government of Saskatchewan and SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). The 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation is undoubtedly involved in uranium development. It is also 
undoubtedly a Crown corporation whose affairs may be fully discussed and whose management and whose 
responsible minister may be questioned in detail in the Crown corporations committee. I would suggest that 
the hon. member ask all the questions he wants and direct his questions in as pointed a way as he wishes in 
the Crown corporations committee, the vehicle provided for answering just such questions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Solomon (Regina North-West) 
for an address in reply and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Berntson (Leader of the 
Opposition). 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): – Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise to 
participate in this throne speech debate on radio. 
 
But before I go on, permit me to briefly touch on some of the points which I mentioned yesterday, points 
relative to the speech by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson) which he delivered two days ago. 
 
I mentioned the Tory leadership convention held in Saskatoon. But I failed to mention what everyone sensed 
and that is the lack of spirit that was displayed at the convention, as evidence by the fact that on one morning 
of that convention the speakers looked out at a whole slough of empty seats. I also mention that one Tory 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
148 

hopeful saw and still sees Saskatchewan as a sort of cash register, without any regard for the real desires and 
hopes of Saskatchewan people. Another leadership candidate who promised them a new sense of dedication 
garnered with honesty and integrity was rejected. And the winner seemed to imply that anyone not agreeing 
with Tory feudalistic thinking should be under his thumb. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he’ll have to be all thumbs to do that because more and more citizens are now realizing 
that the Tory party of Saskatchewan is just an extension of the federal Tory party led by that man of 
decisions, Mr. Joe Clark. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Now you may well wonder why I call Mr. Clark a man of decisions. He faces 
decisions with which I know the Saskatchewan Tory leader agrees wherever he is. Decisions like, should the 
banking rate of interest be 15 per cent or 18 percent? Should Canadian automobile drivers and users of fuel 
oil pay double the price of gasoline in two years or three years? Should the crowrate be taken off now or a 
little later? Should families have to make $35,000 or $40,000 to qualify for home mortgages? These decision 
he has made or is now in the process of making. But I suppose I shouldn’t be to hard on Mr. Clark in light of 
the fact that the most recent Gallup pool indicates Conservatives are in a tail spin, that the pubic will be hard 
on them and rightfully so. Let me suggest though, Mr. Speaker, that the new leader of the Tory party has the 
same cold, hard, callous and negative ideas and outlook as his hero in Ottawa. If not, why would he have 
said in a report that 80 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers are inefficient when we on this side of the House 
know that almost all of our farmers are efficient. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Why would the leader of the Tories have said through the member for 
Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson), and a fine gentleman that member is, that business is dying in 
Saskatchewan when everyone knows that that is not so? Why would he say through that member that the 
gouging multinationals can do better than a partnership between companies and governments, when he 
knows full well Premier Blakeney’s resource policies are the envy of Canadians, Americans and people all 
over the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Well, I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. It is because he and the Tory MLAs suffer from 
petrification of thought. And that is to be regretted because every member opposite should be allowed at 
least two thoughts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give you a few examples of what I mean by this solidification principle which members 
opposite embrace hook, line and sinker. Now they still insist on attacking co-ops. They still believe that 
foreign board-room barons smoking expensive Cuban cigars should control and benefit from our potash and 
you can’t deny that. They still insist that the uranium mining industry should be left to foreign multinationals 
– and why shouldn’t they when one realizes the fantastic contributions they get from these unscrupulous 
corporate culprits. Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House, the New Democratic Party MLAs, 
believe that Saskatchewan people have a right to control their resources and benefit from them to the fullest 
extent possible. We reject Tory philosophy and so did the people of Saskatchewan at last year’s 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
149 

provincial election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Mr. Speaker, I should now like to spend a little time on things of particular 
importance to my constituents, the good citizens of Saskatoon Centre constituency. 
 
Saskatoon is experiencing a boom never before equalled in its history. Businessmen tell me business has 
never before been so good. Senior citizens, and there are many in Saskatoon Centre, tell this government has 
been good to them. Workers tell me that, generally speaking, they are satisfied with this government, 
especially in relation to what it would be like if a Tory government ever became a reality. Students are not an 
exception either when one considers the hardships they are experiencing in, for example, Alberta where it 
almost costs them an arm and a leg for car insurance or other things related to students’ costs. 
 
Not wishing to forget homemakers, I know they are pleased with the many programs offered them and their 
families by the provincial government denticare, grants relative to housing, and I could go on an on but it 
would take too much time at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that does not mean that I am not aware that all things are not right with everybody because that 
is not the case. There is much to do and this government will continue to meet these challenges, not in one 
swoop, but it will act and it will continue to press Tories to see the errors of their ways and join with us for 
the good of all the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Mr. Speaker, I know that many Saskatoon Centre constituents are looking forward to 
our rent rebate program from which they can take advantage this year. I have always pressed for such a 
program for these citizens because they, too, are taxpayers, although indirectly. 
 
I know I speak for all Saskatoon MLAs, all eight New Democratic MLAs from Saskatoon, when I say the 
citizens of Saskatoon appreciate the centralization of most provincial government services in one downtown 
location – the Sturdy-Stone Centre named in honor of two very fine CCF MLAs who served a number of 
years ago, one of whom, Mr. Stone, is alive and well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Now I had the honor of being master of ceremonies at the official opening of that 
building at which time the Premier, a number of cabinet ministers and other MLAs were present. An 
enthusiastic crowd was present and the compliments to this government were coming in by the hundreds 
from the public who were invited to participate in a number of ways. Mr. Speaker, I also had the pleasure of 
officially cutting the ribbon when the Sturdy-Stone Centre Merchants Association had its official opening a 
few months ago. Their shops are neat in appearance, well-stocked, and I congratulate them on their efforts 
just as I commend all the other merchants of Saskatoon or, for that matter, Saskatchewan for their 
enthusiasm and energy which makes Saskatoon one of the nicest places to live in Canada. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
150 

While I’m on that subject, I want to welcome the thousands of Canadians who have left provinces like 
Ontario, Manitoba and other provinces and yes, even Alberta, to make their homes in Saskatoon and 
Saskatchewan. I want to inform these same citizens that this government and government MLAs appreciate 
their valuable contributions to the fabric of our rich Saskatchewan society. I want to inform this Assembly 
that most who come here express total amazement at the quality of life in Saskatchewan, the freedom of 
movement, our provincial parks and programs never dreamed of in their own provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last spring this legislature saw fit to pass legislation which created the Meewasin Valley 
Authority. All Tory and all New Democratic MLAs voted in favor of the creation of the authority. It also had 
the backing of Saskatoon City Council, the University of Saskatchewan and the rural municipality of 
Corman Park. Mr. Speaker, at that time I was enthusiastic about the creation of this body which is charged 
with the beautification, protection and preservation of the river bank in Saskatoon and adjacent area. I was 
enthusiastic because I have a special feeling for the river bank having spent many a pleasant day on it during 
my childhood. I was enthusiastic, Mr. Speaker, when public hearings and meetings were held for public 
input. Mr. Speaker, I am still enthusiastic even though I know certain amendments will have to be made to 
the legislation to make allowances for legitimate concerns on the part of property owners and farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, knowing full well there are legitimate concerns which will be alleviated by amendments in 
relation to the functioning of that particular authority and knowing full well that when the Wascana 
Authority in Regina was created many years ago, many high financiers and speculators cried foul, I am 
confident that the route that should be taken is not one where the whole concept should be scrapped. I am 
confident that the desire for the preservation of the river bank can be realized by changes to meet the 
concerns that some have expressed recently, I do not agree with one editorialist in Saskatoon who recently 
claimed it was but another example of what he called the high handed tactics of this government. Nor do I 
believe that this same editorialist (a defeated Tory candidate, I might add) really meant what he implied by 
writing that last year Saskatoon City Council and the university and to some extent the rural municipality of 
Corman Park and the provincial government were parties to some sort of plot to enslave the people of 
Saskatoon and area. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I know the hon. members of Saskatoon City Council. I know many top administration 
university personnel. I know some members of the council of Corman Park. They are honorable people and 
to suggest, like this editorial did, that they were not and are not capable of making rational judgments, is 
unacceptable to me. And so I once again, Mr. Speaker, would like to stress that I am positive that legitimate 
concerns of property owners and farmers will be acted on and in this matter, I say politics should have no 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a member, although new, of the Saskatchewan Archaeological Society. But before I go on, 
could I be so bold as to digress for a moment and say that when I was younger and knew nothing about the 
society, I thought it was a society bent on preserving the philosophy of the Tory party. Well, I certainly was 
wrong. At any rate I have always been concerned about the preservation of things historic in Saskatchewan. 
But I have always had a very deep appreciation of the preservation of the heritage of western Canadian 
Indians, especially artifacts. It is with this in mind that I feel that if concrete action is not soon taken, these 
artifacts will be lost to us forever. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
151 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting to government and in particular, to the Minister of Culture and 
Youth (Mr. Shillington) that serious consideration be given, in co-operation of course with Saskatchewan 
Indians, Metis people and other citizens, to the establishment of a permanent museum of western Indian 
artifacts in Saskatoon. Such a museum would preserve those artifacts we sill have and it would be an 
excellent attraction for tourists and other citizens. To my way of thinking, Mr. Speaker, these artifacts could 
be had at little or no cost to the jurisdiction which would operate the museum. I say this because I know of 
many citizens who would be only too willing to donate their various collections, with recognition of 
themselves as donors the only cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about one month ago, my hon. friend, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Prebble) 
made some public remarks about the desirability of eating establishments serving certain kinds of 
wholesome foods along with the usual items. No doubt there is merit in that suggestion . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman laughs. He laughs at wholesome food. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that he is laughing at anything that is wholesome. Mr. Speaker, I too have a concern in this regard, but it is 
one that is mainly directed to the processors of foodstuffs and retail establishments like the supermarkets. 
Why is it that in most of these supermarkets one can hardly ever find canned goods that aren’t completely 
saturated in what most doctors would suggest is one of the most dangerous of all our foods, sugar? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not necessarily referring to dietetic foods, but canned foods free of sugar. Now I know of 
many of my constituents who are on restricted diets and I am also aware that some health food stores carry 
the sugar free foods, But I wonder why the supermarkets don’t carry these items. I also know that when 
asked about this, many supermarket managers claim they cannot get these foods. It sometimes makes one 
wonder whether the big sugar conglomerates aren’t in league with some of the corporate wholesalers in light 
of the fact that it is in their interest to push greater sugar use on consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have only a few minutes left so I will touch very briefly on a few other points that I wish to 
make. With soon to be double-digit inflation, due to the actions of the federal government, the price of 
clothing is scandalously high. For the majority of families with children the cost of clothing their children is 
almost beyond reason. Well, in the past I have suggested some sort of a break for those families and I will do 
so again. Might not the removal of the sales tax on, for example, footwear, be an appropriate gesture of 
recognition of the fact that Clark’s inflation is hurting these families? I would hope consideration in this 
regard will be given. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another concern which I would like to bring to the attention of government at this time. 
It goes hand in hand with the rapid increase in the population of Saskatoon. It appears that there is a very real 
need for additional level IV care facilities in Saskatoon. Therefore, I should like to ask the Minister of 
Health, the hon. member for Saskatoon Buena Vista (Mr. Rolfes) to take appropriate action to increase level 
IV care facilities. Knowing full well he is a minister of action – yes, and that proves it, he has already got it 
written down – as all the other ministers are. I know, Mr. Minister, that you will act on this concern thereby 
relieving the strain on other higher facilities. 
 
As some of you are no doubt aware, Regina has the benefit of a mobile family unit which may be called 
upon for assistance and action in a wide variety of emergencies which befall citizens. I commend the citizens 
of Regina on this unit and I have come to the 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
152 

conclusion that we need a similar service in Saskatoon, and I believe Saskatoon City Council has also said 
the same. Only we in Saskatoon prefer to call such a unit a crisis intervention centre, a centre to which 
anyone may call 24 hours a day in cases of emergencies such as child brutality, rape, desertion, etc. It is with 
such a service in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I am going to urge the Minister of Social Services (Mr. Koskie), 
and I know that he will give it very high priority, the funding of such a centre. I see that he already has it 
written down and it will probably be carried out very shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments I want to make in regard to the 42nd Street bridge in Saskatoon. All 
citizens of Saskatoon know that we need that bridge. Traffic is congested. The hon. member says we want it 
gold paved. Well, if you stick with this government I am sure that it eventually will be. But I want to say that 
there is some concern expressed by certain groups of citizens and good concerns they are, as to the routing of 
the road which will lead up to the 42nd Street bridge in Saskatoon. 
 
I just simply want to say that when all that is ironed out through city council, I am sure that the Minister of 
Highways (Mr. Kramer) will see fit to make a slightly greater contribution than what is the usual in regards 
to the 42nd Street bridge. Well, somebody has to sock it to them, Mr. Opposition Member, because you 
fellows certainly aren’t doing the job. We have to help you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I should like to make an observation or two. The Tories have reacted negatively to 
the speech of His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor, the Queen’s representative to this Assembly. For their 
own benefit I urge them to do an about-face and become positive. I believe this negative attitude will 
probably result in a resignation or two on the part of their members and when that happens, the resignation, 
you can rest assured that they will not have had taken my sound advice to join with the side of the House in 
being cheerful in outlook and big in their assessment of the people of Saskatchewan and future generations. 
So, I say to Tory members opposite, come over to the Saskatchewan option in your thinking, vote with us on 
the throne speech, and you will, sometime in the future, be able to tell your grandchildren (some of you, I 
presume, have them now) that in the fall of 1979, you finally saw the light. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: – Mr. Speaker, having thought the matter over very thoroughly, I have come to the 
conclusion that honesty is the best policy. Therefore, I will be voting against the Tory amendment and I will 
be voting for the main motion which is what I know the citizens of Saskatoon Centre would want me to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I rise to take 
part in this throne speech debate. I must indicate at the outset how pleased I am to be the member for the 
great constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley. I think that this constituency has become well-known 
throughout the past summer in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m very interested to see the observations of 
the people opposite and the attention they paid to the leadership convention of the Conservative Party. I 
stand here and I’m sure that each one of you learned something in watching that convention. I think that you 
learned and you saw the white hats from Indian Head-Wolseley. They’re known throughout this province 
and the Premier points out that there were 50 of them that were in here in the Regina by-election. I want to 
correct the Premier. There weren’t 50; there were 64. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
153 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – I’ll tell you boys opposite that these 64 will be here until 1983 and in 1983, there will be 
364. They are trying to defeat the socialists in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – You know, they call us folksy people. They say we’re folksy people in Indian Head. I’m 
proud to be a folksy person and I’m proud of those good people that I represent. Now, I want to go on and 
indicate to you some of the needs of that constituency and I would hope some of the ministers would take 
these to heed because I’m sincere in expressing them. 
 
I talked last year about the double-lane highway. For the last few days, it’s been the three lane highway – two 
lanes of blacktop and one lane in the ditch where everybody is driving because the roads have been too icy to 
stay on the blacktop. Now I would like to see the double lane extended from Qu’Appelle right through to the 
Manitoba border. I think this is a priority. I think there are members on the other side of the House who 
would support this idea. I think it is a priority. I’d like the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) to come out. I 
travelled this summer throughout the province of Saskatchewan and I saw the traffic flow on the various 
highways and that highway is the busiest in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of Highways talks about safety. Now there’s no greater way to ensure safety on the busiest 
highway in this province than to have it constructed on the double lane. Yesterday, the Premier said that 
Regina is becoming the distribution centre of Saskatchewan and if that is so and given the number of trucks 
that are coming from Winnipeg, I think that is a real priority for this province – to have that double-lane 
highway constructed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – Not only would it be of service to the public and add to the safety of our transportation, 
but it also would be reducing the cost in insurance regarding the cars, the cost of lives and so on that are 
being taken constantly on that highway. 
 
While I’m on highways, I must say that No. 48 Highways that runs through my constituency from 
Montmartre through to No. 9 Highway is an actual disgrace when compared to many of the other highways 
in this province. I would urge the Minister of Highways to take a look at that one also. He said last year that 
you could drive down it at 60 miles an hour around every curve. I don’t know if he realized that the speed 
limit was 50 miles an hour on that highway but perhaps he’ll find that out. 
 
Now, also in Broadview, there is a great need – a tremendous need – for a senior citizens’ accommodations. 
There is nothing in that area and I would urge this government and the Minister of Social Services (Mr. 
Koskie) to consider that aspect. 
 
In talking to the other towns in my constituency, one of the real priorities seems to be assistance from the 
Department of Urban Affairs to help them with sewer installations, street improvement, water construction. 
Also (and this has been brought up by our member for Milestone (Mr. Pickering) yesterday in question 
period), a serious 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
154 

consideration in the province of Saskatchewan is the drainage of rural farmland. This is going to cause 
problems in the rural areas. It’s going to have neighbor fighting neighbor and I don’t think that’s the thing 
we want. I know from this side of the House it isn’t and I don’t think that’s what you want to see either in 
this province of Saskatchewan. So I would urge you to take some action, Mr. Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), to look into this problem of drainage because it is a serious problem in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly, we need an expansion to the Lakeside home in Wolseley. Some of the out-of-scope people 
were out there working with me. In fact some of them are pretty good at peeling potatoes and carrots. I think 
they’re seeing that need and I think that would be one of the great things if the only home left administered 
by this government, as the minister did say today, could see an expansion and I would ask the minister to 
look into that because that home, when it is operating, is certainly providing good service to the people of 
that area. I would ask for an expansion to that. 
 
Of course, all of our towns would like to see industry located in them. That gives the economic spinoff for 
schools and hospitals and communities in the areas of my constituency that are close to the city of Regina, 
are becoming satellite communities for this city. I think we could be looking at some help for the, because 
they are supplying the recreational needs and many of the needs of the people who are living within their 
boundaries. 
 
Those are a few of the things that I see as the requirements and the needs of the constituency of Indian 
Head-Wolseley. Now, I noticed that the member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) did learn something 
from the Conservative campaign. He pointed out that I was the candidate who promised sincerity and 
honesty and that’s absolutely correct. I hope you boys learned a lesson and will do the same thing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – I heard him talking about artifacts and museums and when I look across there. I can see 
why he’s talking about that. 
 
Now the new member, the member for Regina North-West (Mr. Solomon), got up the other day and he made 
a fair speech. The only thing I saw wrong was that he patted all his old comrades here on the back. Now I’ll 
tell you, as a young member, you’re going to get further in this legislature by standing up and saying what’s 
on your mind than by patting some of these boys on the back. You also talk about family life. He was 
attacking our leader because we said something about family life, Mr. Speaker,. He went on to be the great 
upholder of family life. And then the Premier got into Christian principles yesterday. Well, I want to tell you, 
I wonder about a party and its family life and its Christian principles when it’s the party that comes out in 
support of abortion – wholesale. I wonder about that. That’s the same party that wants to lower the age of 
consent and it’s supposed to be the family part of Saskatchewan. I say that’s baloney. 
 
Now, I would like to take a look at some of these fellows, who got appointments to cabinet. That was 
interesting little piece of political manoeuvring over the summer. I would look at one of them and that is the 
Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources (Mr. Gross), the member for Morse. When I travel 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you know what they call him? The well-known Waffler from the West. He’s in 
the cabinet today. Then there’s another couple of fellows, the member for Regina Lakeview (Mr. McArthur) 
who is the Minister of Education, the Minister of Northern 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
155 

Saskatchewan (Mr. Hammersmith), the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. I would like to remind you of 
an interesting quote that I read in the November issue of The Saskatchewan Indian which said, soon after the 
last election, that the minister for Lakeview and the minister for Prince Albert-Duck Lake were both 
employees of the FSI (Federation of Saskatchewan Indians). The article was written by Doug Cuthand and 
he said they certainly owe us a debt. I don’t know if we want ministers of the Crown that owe debts to 
people. And then we have our new minister over there, last but I don’t know if I should say least, the 
minister for Quill Lakes (Mr. Koskie), the Minister of Social Services. Sir, I put a challenge out to you on 
June 22 to do your homework and today it just indicated to me that you better do it again, because I put the 
challenge again, look out on the Lakeside home in estimates. 
 
Now, it seems to me that in selecting these minister for this new cabinet that the Premier didn’t look at who 
you were or what potential you had. He looked at where you stood in the political spectrum and it seems to 
me that the boys on the left won the toss this time around. In fact the best way to put it – and I wouldn’t 
name him – one of the members opposite came up to me and he said, what do you think of the cabinet 
appointments? I said I was shocked. He said, you were shocked, I was darn mad! What about the Premier? 
You know the other day, the Premier, he goes talking about Regina. He tells us how well we’re doing in 
Regina. He won the North-West by-election. I tell you, hon. member, you’re darn lucky he called it when the 
Conservative leadership convention was on and our focuses were put off in another direction. Unfair timing. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Get rid of Henry. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – You know, he talks about how well you’ve done in Regina. My friend over here, Mayor 
Baker, (or ex-Mayor Baker) is no longer the mayor. Also, where are the NDP aldermen in the city of Regina? 
I tell you that the people of Regina spoke about the NDP domination in this city and elected Larry Schneider 
as their mayor and turned out the NDP. In fact, I think that Mayor Baker is a fine man and I go so far as to 
say that some of his own party worked against him. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Right on! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – And you know the Premier talks about Agribition. He talks about Agribition as if you, the 
members opposite, invented Agribition. I’ll tell you that Agribition came about because of the private 
enterprise cattlemen in this country, because of the John Newmans, the Bill Smalls and yes, even the Leroy 
Barrys. 
 
You know I don’t really think that in all due honesty the Premier knows one end of a bull from the other. He 
knows how to spread it. And you know I even think that if you mentioned the name Main Anjou to the 
Premier, he’d think it was a French movie star. And that a Limousine is a big car. That’s his grasp on 
agriculture. And I can tell you boys that if you keep pushing your beef marketing boards, Agribition may go 
down a bit too. 
 
Yesterday he said you’re the farmers friend. I remember him saying, standing shoulder to shoulder. You 
know the next line of that song? . . . and that’s you fellows – bolder and bolder, and the farmers better 
remember that. Look at your results in rural Saskatchewan in the last election. The Premier is coming out as 
the great saviour of the farmers. After listening to him yesterday, I don’t know if he’s the defender of the 
crow or the bargainer of the crow. He knows he’s in trouble in rural Saskatchewan. What happened to your 
last minister of agriculture? He wasn’t doing the job. We all knew that. So he dug deep into the NDP caucus. 
He dug deep into there and he pulled out the good 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
156 

old honest member for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy). But I can tell you not even that fine 
man can convince the farmers of Saskatchewan that your policies of land bank and marketing boards are in 
their best interests. You’re in for a real disappointment there – an impossible task. 
 
The Premier talks on and on in his speeches and I never hear him say anything about taxation. (Sooner than 
you think, my friends, and over there, on that side. It will be on that side when we are.) We talk about E&H 
tax. The member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) stood up and said something abut footwear. Well 
that’s rather a noble gesture, but you remember that I’ve discussed in this House for some time to remove the 
E&H tax on books, to remove it on children’s clothing and if you’ll study it, all the other provinces in 
western Canada – B.C., Alberta and Manitoba, have done just that sort of thing. 
 
Here we tax farmers on steel bins. I don’t know why. Maybe you think they’re going to put their compact 
cars in them. I don’t know your reason – staples, all these sorts of things. 
 
And the Premier talks about the population. He says they’re coming here in droves from Alberta. Now the 
only way that it makes sense is if you talk about the net population and to do that you’ve got to take into 
account who’s leaving. How many are going out? You know the Premier puts me in mind of a bookkeeper 
who only talks about his assets. He forgets he has liabilities and that’s the way that I think you’re running 
this province, only showing one-half of the picture, only one-half of it. 
 
The Minister of Labour raised his head. I say I think you folks are losing the confidence of labor in this 
province over this SGEA strike, You won’t admit that this strike is nothing but a family feud between the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and the NDP party. And finally, you haven’t at this point in time 
realized that it’s your responsibility to get a settlement for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to turn now to the throne speech. The Souris-Cannington member (Mr. Berntson) said the other day 
that there was no direction, no innovation. Not one jot in a tiddle was there in that throne speech. 
 
He defined the bureaucracy. He said it’s a giant mechanism built by pygmies. And because you fellows are 
so famous for your bureaucracies, I’d like to call this throne speech the prophecy of the pygmies and that is 
something created by small minds. 
 
I would like to start first of all, because of my position as critic of education to take a look at education. It 
was very interesting for me to see an article in the Leader-Post about Rhodes scholar regarded as left-wing 
NDP member and I quote: 
 

The Rhodes scholar is regarded as a left-wing NDPer by political opponents. And the Minister of 
Education says I make no apologies for that label. 

 
Well, I’ll tell you, you may have won a mandate in the last election but that wasn’t the majority of the people 
in Saskatchewan who voted for you. And we do not want socialist philosophies stuffed down the throats of 
our children in the schools of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: – I tell you if you try this, Mr. Minister, your government will live to regret 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
157 

that move. I don’t know what’s motivating it; it could be the old disciple Tommy Douglas coming back and 
telling the boys you’ve got to teach them socialism. It could be the new minister wanting to force his 
attitudes onto the young people in this province. 
 
The emphasis upon co-ops, and I want to say at the preface because I know you all yell anti-co-op. I’m a 
co-op member and I patronize the co-ops and I speak for many co-op members in this province, that we do 
not want these co-ops to be into the school system Co-op programs in grades 2 to 5, co-op tours, co-op 
resource materials, why al the emphasis on co-ops? Why not tours to historic sites in Celebrate 
Saskatchewan year? Why not extra-provincial, interprovincial, environmental tours? Instead of a co-op 
week, why not a week to honour our pioneers, our senior citizens and really a week to honour our native 
people? If you show both sides of the picture in education, Mr. Minister, you’re educating. When you push 
one side, you know as well as I do that you’re indoctrinating and that’s what this smells of to me. 
 
When we talk about the education of natives, Mr. Speaker, I have another clipping ‘McArthur postpones 
Head Start financing’ and in looking in the Leader-Post it’s brought to my attention that not ever did the 
minister look at the program, not one of his people from his department visited the schools. They decided to 
scrap the program. I know the reason you’ll give me is because you’re coming out with something new but 
his rationale for refusing this is because he accepts researches done in the United States in a different social 
setting from Regina. On one hand you people talk about helping the natives; on the second hand you take 
away this Head Start program. I say, shame on you! In a government that’s headed by two Rhodes scholars – 
the Premier had the good fortune of a Rhodes scholarship and the Minister of Education (Mr. McArthur) – it 
seems shocking to me you do not come out with some type of a policy to help the students in Saskatchewan 
who have superior learning capabilities. I think you’ve had the good fortune of these scholarships. Let’s help 
other bright, young boys and girls in Saskatchewan and I put that forward to you, Mr. Minister of Education, 
as something certainly worthy of concern. 
 
You could put more emphasis on other things other than co-ops. What about nutrition? Health costs are 
rising all the time. What about public speaking? That’s the way most people make their living in this society. 
Let’s put some emphasis upon that in our education and not just upon co-ops. Yesterday, you know the 
Premier wittily said the community colleges would introduce a course in twentieth century history for the 
Conservatives. I say by the travels of your Premier and some of your top people in your government that you 
may be needing a course in Russian by the community colleges so you can go over and get your instruction 
for the next round in this legislature. 
 
Now there are other areas of concern I’d like to discuss. I see time is going on but I want to point out a few. 
You know in the throne speech you talk about economic and social benefits from renewable resource returns. 
I ask you, are increased taxes an economic benefit? Are increased utility costs an economic benefit? Are 
rising petroleum costs an economic benefit? I say no. He says you’ve got to show initiative to conserve 
energy. I ask you members opposite, are you, the government going to lead the way? I know we’re lighting 
up now for Christmas but do your government buildings have to be lit all year around? Are you fellows 
driving compact cars – your cabinet members? Let’s show the way. And what about the jet set? The jet set in 
the government – are they going to cut down in their flights in the government airplanes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have many other things that I will be discussing with this government. I 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
158 

feel that this throne speech is entirely lacking in direction. It has no innovations. I would put forth a few 
ideas because the Premier always says the Tories are good at criticizing but they have no new suggestions. I 
would say let’s bring the feedlot industry back here. The feedlots, for your information, are farms and there 
is a tremendous economic spinoff from the feedlot industry. What about a cannery for Saskatchewan? What 
about a tannery? Have you got any leather products? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that’s where you 
get your information. What about the use of nonproductive land in this province? That’s another thing we 
could be looking at. And of course diversified agriculture; that is a whole new field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe my time has elapsed. I’m sorry I only got one-tenth of the suggestions and criticisms I 
have for this government but there will be other opportunities. I cannot support the motion but I will be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): – Mr. Speaker, on starting this speech I suppose I should counter some of 
the points raised by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor), but it was such a negative affair that 
I think I will ignore the most of it. I think I would like to mention a couple of points that will illustrate . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll do that later too. I would like to mention a couple of points that he mentioned 
just to illustrate the nature of his speech. He said, take the sales tax off books, Mr. Speaker. I happen to know 
that there is no sales tax on books. It’s already gone. That’s another indication of his negative nature. Mr. 
Speaker, it incenses me, it really does. He said we should be taking Russian in our community colleges. Mr. 
Speaker, we have Russian people in our area. We have Russian people in the Kamsack area. I take that as a 
slur against my constituents. This, Mr. Speaker, is typical of Progressive Conservative action and policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: – In fact his whole speech reminded me of the loud heckling that came from the 
Conservative benches during the whole of the question period today. 
 
In continuing this speech, Mr. Speaker, I would though like to join with everyone else in this House in 
offering my congratulations tot eh newly elected member for Regina North-West (Mr. Solomon). I would 
like to congratulate him on the fine campaign that he and his supporters waged and also on winning the seat 
with a majority that showed the opposition where they belong – far down in third place. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the member for Regina North-West, and he member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster (Mr. Long) for the excellent job they did in moving and seconding the reply to the 
Speech from the Throne. We really look forward to great achievements from both of them. 
 
I would also like to offer my sincere congratulations to four of my colleagues, the hon. member for Morse 
(Mr. Gross) on being made Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources; the member for Regina 
Lakeview (Mr. McArthur) on becoming Minister of Education; the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
(Mr. Hammersmith) on becoming Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, and lastly I would like to congratulate 
my friend and former room-mate, the member for Quill Lakes, (Mr. Koskie) on becoming Minister of Social 
Services. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
159 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: – I know that all of them are doing an excellent job. I know they are serving their 
constituents, their province and their country in a most distinguished manner. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson) on becoming Leader of 
the Opposition. I am sure he is there by divine right. At any rate, listening to his speech the other day, I 
thought he was inflicting divine retribution upon the members of the opposition. In listening to him I surely 
felt that he was inflicting divine retribution on me and all the rest of the members over here. Certainly if a 
Progressive Conservative government were ever elected it would be inflicting divine retribution on 
Saskatchewan, just as Progressive Conservative retribution is being visited on all of Canada by the Clark 
government. 
 
Tuesday, in this House when the stand-in Leader of the Opposition spoke, that was the first time I have heard 
members of the opposition have a script which told them where to applaud. I even noticed a few of the 
members over there reading their off-the-cuff remarks in support of their new leader. It was all nicely 
orchestrated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was interested too in the remarks of the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) on the election of their 
new leader. That member’s statement went something like this: we are not going to allow the NDP to push 
our new leader into running for a seat right away. That same member went on to say the NDP wants to get 
Mr. Devine into the House where they can cut him to pieces. How about that for confidence? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: – That’s the first time I heard a member of a caucus virtually say to the public we have 
elected a new leader but we know he can’s produce. In other words, the PC caucus has no confidence in their 
leader at all. Now isn’t that a divine situation! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: – I was interested in the speech by the stand-in Leader of the Opposition where he indicated 
his firm belief that all should be done via the so-called free enterprise route. The PCs say return Petro-Can to 
the private sector. Well we in Saskatchewan have had a $40 million lesson that kind of folly. 
 
In about 1967 the Thatcher government sold the Halton gas field owned by the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation for $44,520. To buy the gas back that they bought now costs the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and hence the people of Saskatchewan $40 million – a $40 million folly. The sale of Petro-Can 
would be a disaster that would make the Halton gas sale look like peanuts. 
 
The PCs want to destroy orderly marketing. Yet it is orderly marketing that has made it possible for many 
Saskatchewan farmers to remain on the land. They make light of anything that has anything to do with the 
orderly marketing of farm products. 
 
The PCs would sell any Crown corporations which make any money at all. They say that some private 
businessman should make the millions and not the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
160 

But, Mr. Speaker, look at the 130 people who are employed in the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation (SMDC), employed in exploring for minerals in Saskatchewan. Somehow, in some strange, 
convoluted PC logic, those 130 people and the SMDC officials are suspect and sinister. Most of those people 
are Saskatchewan-born. Somehow the work of those 130 prospectors has evil portents for the people of PC 
persuasion. Somehow that money which those people earn is just no good at all. Somehow the minerals 
which were discovered west of Creighton, Saskatchewan by SMDC are of less value than minerals 
discovered by people in the private sector. 
 
In some strange, convoluted PC logic it was unwise for SMDC to buy a one-third interest in the Key Lake 
uranium mine and discover that four years later an investment of less that $15 million was now worth more 
than $180 million. by some strange convoluted PC logic those millions of dollars of capital gains should not 
have been made by the people of Saskatchewan. According to the PC Party it would have been better to have 
some foreign-owned private company make that gain. By some strange, convoluted PC logic it is wrong for 
all the people of Saskatchewan to own the potash mines. All the people of Saskatchewan should not be 
allowed to share in a $46.4 million profit from potash. PCs want that $46.4 million of potash profits to go to 
the United States or wherever – out of Saskatchewan. 
 
The PC Party, like their brothers in the Liberal Party, do not like to see a head office for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan or SMDC located in Saskatchewan, Liberals and PCs seem to want the top 
officials for all Saskatchewan companies to be somebody from the United States or anywhere outside of 
Saskatchewan. It is obvious the PCs have no confidence in Saskatchewan people. It is equally obvious that 
they have no confidence in themselves. Just one look at their federal leader, our Prime Minister, and it is 
obvious why the PCs have no self-confidence. 
 
It is equally obvious that the PCs have no confidence in the people of Saskatchewan because they have no 
confidence in their own ability. The less government the better they say. Why? Because they can’t govern. 
The Joe Clark fiasco is ample proof of that. But we on this side of the House have confidence in 
Saskatchewan people. Everyone else in Saskatchewan except the most rabid PCs and Liberals have 
confidence in our Premier and in our cabinet. The last general election showed that confidence. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: – Mr. Speaker, there is more hard rock mineral exploration going on in Saskatchewan than 
there is in all the rest of Canada. That shows the confidence of the business community. It shows the 
confidence of the workers in SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), the mining company 
that is owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s take a look at the unemployment figures – 2.9 per cent unemployment in October, the lowest in the 
land for Saskatchewan. The fact that the small and medium sized businesses are going stronger than eve 
shows what a confident, decisive government can do. How did the people on a recent Fifth Estate television 
broadcast put it? Clear, crisp decision-making policies of the Saskatchewan government. And let us make no 
mistake about it. It is not just because of an accident of oil beneath the surface that we’ve had the lowest or 
the second lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
161 

Let’s take a brief look at history. In 1971, the year of the last Liberal government of Saskatchewan, you and 
I, the people of Saskatchewan received only $32 million of revenue from our resources. This year we 
estimate we will receive $51.5 million from our resources. Of that amount, $328 million will be spent 
around the province on ongoing programs for the people of Saskatchewan. Another $20 million will be used 
for long-term assets like the expansion of culture, recreational and educational facilities. 
 
The PCs keep saying tax the resource companies the way it’s done in Alberta. If the Blakeney government 
had followed the advice of the PCs and the Liberals, there would have been a reduction of about two-thirds 
in the taxes on the resource companies. There would not have been a Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
bringing in over $46 million. There could not have been as much business activity. We could not have built 
the roads and the hospitals. Two-thirds of our resource taxes our government has collected would have 
trickles – no, poured into the hip pockets of the multinational supporters of the PCs and the Liberals, and it 
would have left the province, left the country. Unemployment would have soared to the Manitoba levels. If 
we had followed the advice of the Liberals and Conservatives, Saskatchewan would have enjoyed what 
Premier Lyon of Manitoba calls acute protracted restraint. Cutbacks in services to the people would be the 
order of the day just like they are in Manitoba. 
 
The people in the Yorkton constituency can tell you about Manitoba. On the doorsteps during the last 
election I was constantly told about conditions there. On one doorstep one senior citizen allowed me to 
introduce myself then started using language that you wouldn’t allow me to repeat here, Mr. Speaker. At first 
I thought I was the object of his attack, but about three sentences of profanity later I discovered that the 
object of his attack was Premier Sterling Lyon of Manitoba. That senior citizen had left The Pas, Manitoba 
and moved to Yorkton. 
 
Now PCs like to talk about the loneliness of our senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, but what do PCs do when they 
get into power? Let’s just look at a few things that do happen in Manitoba. In Manitoba, Progressive 
Conservative Premier Lyon imposed a 24 percent increase on nursing home fees. That shows the PC concern 
for the loneliness of the senior citizens of Saskatchewan. The PCs raised the deductible portion of 
Manitoba’s provincial drug plan from $50 to $75. And who in our society makes by far the greatest use of 
doctors, and prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker? Senior citizens. Again the so-called free enterpriser shows his 
great concern for the senior citizen. 
 
The PCs of Manitoba have completely stopped the building of public housing units, and the new Leader of 
the Opposition across here the other day said, speaking of Ottawa, we have some tough decisions to make. 
yes, butt hey are tough on the senior citizens and tough on the low income people. 
 
The PCs are expressing great concern for the young people. Ah, bring the kids home, they say. But, Mr. 
Speaker, what have they done for the kids in Manitoba? They increased the tuition fees at three universities 
and community college by between 20 and 27 per cent. What kids are going to come home to that sort of 
increase? Or why would the Manitoba kids want to come home to an unemployment rate which reached 7 
per cent last year? 
 
The PCs have expressed great concern for the Indians and the Metis of this province. But in Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, the so-called free enterprisers have left everybody to be free to do things for themselves. They have 
cut off all self-help educational programs 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
162 

for the native people. What else has been affected by the Progressive Conservative’s protracted cutbacks in 
Manitoba? Cutbacks in nursing home construction, cutbacks in senior citizens’ housing, cutbacks in grants 
to school boards and municipalities. With all of that you would think that at least they would hold the line on 
property taxes in Manitoba, but no. Property taxes have risen by 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker,. 
 
Now we admit that at the present time we are having problems with labor here. And our opposition is just 
trying their best to make all the hay they can on that one. But I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the laboring people 
will be looking at Winnipeg’s Victoria General Hospital, where because of a lack of funds from the 
Progressive Conservative government there, workers were asked to take a 3.2 per cent pay cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are approaching the 75th anniversary of the province in Canada. 
The theme of this year as you know, is Celebrate Saskatchewan. We want to celebrate the efforts of our 
pioneers whose sacrifice and courage made our province possible. But we also want to celebrate the present 
and we have much to celebrate – abundant resources, fertile soils, productive farmers and workers, and a 
government that is applauded far and wide as being the best in Canada – the envy of the whole of North 
America. So that our future generations may celebrate a 150th anniversary with equal joy, our government 
looks and plans for the future. 
 
The investment from our heritage fund and the development of resources of our province is a significant part 
of the planning for the future. The people opposite have stated and re-stated their total opposition to this 
strategy for the future of the province. We, for our part have said, that’s our position. We will stand or fall 
with it. 
 
In 1975 and again in 1978 the people of Saskatchewan stood with us. The members opposite should 
remember 1978 when they state, as the temporary Leader of the Opposition did on Tuesday, their total 
opposition to our resource policy. I predict that the people of Saskatchewan will continue to stand with us. In 
a decade or two from now Liberals and Tories around this entire province will be pretending the idea was 
theirs, the same way that the great pretenders opposite lamely try to pretend that medicare was their idea. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Speaker, there is more room in heaven for repentant sinners, but for the sake of older 
members opposite we can only hope they live long enough to repent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not mention a few things about my constituency and the fine people 
who live in it. First, let me say I am most pleased by the great advances made in our city and the area since 
1971. As I said before, it is no accident that Saskatchewan has a thriving economy under the Blakeney 
government. It is no accident either that Yorkton has once again become a thriving, bustling city under the 
Blakeney government and I would like to show you why. 
 
During the 7 years from 1964 to 1971 under a Liberal style, fee enterprise so-called government, the city of 
Yorkton received a total of $616,779.46 in provincial grants of all kinds. That is to run the city municipality. 
In the 7 year period of the Blakeney government, from 1971 to 1978 the city of Yorkton received 
$6,051,524.68 in provincial grants of all kinds. In other words our city got nearly 10 times as much from the 
Blakeney government as they did from the so-called free enterprise style of government. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
163 

Yorkton has been well served by NDP governments and the people of Yorkton showed the satisfaction with 
that government in the last provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Yorkton is an aggressive, thriving city of just over 15,000, situated in the east central part of 
Saskatchewan. We who live there are mighty proud of it. Its history dates back to the year 1882 when the 
first white settlement was made by a group of colonists from Toronto. The group that stated the first white 
settlement in the area called themselves The York Farmers Colonization Company Limited. The first settlers 
travelled to Whitewood by CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) and then overland by stage coach that was 
owned by the York Colonization Company. For almost a decade then, there was a steady stream of white 
settlers into the area. Then groups of settlers stated to arrive. 
 
One group came from the Dakotas in 1891. Another group came from the Orkney Islands, just a little later. 
In 1899, there was an influx of Doukhobors from Russia. Shortly thereafter, came the Ukrainians. Today, 
Yorkton is what I like to call a model of Canadian unity. People of almost every race and creed in the world 
live in harmony in our city and in the Yorkton area. We don’t just show toleration, we fully accept each other 
and we fully accept each other’s cultural heritage. 
 
In the fall, we are all proudly German as anyone who can, get a ticket to go to Oktoberfest and sings lusty 
German songs and enjoys a wonderful evening. In January, We flock to become Ukrainians as we eat the 
delicious dishes spread before us at Malanka – the Ukrainian New Year celebrations. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Any Icelanders up there? 
 
MR. NELSON: – Oh, there’s the odd one. 
 
In June we have a multicultural festival where the song, dance traditions of the world are paraded before us. 
It is because of this multiracial mix of Yorkton that I say we are a model for Canada. We can experience the 
whole world on our own doorstep. That racial mix. The differences in our people, makes Yorkton one of the 
most interesting, colorful places in the whole world to live. 
 
That is how I see Canada, Mr. Speaker. In the largest part of the country, the major language is English. But 
we have a variety of traditions here. We also have Quebec, a section where the people have a tradition and a 
language all their own. But that difference only adds to the interest and the beauty of our land. In fact, it is 
that difference that makes Canada the most interesting place in the world to live. 
 
While there are those who would separate Quebec from the rest of our land, I for one (and I know most of us 
in this House) reach out our hand to the people of Quebec and say: 
 
Vous en Quebec et nous dans le este du Canada, nous avos le plus magnifique pays du monde. De notre 
province nous vous offrons la main d’amitie. Et, quoique nous n’allons pas vous donner tout le magasin et 
toute la ferma, il est bien certain que dans le Canada uni Quebec suivra un role d’honneur et de respect. 
Separees, nous allons disparaitre dans un monde des pays sans importance. Ensemble, dan un pays uni, nous 
pourrons etre un des plus importants pays du monde. 
 
It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will be 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
164 

opposing the amendment and I will be supporting the main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D. LINGENFELTER (Shaunavon): – Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I rise to participate in the throne 
speech debate, I am pleased that once again our deliberations in the Assembly will be guided by your 
wisdom and unerring sense of fair play. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity as well to congratulate the mover and seconder to the motion in reply to 
the throne speech for the excellent speeches they gave on the Monday past. John Solomon has shown that he 
will give the people of Regina North-West a strong voice in the Assembly. Bob Long will ably continue the 
CCF-NDP representation from Cut-Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the newest members of our provincial cabinet, Reg Gross, Jerry 
Hammersmith, Murray Koskie and Doug McArthur bring new energy and new ideas to a cabinet which is 
regarded by even impartial observers to be the strongest in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to hear in the throne speech that my government reaffirms the commitment to the 
family farms in rural Saskatchewan. Our position on such issues as the crowrate and orderly marketing must 
constantly be restated because the attacks on the basic rights of farmers which are enshrined in these 
institutions are now being stepped up by the Conservatives in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I almost hate to mention the federal Tory government because I know how some members get 
upset when I mention the dead. 
 
Bob Long gave us an excellent summary of the issues which are at stake in this debate over the future of 
grain handling and marketing in our country. Today, I want to concentrate on one aspect of that debate – the 
comparison of the grain handling system in Canada and the United States which often springs up when the 
merits and weaknesses of our system are considered. 
 
The people of the Shaunavon constituency are fortunate in considering the merits of the two-grain-handling 
systems in that they have an opportunity to go and look for themselves and they don’t have to take the advice 
of agricultural economists who sit behind desks or in galleries and tell them they should adopt the U.S. 
system of grain handling. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – What they find when they go to the United States to look at their grain-handling 
system is a system in far worse shape than our own, where farmers pay rail companies six times what the 
farmers in the Shaunavon area pay for handling grain and hauling it a similar distance. There is an acute 
shortage of grain cars. Branch lines are run-down. The facilities are fun-down in all but the large centres. 
Farmers are forced to build new grain bins or pile grain on the ground while the roads suffer the 
consequences of moving vast amounts of grain by truck. 
 
What they also find, if they stop and talk to farmers, is frustration with the flexible open market system that 
the Conservatives often sing praise to. Only those who share the Tory fascination of beating a farmer out of a 
buck or those who have large corporate 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
165 

farms and have time to keep an eye on the commodity exchange are happy with the U.S. system of 
grain-handling. Most Montana farmers I have talked to are frustrated with the daily fluctuations in grain 
prices and the need to gamble on each load of grain. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do not have to take 
my word for it. I invite them to go to Montana or North Dakota or Arizona and take a good look at the 
system they are so envious of before advocating destruction of a system that has served us so well despite the 
responsibility of railways and the Liberal and Conservative governments in Ottawa. I doubt whether many 
members opposite will take the time to go look at the disastrous results of that grain-handling system. For 
their benefit, I’m going to give them a few facts and figures to keep in mind before they attack the crowrate 
and the Canadian Wheat Board again. 
 
Last summer, farmers in the Havre area of northeastern Montana were paying in the neighborhood of $1.30 
per hundredweight or 78 cents per bushel of wheat to ship grain to Seattle. Since that time, the farmers in 
Montana have experienced a 1.3 per cent rise in freight rates and are expecting another 16 per cent rate 
increase this month. At the same time, farmers in the Shaunavon area have a guaranteed statutory rate of 23 
cents per hundredweight. The crowrate has remained constant as the farmers in Montana have increased 
freight rates over and over again. What do the farmers get for the extra money they pour into the coffers of 
the railway companies who are allowed to jack up freight rates several times in the course of a year? Well, at 
Turner, Montana, the first town south of Shaunavon, they get a Burlington-Northern branch line which is in 
terrible condition and a hopper car couldn’t be brought down it even if there were any available. The last 
time I was in Turner during harvest, wheat was piled on the ground, the elevators were plugged and farmers 
were busy building new bins so they could store the wheat they couldn’t haul to market. 
 
At Harlem, a larger town south of Turner, elevators have been specifically built to handle semi-trailer trucks 
which haul their wheat to the coast. One can clearly see the consequences of highway movement of large 
amounts of grain as one drives west toward Havre. 
 
At Havre, one would expect to see the fruits of this centralized, free enterprise system that members opposite 
are so envious of. What one finds, instead, are the same old complaints – lack of service from the rail 
companies. Farmers who deal with a farmer-owned co-operative in Havre, the Farmers Grain Exchange, 
have been called on to purchase their own boxcars and producer trains are now a common sight in the United 
States. Even at that, many trucks a day leave Havre to carry grain to the coast and the cost of that is much 
higher than by rail. 
 
That’s the kind of service railways have given the people of northeastern Montana. It seems that giving 
railways the profits they demand does not necessarily guarantee responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these figures the costs and benefits of the American user-pay concept, grain transportation 
in mind, it is possible to estimate what it would cost the Shaunavon constituency if the Conservative 
conspiracy to dump the crowrate were to succeed. There would be a direct loss to farmers in my constituency 
of over a million dollars per year if they were forced to use the similar rates that the Montana farmer has to. 
Towns such as Admiral, Ponteix, Shaunavon and others would suffer a loss of revenue of over $1 million. A 
family farmer who sold 20 thousand bushels of wheat a year would lose $13,000 a year from his net income. 
Not many farm families could survive that kind of a loss and I suppose that’s the kind of reaction that we can 
expect 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
166 

from the 20 per cent club as they have become to be known on the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, comparing freight rates between Canada and the United States does not, however, show the 
true impact of what would occur if the crowrate were removed. At noon today on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) the UGG (United Grain Growers) has reported that they have contracted with 
Friesen Transport of Winnipeg to haul flax from Manitoba points to Thunder Bay. The initial rate being 
charged for the 1,000 mile round trip is $1.56 per hundredweight compared with 15 cents crowrate. To 
translate this in terms that would mean something to my constituents, where the round trip is 2,000 miles the 
comparison would be $3.12 per hundredweight or $1.80 per bushel of wheat. The figures that I have used on 
the loss to the farmer in my constituency are very minimal and the farmers could lose much more. There 
would be a direct loss for their farmers in my constituency of over $15 million as I have mentioned earlier. 
Using the figures that the Manitoba people are using today, that could go up to $30 million. The crowrate is 
the West’s one major benefit from confederation. It has much legal, historical and economic importance as 
the eastern tariff protection. Its loss would mean hundreds of millions of dollars being paid out by western 
farmers to the rail companies who are already heavily subsidized. Here in Saskatchewan we produce 60 per 
cent of all the grain which goes to export from Canada. If we were to lose the crowrate, we definitely have 
the most to lose. Not only do we produce 60 per cent of the grain but we are the farthest from any port. But 
in producing 60 per cent of the export grain, we also hold the trump card when it comes to deciding what 
kind of a grain handling system we are to have in western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the overwhelming evidence that the loss of the statutory rate would be disastrous to 
western agriculture the members opposite have joined their Conservative brethren in Ottawa and cried that 
the crow must go because the railways are not making enough money. Let’s examine how badly off those 
rail companies really are. In the first place, they have not been required to haul grain at the statutory crowrate 
for many years. If one takes into account the 8,000 hopper cars that the federal government has purchased for 
their use. As well, the subsidies on the branch lines have been paid since 1970. Those subsidies in 1970 were 
$114 million a year and in 1977 the federal government gave the railway companies a further $100 million 
for rehabilitation of selected branch lines. 
 
It becomes even more difficult to share the Tory sympathy for the rail companies when one examines the 
profits that they have been making in the midst of the bleating they have been doing about the crowrate. 
Canadian Pacific recently recorded a record profit of $368 million in the first nine months of ’79. CP Rail 
operations alone have recorded profits of $70 million. The CPR can afford to spend a hundred million 
dollars in United States for factories, apartments, office buildings but cannot afford to buy hopper cars. The 
rail companies say the massive subsidies and profits they are already receiving and not enough. More is 
needed if they are to maintain the branch lines and buy enough rolling stock to do a decent job of moving 
prairie grain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a federal government with the guts to stand up to the CPR and CNR and make them 
live up to the obligation as speed out in the railway act and get our grain to market. Not a penny of subsidy 
should go to the rail companies until an iron clad guarantee of performance is guaranteed. Unfortunately, 
there is no hope of a get tough policy with the spineless Conservative government we now have in Ottawa. 
Asking Joe Clark to stand up to Ian Sinclair is like asking a puppet to stand up to one of the puppeteers who 
pull his strings. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
167 

Mr. Speaker, western grain producers are losing hundreds of millions of dollars in the sale of grain each year 
because the railways won’t co-operate and the federal government won’t make them. The shortage of cars 
has reached crisis proportions and once again Saskatchewan has shown the leadership. Our purchase of 
1,000 cars has got the ball rolling and a start is now being made to alleviate the chronic shortage of grain 
cars. 
 
The Acting Leader of the Opposition or whatever he is – really is getting difficult to tell who is leading what, 
or who is where around there any more – but the Leader of the Opposition said on Tuesday that he was 
offended by the conditions attached to the Saskatchewan purchase of hopper cars. Naturally he was offended. 
Those conditions were designed to prevent the Tories from using those hopper cars to undermine the wheat 
board. Saskatchewan’s cars will be allocated by the Canadian Wheat Board for the benefit of all farmers and 
for all producers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, the mention of the Canadian Wheat Board brings me to the second 
part of the usual comparison between Canadian and American grain handling systems. Conservatives find so 
much to admire in the grain handling system which pay the railways a lot more money for the same lousy 
grain hauling service Canadians have come to know. They seem to find even more to admire in the 
American system of relaying on an international group of grain traders to sell their grain. 
 
Why do they favour such a system, Mr. Speaker? Clearly because the only kind of farmer which it would 
benefit would be the corporate farm – the lucky members of the 20 per cent club they would like to see on 
the land. 
 
Most of us are not old enough to remember what it was like before the formation of farmer-owned 
co-operatives and the establishment of the wheat board – the days when the farmer’s destiny was controlled 
by the barons of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange and grain was sold at a price or not sold at all. Since we are 
not familiar with that part of our history, the Conservatives seem determined that we should be condemned 
to repeat it. That is why we are again fortunate to have the American exampled to have a close look at. The 
question as to which system can sell more grain is irrelevant because the grain handling system in either 
country can’t handle what we now sell. 
 
Most American farmers express amazement at the Canadian Wheat Board’s ability to maintain fair and 
equitable price for grain to the farmers, while they are experiencing wild fluctuations with their own price. 
Not many express a preference for the boom and bust which they experience in their system. 
 
The most important question concerning the American grain system is, whom does it benefit? It benefits the 
larger corporate farmer who has the time, the expertise and the resources to properly play the commodity 
market. It certainly doesn’t help the young farmer who is forced to sell his grain as soon as it comes off the 
field in order to meet financial commitments. Anyone who has watched the Chicago Grain Exchange will 
well know that the harvest time is the lowest ebb of the American grain market. It doesn’t benefit the small 
family farm either, Mr. Speaker. Such a farmer is far too busy working to make ends meet to be playing the 
grain exchange. Perhaps that is why the family farm as we know it in Saskatchewan is all but extinct in the 
United States, and over 80 per cent of all the farmland, in such states as Colorado and California is now 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
168 

owned by person who no longer farm it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is not doubt concerning the kind of farmer the open market benefits. It benefits the 
managers of grain factories that have come to dominate the agriculture in America. They are the only farmers 
who can benefit from the activity of the Chicago Grain Exchange, activity which has been likened to a 
frenzied feeding of blood-crazed sharks. 
 
The Conservatives’ desire for flexibility in the marketing system is just a smokescreen for the goal of 
involving the multinational grain traders like Cargill in the purchase of more Canadian grain. And that is 
merely a step towards their final goal of having the Cargills of the world as the major grain trading 
companies and controlling all of the exports in Canada. 
 
Any lingering hopes that we may have had that the members opposite would come to their senses regarding 
orderly marketing were dispelled by their acting leader’s speech on Tuesday. As he spoke I had a curious 
feeling that the words were not issuing in the normal way but were merely being funnelled through him from 
another source. When he made a direct connection between the marketing legislation and joining of the 
union in the city. I was sure a curious feat of ventriloquism was taking place and that was a new form of 
convoluted logic that we had not heard before in this Assembly. 
 
Never before, in all the tortured attempts to twist their minds around the simple concept of fair and equitable 
marketing opportunities for all farmers, have the members opposite come to such an outrageous conclusion. 
Never before, I might add, Mr. Speaker, have they stooped to stating the opposite of the truth in such a 
precise manner. The presence of that skilled ventriloquist, who now puts words in the mouths of the 
members opposite, was unmistakable when one heard for the umpteenth time that the population in 
Saskatchewan is decreasing, when anyone who can read statistics knows that since 1974 it has been growing, 
is growing and growing rapidly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – I don’t know if it’s possible to explain the benefits of orderly market to a 
ventriloquist’s dummy, but we shall try to explain one more time to the members opposite that 
Saskatchewan farmers rejected the concept of open-market many years ago. Because of their tradition of 
co-operation, they led the fight for the orderly marketing system that has stabilized western agricultural 
industry. It has not been as exciting as the sharp frenzy the Tories would like to create and it may not make 
millionaires of paupers overnight, but it does serve the family farm in Saskatchewan. And politicians who 
persist in opposing it merely speed their journey for the political boneyard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when farmers in Montana ask me how anyone in his right mind could advocate the voluntary 
relinquishing of subsidized freight rates and orderly marketing Saskatchewan farmers enjoy, I am forced to 
reply that I have no answer, because I cannot guarantee that any of those people are indeed in their right 
minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the throne speech reaffirms the rights of Saskatchewan farmers, because it indicates 
that inspired leadership of the Blakeney government will continue in the ’80s, I would like to support the 
motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
169 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): – Mr. Speaker, may I say it is a pleasure to be here and that that is the 
first time, certainly since I have been elected to the legislative Chamber, I have been thumped from both 
sides of the House. Now we’ll wait and see if they can thump with their mouths as well as they do with their 
hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last number of months, since I made the announcement I was going to step down as 
leader and since the opening of this session of the legislature, I have in fact participated relatively little in the 
political process of the province of Saskatchewan. I have done so for a reason and I wish to explain this 
reason to the members of this legislature and to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I believe it is essential that new, vigorous and exciting leadership be provided to the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan and I believe the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan today has that 
leadership. I believe it is essential in any political organization that the old – and I look across at three or four 
who might be described as relatively old and relatively unsuccessful – and myself, relatively old and 
relatively unsuccessful – certainly when compared to Mr. Gross’ son . . . By the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
must say I was most proud and thrilled to see Mr. Gross bring his son into the Chamber on opening day. I 
thought it was exciting and I hope it will set a trend for all of us. I think it’s a great thing the young people 
are brought into the legislative process of Saskatchewan. I also think it’s a great thing that finally we 
recognize the average age of mentality of the members opposite in examining the people who come to the 
opening. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – I have not interfered directly, Mr. Speaker, and I have made very few political 
statements or comments in the past few months or in this session, nor do I intend in this session to make any 
further comments than the ones that I make today. 
 
It is essential that a new leader, that the next premier of the province establish his way, establish his 
methods, establish himself as the leader. Let me say so far he has done one hell of a job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – It is not only desired and desirable that the process occur, there is nothing sadder than 
an older leader of a political party making comments and comments behind the back, in front of the back of a 
new leader or sitting there in the legislative Chamber or anywhere else, and by his presence interfering with 
the establishment of this new era. I will, therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker,, as I said, not be participating any 
further beyond today in this fall session of the legislature. 
 
I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that having examined the throne speech in some detail I found relatively little 
reason for this particular fall session. I recall last year when urgent matters – and I mean urgent matters – of 
people’s hearts and souls and health were at stake, when people were worried and concerned about their 
health and their future and deterrent fees which weren’t even mentioned in the throne speech, when it was 
time that a debate occurred in this very legislature about whether the doctors should continue the process of 
direct billing and extra billing and curtailing the use and the utilization of our medical services last year – 
that wasn’t urgent enough. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
170 

The present throne speech with all of its extremely urgent matters and extremely urgent discussion that were 
presented to us, in my judgment did not call for a fall session this year. Weren’t you proud opposite to look 
in the Leader-Post the other day when a man of the integrity and credentials and respect of Dr. Duncan says 
that the hospitals, in Regina are not as good as they were in the ’50s? Didn’t you in the NDP with all of your 
lies about medicare in 1978 just stand up and stuff out your chests with pleasure to see a Dr. Duncan say that 
the hospitals were not as good today as they were in the ’50s? Has anyone over there on the other side of the 
House, has anyone the guts or the courage to suggest that Dr. Duncan was making a political statement? That 
Dr. Duncan is acting politically? That he is trying to defeat the NDP? Didn’t it make you proud? 
 
I listened with some interest on the radio yesterday to the comments from the Premier of Saskatchewan (Mr. 
Blakeney) for China or Russia or whichever constituency he happens to represent. I listened with 
considerable interest to his cheap shot and I hope he appreciated my cheap shot as much as I appreciated his. 
But, Mr. Speaker, not once, not once did I hear the Premier of Saskatchewan talk about individual 
Saskatchewan citizens. Not once did I hear the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan talk about the 
feelings and the spirit and the confidence in the future of individual Saskatchewan citizens. So I had hoped, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to say today for a few moments the kinds of spirit of individual enterprise and the 
kind of individual hope for the future that your government has created in my constituency. I noticed with 
some interest the Premier went out of his way to mention Carrot River in his speech yesterday. Let me tell 
him about a former mayor of the town of Nipawin, one of the leading citizens of Nipawin whose only crime, 
whose only sin was that he was the president of the Progressive Conservative Association of Nipawin. I want 
to tell you his story of the last six years. His story is this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Coventry, the president of the 
Nipawin Progressive Conservative Association is a funeral director, and extremely well respected. Three 
years ago this February a co-operative funeral home, one of only two in the province of Saskatchewan was 
opened up in Nipawin – one of only two, nothing is wrong with that. To survive, a funeral home must 
average six funerals per month – six to survive. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite laugh, but I want them 
to hear this story. Three years ago, this is Mr. Coventry the president, this is an individual person in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – They laugh at us all the time, it hasn’t changed. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Do they? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Yep, still laughing. 
 
MR. COLLVER: – It takes six funerals a month to break even; 10 funerals a month and a funeral director 
can make a decent living; 12 funerals a month and a funeral director can make quite a good living. The co-op 
funeral home in Nipawin over the last three years has averaged two funerals a month – two. They get no 
more than that. How do they survive? With government subsidies. Where does the money come from? Mr. 
Coventry and his family, a local independent business man whose only crime was that he was the president 
of the Progressive Conservative Association of Nipawin – your government through your subsidies and your 
policies are keeping alive a funeral home that cannot break even, that cannot possibly do anything but lose 
the money paid for by the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. Now, you might say, well that’s not 
much. Mrs. Coventry, the wife of Jim Coventry, an individual in Saskatchewan whose only crime was that 
she was the wife of the president of the Progressive Conservative Association of Nipawin, was a nurse of 
some 20 years exceptional standing – 20 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
171 

years. She was the nursing director at the senior citizens’ home, the nursing home in Nipawin. The head of 
the hospital board for Nipawin is the head of the NDP (New Democratic Party) in Nipawin – or I shouldn’t 
say that I’m sorry – in Whitefox. The name is Shackleford. The executive director of the hospital in Nipawin 
is a very strong and active supporter of the NDP. I want you to listen to this please to know what you’re 
doing to individual people. You may not be aware of it. Some years ago, two or three years ago, sent out 
from Regina an NDP hack who sends a letter to the nursing home, the same letter, by the way, which went to 
the Carrot River nursing home and others, brought about Mrs. Coventry’s dismissal as nursing director for 
the nursing home. Mrs. Coventry has brought an action for improper dismissal. You will find it out. This 
action is still pending before the courts. But here are two individuals, well respected and I invite any member 
opposite to go to them as a sincere human being and ask them what they believe as individuals, ask their 
friends what they believe, ask the local Nipawin business community what they believe, as the Carrot River 
business community what they believe. I invite you to do this. I invite you to go and talk to those people and 
find out whether they believe that the only crime of Mr. and Mrs. Coventry was that they backed the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and therefore their economic well being was threatened and 
their reputation was maligned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to you and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and to the members opposite, I 
say that Jim Coventry has more guts in his little finger than your whole government has in every part of its 
body because Mr. Jim Coventry . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – . . . because Mr. Jim Coventry, not two months ago or less, accepted the position again 
as president of the Nipawin constituency. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks much about resources, but the major human resource in 
the province of Saskatchewan is the spirit of individuality of the Saskatchewan people, of individual citizens. 
You cannot create a pride in the province when your union bosses run roughshod over the membership. you 
cannot create a pride in individuals when your legislation allows union bosses to run roughshod over their 
membership and roughshod over individuals in their union. You cannot create a spirit of individuality and a 
feeling of pride in an individual person when NDPers are granted land bank and people who have other 
political beliefs are not granted land bank land. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – You cannot create a spirit of individuality and a feeling for individual people and a 
pride in themselves as individuals when you boasted, Mr. Premier, yesterday, that today the NDP 
government and Exxon are together! He boasts; he says we didn’t kick the oil companies out, we didn’t kick 
the uranium companies out, we didn’t kick any of these out. Look at this: Exxon and Gulf and all of these 
multinational corporations are here with us. I say to him like I say to every member of this legislature, where 
are the little entrepreneurs, Mr. Premier? Where are the new entrepreneurs, Mr. Premier? Where are the little 
guys in the oil business? Where are the little guys in the uranium business? Where are the little miners? 
Where are the little timber companies? Where are they, Mr. Premier? They aren’t here any more because the 
spirit, the feeling of individualism, the feeling that built the country – you have gradually taken it away. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
172 

You say you’ve made money – of course, you’ve made money! Who in the name of heaven couldn’t make 
money when the major products you’re selling quadrupled in value and were put there by God? Who 
couldn’t make money? Who couldn’t have huge revenues? Every other oil country that I know of the sheiks 
drive around in huge Cadillac limousines but where are the little guys. Mr. Speaker, where are the little 
guys? Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Premier and perhaps even the people of Saskatchewan (certainly they 
showed it last October) are prepared to accept direct control of everybody’s life by a combination of joint 
venture between Exxon and the Premier of Saskatchewan but I for one am not prepared to accept it. They 
will not control my life. You will not control my life and you will not control the lives of people like Jim 
(Tiny) Coventry who will fight you to their dying breath while you take away their rights, their feeling and 
their spirit of individualism. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I notice yesterday in the remarks of the Premier that he expressed some concerns about 
the present federal government in Ottawa. I wish to say to the Premier and to the members of this legislature 
that I, too, share those concerns. Mr. Speaker, so far I have not seen what I have been asking, pleading, 
begging the members opposite, who are the Government of Saskatchewan, to do which is to give people 
back hope, to give them hope for the future, to give them a feeling as individuals and to recognize that that is 
more important than the bucks; that is more important than the extra car in the garage; that is more important 
than the 15 pair of socks; that is more important than anything. That feeling of hope, that feeling of 
individualism, that spirit that build our country is the only thing that will make us survive when times aren’t 
so good. And I begged you to try to bring that about and you haven’t done it, and so far I’m afraid neither has 
the present Government of Canada. Mr. Speaker, as one member of this legislature and as the member for 
Nipawin, I intend to insist, when this session starts up again in February, I intend to insist on every possible 
occasion that this government stop its over-emphasis on dollars and cents and start recognizing that 
government’s primary role is to lead in the spirit of this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: – The people of Nipawin expect it; the people of Saskatchewan expect it; the people of 
Canada expect it and I expect it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): – Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to enter 
the debate of the Speech from the Throne this afternoon representing the Melfort constituency. Mr. Speaker, 
firstly I would like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the throne speech, the member for Regina 
North-West (Mr. Solomon) and the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster (Mr. Long) for the capable manner 
in which they made their presentations. I would like also to extend special congratulations to John Solomon, 
the member for Regina North-West, on his election as the member to the Legislative Assembly for that 
constituency. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that people of North-West have selected a capable, hard-working 
representative who will serve them well in the future, as well as did the previous member for Regina 
North-West, Mr. Ed Whelan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: – Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for Melfort constituency it is my pleasure to stand in this 
House and reflect on some of the past services and the future benefits 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
173 

that the people I represent, the citizens of the Melfort constituency have received because of the sound 
policies and the planning of this government. 
 
In the last year many projects have been under way in my constituency and one of the most significant of 
these is the construction of the bridge over the Saskatchewan River between Gronlid and Choiceland. Work 
is progressing on the bridge according to schedule and it is now expected that this important new link 
between the South and the North will open in the fall of 1980. This bridge will provide easy access to the 
northern recreational areas available along the Hanson Lake road. Another project which is slated for 
completion in the 1980s is the prairie housing development project in St. Brieux. This project was made 
possible through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation and provides for the construction of 14 rental units 
which will be made available on a non-profit basis to middle income people, such as the workers at 
Bourgault Industries in that particular community. 
 
In another part of my constituency, Highway No. 349 from Naicam to Highway No. 35 is being upgraded. 
Once the project is completed it will provide improved access to the lakes and the recreational facilities 
available around Greenwater Lake Provincial Park. Also in Naicam, a senior citizen’s low-rental housing 
project is under construction. This $800,000 project has been made possible by the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation and is presently about 70 per cent complete. When completed it will provide 30 units of 
low-rental accommodation for the pioneers of Naicam and district. 
 
As these examples demonstrate, Mr. Speaker, the people of the Melfort constituency are receiving excellent 
service as a result of the progressive policies of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege for me to be a part of the government which brought down the recent throne 
speech. This speech outlines one more step in this government’s program of development to the province of 
Saskatchewan, a program which provided for economic development and also ensure the security, the safety 
and the well-being of Saskatchewan’s citizens in all aspects of life. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, some 
provisions mentioned in the throne speech are particularly significant. For our primary industry, agriculture, 
the continuation of the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation is important. The hopper cars which will be 
made available to the Canadian Wheat Board through this corporation will be important in dealing with the 
shortcomings of our present grain transportation system. 
 
The safety of our people and the preservation of our environment are issues which are important to the 
quality of life in this province. The government’s proposed new legislation, The Environmental Assessment 
Act and the proposed amendments to The Department of the Environment Act, show that the well-being of 
Saskatchewan’s citizens is a high priority for this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provisions of the throne speech also reflect this government’s concern for the health and 
happiness of Saskatchewan’s citizens. The plans to improve hospitals and to expand and develop the 
home-care program will benefit many people in this province. The concern for health and security is also 
reflected in the proposal to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act. As Minister of Industry and Commerce 
I am particularly pleased that a system of merit rebates will be introduced in The Workers’ Compensation 
Act. Many small employers in this province have excellent safety records and I am pleased to know that 
these employers will be rewarded for their conscientious attention to worker safety by rebates on their 
contributions to the workers’ compensation. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
174 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one indication of the concern this government has for the needs of small 
businessmen in this province. This government also provides many other services and programs which 
contribute to the economic well-being of the small Saskatchewan employer. 
 
The services of the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, for an example, make a substantial 
contribution to small businesses in this province. During the last 12 months, SEDCO has provided a $15.7 
million in loans and guarantees to 75 Saskatchewan businesses. Some of these funds went to new enterprises 
in the province; some went to existing businesses that were expanding and developing. All businesses 
involved were small by Canadian standards and the majority of them were located out of the major urban 
areas. 
 
However, the importance of SEDCO’s contribution is best illustrated by its participation in the 
manufacturing sector. Manufacturing is vital to the province’s development because it provided diversity in 
our economy. Manufacturing shelters us from the boom and bust cycles of the primary industries and it 
provide a wide range of jobs. Even more important is the fact that each job in the manufacturing sector 
creates approximately three additional jobs in other sectors of the economy. 
 
In the past 12 months, SEDCO has provided 22 loans with a total value of $8.2 million to businesses in the 
manufacturing sector. Twelve of these loans assisted in the establishment of new enterprises in the province 
which will eventually employ 211 persons. Ten of these manufacturing loans went to assist in the expansion 
and development of existing manufacturers, creating 183 new jobs in those companies over the next few 
years. Thus, SEDCO’s financing over the past 12 months has assisted in the creation of 394 new 
manufacturing jobs. As these jobs are filled, the spinoff will create approximately 1,200 jobs in other areas 
of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total number of jobs created is significant. This government can show the people of 
Saskatchewan that the activities their Crown corporation SEDCO provided in the last 12 months will 
ultimately lead to the creation of over 1,500 direct and indirect jobs in our economy. This is a record to be 
proud of, Mr. Speaker, but our activities do not stop there. 
 
The Department of Industry and Commerce has also been active in the business community. Our network of 
regional offices, staffed by qualified and informed business consultants, provide a valuable service to the 
business community. In the past 12 months, these offices handled over 3,800 inquiries covering a variety of 
business related questions and referrals. During this same period an average of 700 individuals were clients 
of the department, receiving extensive assistance from the regionally located consultants. Approximately half 
of these clients were drawing on the Department of Industry and Commerce resources and assistance to start 
new businesses or to expand existing ones. Mr. Speaker, these figures clearly illustrate the valuable 
contribution this consulting services makes to the community. 
 
One of the major difficulties facing businessmen today is the high cost of capital The current high interest 
rates are especially hard on small businessmen, and once again, I am proud to report that this government, 
through the Department of Industry and Commerce, and through SEDCO, has been doing something that 
problem. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
175 

In the past six months, 240 Saskatchewan businesses have applied for, and received approval of grants of 
more than $116,000. These grants are made available through the interest abatement program and they are 
here to help defray the high cost of borrowing for capital improvements. In the same period though, through 
the small industry development program, 57 forgivable loans valued at approximately $475,000 were 
approved. These loans contributed to the creation of 124 new jobs in the Saskatchewan economy. Mr. 
Speaker, these figures show that industry and commerce business development programs are well received 
by the Saskatchewan business community. We are providing assistance which they need and they use. 
 
SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) also, has taken an important stand with 
respect to the current high interest rates. SEDCO has historically placed its rates at the current market level, 
but we feel the present rates do not reflect the current Saskatchewan situation. Therefore, at this time, 
SEDCO is offering loans at interest rates somewhat lower than those available through conventional levels. 
This, Mr. Speaker, is one of the benefits of having financing available through a Crown corporation whose 
primary concern is the good of the people of the province. 
 
The federal government seems willing to permit the nation’s business community to be held to ransom by 
exorbitant and inflationary interest rates, but SEDCO feels these rates are not appropriate in Saskatchewan, 
and therefore is providing a somewhat lower rate for Saskatchewan business development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a time of great economic potential for the province of Saskatchewan. I feel the programs 
and services I have mentioned, along with other industry and commerce programs directed toward economic 
development, demonstrate this government’s commitment to assisting Saskatchewan business. We want 
Saskatchewan citizens to take advantage of current and future opportunities for growth. However, I would 
like to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the other side of the coin. I would like to talk about the 
importance of the private entrepreneur to the economic future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have outlined, this government has done a great deal to provide a good climate for business 
in this province. But I would like to emphasize that once that climate is established, the initiative rests with 
the private business community. It is up to the Saskatchewan entrepreneur who has an idea to develop it, and 
to provide the driving force which will carry a business proposal from the initial idea to an established 
business venture. Along the way, the Department of Industry and Commerce and SEDCO can provide 
consulting services, assistance in application for federal funds, assistance with marketing studies, financing, 
access to information on the national and international scene, grants and loans. This support, Mr. Speaker, is 
available, and I believe it is essential to our province’s development. But ideas, initiative, and venture capital 
from the private sector are also vital. 
 
The importance of venture capital cannot be over emphasized. Man Saskatchewan businesses take their 
investment money out of the province, even out of the country. There are opportunities for investment in 
Canada, and especially in Saskatchewan in the 1980s. There are exciting opportunities, both large and small. 
The government cannot develop them alone. In all but exceptional circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I believe it 
would be inappropriate for the government to consider getting directly involved in these business ventures. 
We stand prepared to help, but we need the participation and commitment of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs to 
fulfil the promise the future offers. 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
176 

Saskatchewan does have its success stories. One that comes to mind is Mossbank Foods. In Mossbank, Mr. 
Speaker, local initiative, combined with government assistance and an international food company, 
combined to establish a noodle factor in that rural Saskatchewan community. This is a success story which 
demonstrates what can be done. It is true both the government assistance and private industry participation 
were vital. However, I want to emphasize the initiative and the sustaining determination which brought that 
factory to Moss bank came from a local group – a local group of people who carried the idea from its 
conception to its fruition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is much discussion in the media about the spinoff benefits that can come to the people of 
Saskatchewan from the development of our vast natural resources. The Department of Industry and 
Commerce has a program in place to inform Saskatchewan businesses of the needs of industries involved in 
resource development. In this way, Saskatchewan businesses have the opportunity to provide the needed 
goods and services. Also, the companies involved in the resource developments are being encouraged to 
utilize Saskatchewan secondary industries wherever possible. With the rapid expansion in the resource field, 
the opportunities in Saskatchewan are tremendous. Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage our local business 
people to look into these opportunities and to sue their venture capital to participate in development of this 
fine province that we call home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech, which we had the honor to hear a few days ago, was part of this 
government’s plan to develop this province for its people, I am sure that the business people of this province 
have their own contributions to make to that development and with the co-operation of the business world 
and the Government of Saskatchewan we can create in this province diverse, viable business environment – 
an environment which will attract entrepreneurs and serve as an example of balanced economic development 
for the rest of Canada. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that we will see an increasingly active and exciting 
business community developed in this province during the decade of 1980. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks, you will understand that I will not be supporting the amendment but I 
will be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to take my place in 
the Assembly and I’m sure all members of the House including the government side, will share in that joy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, the Premier is having a good laugh there now. I hope he 
does because I’ve got a few for him today. Mr. Speaker, Its’ rather a unique opportunity that one has in this 
Assembly to follow a performance like the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar). Most unique, 
indeed, Mr. Speaker. I say that on this basis that upon entering the House this afternoon, I noticed that our 
critic for the industry and commerce department was attempting to take notes. And very shortly, just a few 
minutes ago, you will notice that he left the House. He was attempting to be a very hon. member – he was 
attempting to be a responsible member of the opposition and attempting to jot down some notes and some 
worthy comments that the minister responsible for industry and commerce for the province of Saskatchewan 
was putting to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the hon. member for Regina South 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
177 

(Mr. Rousseau) had a blank sheet of paper. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: – A blank sheet, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, there was one worthy aspect of the 
minister’s speech this afternoon and that, Mr. Speaker, was very simple. The member for Prince Albert (Mr. 
Feschuk), Norcan Mike will have to use fewer sleeping pills now for his attendance in this Assembly since 
the Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Vickar) is just lulling him to a nice rest as he sits there in his 
chair and attempts to do nothing and nothing and nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, I always attempt to give very statesmanship-like speeches in the House but it’s 
becoming ever-increasingly difficult with these speeches coming from the government side of the House. I 
find it difficult to respond to such drivel as was emanating from the member for Yorkton (Mr. Nelson) this 
afternoon. But in seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome you, on behalf of I’m sure, the members of 
the opposition and the members of the government. I want, Mr. Speaker, to welcome you with a note of 
sincerity and not out of tradition. You have done a fine job and we support your occupation of the Chair, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would like to, as well, congratulate the government for their performance of the tall, the long and the sort. 
In moving and addressing themselves to the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, let me say that the member for 
Regina North-West (Mr. Solomon) is to be congratulated on his election to this Assembly even though it’s 
on a rather small number of votes. I would estimate 25 per cent. I would suggest to the member and to the 
Assembly that that is not a discredit just to the member for Regina North-West. I suggest, in a statesman-like 
way, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a disgrace to all of the members of this Assembly that that few people will come 
out to vote. I say it’s something that we address ourselves to. What is the problem precisely? Now the hon. 
member for Regina North-West says all the ones that you visited didn’t come out, Mr. Speaker, those are the 
remarks that keep people at home during election time. 
 
Let’s attempt, Mr. Speaker, to present ourselves fairly, not just at election time or when we address ourselves 
to the throne speech. I would like to congratulate the member for Regina North-West for his presentation in 
the House. He had his notes well prepared and he went through them quite nicely without stumbling. As time 
goes on and as he develops more experience in the House, he will be able to take his place, know what he’s 
talking about and not require those kinds of notes. But I do congratulate him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to pass on my congratulations to the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster (Mr. Long). I 
have a great respect for the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but this year, I noted in his presentation that 
the Premier’s office, (and I say the Premier’s office because that’s where all direction is given to this 
government) obviously got to that member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster because we all noted that his speech 
was dogmatic. It was ideological. It was philosophical. It was not the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
that I knew last year. Now, Mr. Speaker, I do congratulate him. He had to present what was given to him and 
so he did. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just before the Premier leaves (and he quite often leaves when I get up to speak because 
he usually finds it embarrassing), I would like to say that when he took his place to comment on the throne 
speech, I was convinced he must have had a double-take of Geritol. My goodness, Mr. Speaker, he seemed 
to get so excited and worked up about it. I think that that, in itself, lays credit to the member for Souris- 



 
December 6, 1979 

 
 

 
178 

Cannington (Mr. Berntson) and his speech in this House. Obviously, the Premier was most disturbed. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – It struck a nerve. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: – Struck a nerve, that’s right. 
 
Let me, Mr. Speaker, congratulate the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake (Mr. Hammersmith) for his 
appointment to Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I’m sure that he will discharge his duties in a fair and 
even-handed manner. And let me say again, as I most often do, that there are members on the government 
side of the House that I like to take the time to pay tribute to, members on that side of the House that I 
personally can respect. Yes, Mr. Attorney General know that I have a great deal of respect for him. The 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy), Minister of Agriculture, a worthy members. The 
member for Saskatoon Nutana (Mr. Robbins) a very honorable gentleman with a photographic memory, very 
good at telephone numbers – so am I, I might add . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: – . . . and the Minster for Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington) is a man whom I have 
always found very congenial, and I feel does a good job in his department. And lastly and not leastly, the 
member for Regina-Wascana (Mr. White), affectionately I’ll call him the white knight or the white tornado. I 
feel that he is a very conscientious individual and presents himself well and the case of is party well. Mr. 
Speaker, just in concluding I would like to again express my appreciation to the constituents of the 
Moosomin constituency for the honor that they once again have given me to be able to take my place and 
represent them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just let me make a few brief comments with reference to the Premier. In other speeches in this 
Assembly I have, unfortunately, addressed myself to other members of the government – other ministers – 
and, Mr. Speaker, this year I will not be doing that. I will be addressing my remarks to the Premier. It is the 
captain of the ship . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – The chauffeur. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: – . . . the chauffeur, yes, we could call him that too. Mr. Speaker, the Premier in his 
remarks criticized the opposition for criticizing the government. Surely, Mr. Speaker, he must be failing and 
lacking in his understanding of the parliamentary system. Surely all people and all members of this 
Assembly cannot think alike. If we were we would not be thinking much. Mr. Speaker, I see that he has the 
backbenchers thinking alike. But if he thinks that the members of this opposition are going to think as he 
does, then surely he has another thought coming. Now, Mr. Speaker, another member – I can never 
remember where he’s from – but I’ll tell you what, he is the minister responsible for health. And I would just 
like to tell you, Mr. Minister, that if you ever had an original thought you’d have stretch marks on your brain. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks of some $520 million in profits accruing from the resource industry . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: – . . . $520 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear the Minister of Health 



 
December 6, 1979 

 

 
179 

(Mr. Rolfes) (in past years other ministers of health), speak of how he is paying for the $0.5 billion health 
cost to the taxpayers of the people of Saskatchewan with that $0.5 billion resource money. Then I hear, Mr. 
Speaker, that we are paying $0.5 billion education costs with that $0.5 billion resource profits, and it goes on 
and on and on. Today the member for Yorkton (Mr. Nelson) again stated that they were using three hundred 
and some odd million dollars for various programs, and he didn’t state where the rest was going. They are 
very inconsistent. What, Mr. Speaker, they are attempting to do is to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
they can spend money in more than one place at a time – and they cannot. If you spend that $0.5 billion to 
cover your health costs, then you can’t spend it anywhere else. That’s the type of propaganda, Mr. Speaker, 
that the members of this government and in particular the Premier is trying to do to the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Premier further, in another area, admits his partnership with the 
multinationals. Since I was elected here in 1975, Mr. Speaker, I have heard nothing but criticism from the 
government members to this opposition that we were the friends of the multinationals – that we were the 
friends of the multinationals! So, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to listen to that kind of criticism from the 
government any more because we know now who’s the friend of the multinationals. I hope that bothers your 
supper too, Mr. Premier, as you leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to conclude by saying that the throne speech fails to address itself to four 
major areas that affect the people of Saskatchewan. Four major areas: agriculture, resources, taxation and 
labor problems. Mr. Speaker, those are the four major areas they have failed in. Mr. Speaker, those are the 
four major areas I would like to touch on in my remarks as we resume debate tomorrow. Accordingly, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask this House to allow me to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 p.m. 
 


