
























































Hansard: March 22, 1979


909 
 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 22, 1979 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, through you, I would like to introduce to the 
Assembly, 21 Grade 8 students from St. Luke School in the Regina Elphinstone constituency. They are 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery with their teacher, Jim Frolick. 
 
In the absence of their MLA, Premier Allan Blakeney, I plan to meet them for a question period. 
 
Members join me, I am sure, in welcoming them, congratulating them for their interest and wishing them a 
pleasant and informative visit to the legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw South): — As has been the custom in the past, Regina has superseded 
Moose Jaw on occasion, but I do want to take this opportunity on behalf of the hon. member for Moose Jaw 
North (Mr. J.L. Skoberg), to introduce to the Assembly, a group of some 26 Grade 8 students who are seated 
in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by Mr. Boudeau and Mrs. Bender. I understand that they 
have had an opportunity to do a tour of the Legislative Buildings. I will have the opportunity, on behalf of 
John Skoberg to meet with them a little later. 
 
Mr. Skoberg wanted to express his welcome to this group in particular, and I will have an opportunity to 
meet with them and discuss a few things with them a little later. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you, to 
the members of the legislature, eight young people from the Canora Christian Academy, an educational 
institution there. 
 
Accompanying the young people is their chaperone, Mr. Virgil Hrywkiw. I do hope the group has an 
enjoyable and informative visit while visiting our capital city and the legislature. I will be meeting with the 
group following their departure from the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I am sure that all members of the House will join with me in extending a warm welcome to them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I too, would like to join with the members in 
extending greetings to all of the students who are with us here this afternoon, and in particular, through you, 
welcome students (48 in number) from the Grade 8 class at the Bruno High School in my constituency. 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
910 

Bruno High School comes to this Legislative Assembly, I think, annually now and has for several years. It is 
always a real pleasure to have those students here. I intend to spend some time with them after the question 
period, answering questions that they may have, and I look forward to that. 
 
I would like to have the members in the Assembly join me in extending our greetings to them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Land Bank 
 
MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Kaeding), the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan land bank. On many occasions in this Assembly, 
Mr. Minister, you have stated the purpose of the Saskatchewan land bank to be to assist the young farmer 
who otherwise could not get a start in farming, and to allow the older farmer to retire in dignity. Do I 
properly state your position and the position of your government on that matter? 
 
HON. E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — That is one of the criteria. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, are you aware — and I’m sure you are — that one Senator Hazen Argue 
has in the past three or four years sold a substantial amount of his farm land to the Saskatchewan land bank? 
Are you aware of that? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — No, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t give you . . . I’ve heard that this is a fact. I haven’t checked 
into it. I think that it’s possibly so. 
 

Senator Argue’s Use of Land Bank Money 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A new question. Are you further aware, Mr. Minister, that Senator Hazen Argue, using 
the proceeds of the sale of his land . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take a new question. 
 

Senator Acquiring Land 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. 
Are you aware that Senator Hazen Argue is using the proceeds of this land sold to the land bank to acquire 
more land and thereby, increase his holdings? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what Senator Hazen Argue is doing with the money he got 
from the land bank nor am I particularly interested in that. He can do whatever he wants. If you sell land to 
the land bank, you can do what you want with that money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, I have in my hand a document. 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
911 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Table it. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — That does in fact . . . I will table it, at any proper time . . . that proves beyond any doubt 
that Senator Hazen Argue is in fact, purchasing more farm land in that area. And you say you agree with that 
. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I’ll take a new question. 
 

Abusive Use of Money Received from Land Bank 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Would the Minister of Agriculture not admit that the practice of farmers 
selling their land to the land bank, taking the money and investing in more farm land is in fact, contrary to 
what you’re trying to accomplish and is stopping young farmers from getting on the land and adding to the 
competition for farm land? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, the major objective of the land bank is to try to get land into the hands of 
farmers who do not have the capacity to get into it otherwise. What the guy does with his money after he gets 
paid for his farm, is none of our business. He can buy anything he wants with it. He can go on a holiday to 
Hawaii if he wants to. Are you trying to suggest to us that we should somehow keep track of what everybody 
spends their money on? 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, are you telling this Assembly, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’m going to try to bring the member for Kindersley into order and ask him to 
bring himself into order. He is abusing the regulations and rules by which the question period is run. I will 
advise him, and I’ve tried to impress upon him that he’s out of order, that he should review the rules of the 
question period. I will take a new question. 
 

Buying Land from Retiring Farmers 
 
MR. LANE: — I’ll direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture, and we’re dealing, Mr. Speaker, with 
stated government policy. Will you not admit that if a farmer is to retire, which is one of the goals of the land 
bank system, when he sells for that reason, that in fact he should retire, instead of becoming a competitor for 
the young farmer trying to get on? You’re creating competition by your practice. Will you not admit that? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t accept that at all. Certainly, we like to buy land from retiring 
farmers. But that doesn’t mean we’re restricted to retiring farmers or anything else. We can buy land if land 
is offered to us, and if that land can be used to get another young farmer started, certainly that’s a legitimate 
purpose for the land bank. 
 
MR. R. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, my question again, to get back to this issue, is simply this. Do you 
agree that a farmer should be able to sell his land with a lease back to his children, who qualify because they 
have no other assets, then simply take the proceeds and go and buy more land, to the point where the guy has 
something like 35 or 40 quarters of land that they’re farming? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, again I simply ask the member if he feels that it’s up to us to monitor 
what everybody spends their money on? Is that what you’re proposing, that  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
912 

we monitor what they spend their money on — after they get it, after they’ve sold the farm? We can’t 
prevent a farmer from doing that, anymore than we can prevent him from buying a hotel or anything else. 
 

Answer to Question on PCS Order of Rail Cars 
 
HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this Assembly, the member for 
Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. Messer) took notice of a question from the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) with 
respect to rail cars. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I have it here. I have it, it’s okay. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — It’s okay. The answer is that PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) has received 
all 500 of the rail cars which it had on order, and has 300 additional cars on delivery for the early spring of 
1980. With respect to the trucking, their response was that only very small volumes are shipped by trucks — 
about 15,000 tons in 1978 — and only in cases where the customer in the United States makes the 
arrangements for trucking. 
 

Senator Acquiring Land 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 
Kaeding). Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of the issue that is being presented to him? Is the minister 
aware that what is happening is the farmer, in this case Senator Hazen Argue, is buying farm land today, and 
selling that to the Land Bank Commission tomorrow? Then he leases it to his children, takes the money that 
he receives from the Land Bank Commission, and buys more land. Next year he goes out and he sells that 
land to the Land Bank Commission, rents it to his children. The next year he does the same thing. So it’s 
year after year after year . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the Leader of the Opposition to document for me the 
transactions with Senator Hazen Argue. I suggest that he has not done. He may have sold the land to the land 
bank and leased it back to his son. That’s a legitimate operation. I suggest that he cannot document for me a 
case where that has happened a second time. I’m sure that he can’t. 
 

Land Bank Abuse 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — If I might just direct one question to the Minister of Agriculture 
(Mr. Kaeding). Twice today in this question period in reply to questions from our side of the House, the 
minister has asked for our suggestions. I’ll ask the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, do you not agree as 
the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) has documented and is prepared to document, and table, that there 
are examples in this province of people who are capitalizing and abusing the land bank program. Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the Minister of Agriculture very simply is are you prepared now, in light of this 
evidence, to tighten up the guidelines, Mr. Minister? Tighten up the guidelines and stop this abuse of the 
land bank program on the backs of our prospective young farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
913 

MR. KAEDING: — I think what the hon. member is suggesting is that we document and we keep a dossier 
on everybody that buys land from the land bank, and somehow go around and follow him around and see 
what he does with his money, and I don’t think this party wants to be involved in that. That party over there 
might do that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 

Purchase of Hopper Cars by Canadian Wheat Board 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Minister of Agriculture can’t answer our questions in this 
regard so I’ll direct a new question. A new question to the Minister of Agriculture. As you have stated in this 
House your position regarding the purchasing of hopper cars by the Canadian Wheat Board, being such that 
you are in support of the Canadian Wheat Board purchasing hopper cars for the Canadian National 
Railways — and it has been brought to our attention as indicated by the Canadian Wheat Board they will 
also be purchasing hopper cars from the Canadian Pacific Railways. Mr. Minister, very simply, do you agree 
with that position taken by the Canadian Wheat Board? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Frankly, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board didn’t ask for my opinion. However, 
the Canadian Wheat Board has made the decision to buy 2,000 hopper cars. At the time they made that 
decision, CPR (Canadian Pacific Railways) said that they didn’t need any more hopper cars, that they could 
get along fine with what they have. Since that time they have made a submission to the Wheat Board saying 
that we do need some hopper cars. That’s not surprising either. The Wheat Board has made the decision now 
apparently that some of them will go to the CPR, and that is a decision of the Wheat Board not mine. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The minister did not answer my question. I asked him 
specifically if he agreed with that decision by the Canadian Wheat Board. Do you, or do you not? Simple 
question. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, again I point out that the decision is not mine to make, and whether I 
agree or disagree is not relevant in this particular case. 
 

Purchase of Hopper Cars for Canadian Pacific Railways 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. Kaeding). You 
suggested the other day in the House you agreed with the 2,000 hopper cars on behalf of the CNR (Canadian 
National Railways). Are you now saying you are also agreeing with the producers’ money against their will 
being used to buy an additional 2,000 cars — not the same cars, an additional amount for the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railways)? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say that nor do I think that is a proposition. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Now, if that’s now the state of position by the Minister of Agriculture, what changed 
your mind? Very simply, what changed your mind now with regard to that policy? Is it because the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is opposed to it, which would be a good reason for changing your mind? Is it 
because the Palliser group is opposed to it? Is it because the National Farmers’ Union now has a class action 
case against the rail company? Are these the things that are changing your mind, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t changed my mind about anything. He talked about 2,000 
additional cars. I did not agree nor disagree at any time with 2,000  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
914 

additional cars. We were talking about the original 2,000 cars. 
 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation — Route E 
 
MR. G. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — A question to the Minister of the Environment. Mr. Speaker, in the 
matter of the Cumberland power line, Saskatchewan Power Corporation has commenced clearing of the land 
on Route B, contrary to the recommendations of the Nikiforuk inquiry. Will the Minister of the Environment 
today tell us that his department has ordered SPC to follow the recommended Route E? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I answered this question a 
number of times previously in this House and the answer today is the same as it was then: that when the 
Nikiforuk report was tabled and when we had received it, I granted approval to the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation that they proceed on the modified E Route. However, providing they were unable to obtain the 
additional materials that would be required for going the modified E Route, they then would be able to 
proceed on Route E. That’s the permission they have. They have subsequently provided to me the evidence 
that they were not able to obtain the additional materials required and therefore they are proceeding on Route 
E. 
 
May I suggest that the most recent report does indicate that, with the supervision which the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation is receiving from the Department of the Environment and from the Department of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources, they are not following the direct E Route, but somewhere in between 
‘modified E’ and E on the basis of following the route which is more environmentally approvable or 
acceptable. They are neither on Route E as outlined on the map, or modified E, but something in between 
those two, on the basis of the recommendations of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources and 
the Department of the Environment in order that the environment may be protected and the forest cover may 
be protected in the best interests of the province. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — A supplementary. Are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that this modified Route E is 
going back on to some of the Route B? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, Mr. Speaker, the member obviously doesn’t have a grasp of the outline of the 
various routes. If he has the map, the hon. member will see that there is a common route for the first 10 or 12 
miles. That common route then branches into four or five different routes; one of them was initialled route E. 
The recommendation of the Nikiforuk Report was that they go on the first few miles as recommended as a 
modified E route. 
 
What I am saying is that the approval which we granted to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was that 
they were to take modified E; however, if they were unable to attain the additional materials which were 
required — the anchors which would be required in the more muskeg area — if they were unable to obtain 
those materials they could then proceed on route E. That’s the approval we gave . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I indicated to the hon. member that they are now neither on clearly modified E or clearly E; they are 
somewhere in between the two. They are only about three-quarters of a mile or a mile apart and they run 
parallel with each other. What I am saying is that the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources 
(which is looking after the timber interests and covering off the concern which Professor Nikiforuk had), 
their surveillance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation is that they are not either following one or the other 
but somewhere in between in order that they might proceed on a route 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
915 

which is of less environmental impact than either of the routes. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have a statement from the Saskatchewan Power 
where they have said that, regardless of where the environment department say we are going to go, we’re 
going to go against their approval and go on route E. Now answer this one. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, we have the same kind of a situation coming from the hon. member 
today as we have had from members from that side of the House on many other occasions. We are still 
waiting in fact, Mr. Speaker, for the previous member to table a document that he said he was going to table. 
We’ve talked about tabling documents in this House and never have. The member for Arm River makes an 
accusation that he has either talked to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation officials, or somebody has 
talked to him, saying that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was going to proceed on their route 
regardless of what the Department of the Environment said. Now, I say that the member making a statement 
like that ought to be required, Mr. Speaker, to verify or at least to substantiate what he is saying. There is no 
question about the fact that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is proceeding on the construction of the 
power line in the Cumberland delta on the approved routes. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a supplementary question to the minister. You have 
indicated that we now have a situation where we had a public inquiry into the best route (I might add that the 
minister knows that you can’t table documents in question period, that’s for the Minister of Agriculture); 
we’ve got a situation where we had a public hearing that now has been totally ignored by the Department of 
the Environment; now we have a completely new route chosen by the Department of Tourism, Department 
of the Environment and the SPC, why bother going through the hearing process if you’re just going to do 
what you want to do anyway. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts of life in a democratic society when a government is 
elected, are that there is no question that the government (nor any government) will turn over to a public 
hearing process the entire responsibility for making decisions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Nykiforuk was requested to make a public review, to undertake a public inquiry. He made that inquiry. He 
tabled his recommendations with the government. The government as a result made a subsequent decision 
which followed as nearly and as closely to the recommendations of Nykiforuk as we thought were practical 
and responsible in terms of the government itself. 
 

Government Acquisition of CPN 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the minister responsible for CPN. Mr. Minister, there 
was a rather significant statement as to the government policy on television last night, not by the 
government, I state that. Is the government in fact negotiating with a ‘consortium’ of co-ops to acquire CPN? 
If so, on what terms, and would you table those terms or the position of negotiations to date? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I wish that I could take credit or 
responsibility for those statements, or somehow get Mr. Ron Shorvoyce sitting here beside us to take credit 
or responsibility for us. (It might significantly improve some of the questions and answers given in question 
period.) The answer to the question is that at this stage in the game, there have been no negotiations 
embarked on with respect to the sale or the resuscitation if you will, revival is perhaps a better word, of CPN 
by the  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
916 

government. The situation is that Mr. Strang from Clarkson and Gordon, the Receiver-Manager, has given 
the Northland Banks a copy of his financial look in his capacity as Receiver-Manager of CPN. I now have a 
copy of that report. Frankly I have not read through it yet; I skimmed through it. It has not gone to the 
members of the Cabinet. Nothing will take place until such time as the officials in the Department of 
Finance, my communication secretariat have had a chance to analyse the report, advise me, I have had a 
chance to look at the political options, policy options, then make a recommendation to Cabinet. At which 
time something will take place. 
 
MR. LANE: — Just responding quickly to the minister’s comments about question period. One of the 
criteria for how well the Opposition is doing is when the hacks start bringing out their note pads — I notice 
they are out in droves today and with their note pads taking them down. 
 
My question is, there was some indication that there are people with whom the government or CPN is 
discussing, with a view to the sale of CPN. I will assume and I think the minister will agree, that those 
people must have had access to the Strang report in order to determine the position, the financial position, of 
CPN, or the Department of Finance reports. Would you now be prepared to table those reports in the 
Assembly because I think they are considerably more widespread than what the minister has indicated. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, no one 
has a copy of the Strang report who is an interested purchaser. So far as I know, Northland Bank has a copy, 
the government has a copy, there may be some copies circulated downwards from Northland and downwards 
from the government. But so far as I know, subject to a leak or something of that nature, making it available 
to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . surely that’s not thought to be the government’s ministerial 
responsibility. I mean the receiver manager is an employee of Clarkson Gordon, acting on the appointment 
of Northland Bank, neither of which are government. So, I can only assume that the report has been kept 
confidential and they don’t have it. I’m advised that that is the case. So I believe that any expressions of 
interest — and by the way, I hope there are expressions of interest — belie the argument of the opposition 
which says that the thing is a dud, a worthless waste . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Why was I cut off? I want to know that before the orders of the day . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday last, the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) directed a question to me and I want to read from Hansard. He said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, you’ve refused to 
indicate financial support to the program Project Health. 

 
At that time, I was unable to ascertain which program he was referring to and it’s my understanding now that 
it’s called Project HELP (Home Enrichment and Learning for Preschoolers). That would have been no help 
to me either because now, if I understood, it’s an amalgamation of two former programs. They have in the 
last two weeks called it Program HELP. But anyway, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I took notice of the 
question. I  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
917 

want to inform the member, no decision has been made on funding that particular program. We are looking 
at it right now, but one of the problems we have is that they have requested a substantial increase in funds 
from what we were funding the two programs last year. 
 
MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Supplementary. I did mention Project HELP but it may 
have been taken down wrong, O.K.? I would encourage you to fund this. I think the substantial amount is 
$100,000. Will you see that as help for the retarded children of Saskatchewan in this International Year of 
the Child? I repeat my question to you. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, again, as I indicated to the member, it’s certainly under consideration. But I 
think when a particular organization asks for about a 100 per cent increase in moneys, it is very difficult 
when it comes after the events have taken place as far as budget finalization is concerned. I am looking at it. 
I think it is a good program, but I think I have to live within my ministerial and fiscal responsibilities. 
Certainly it will get serious consideration and as soon as we can possibly find it within our means, within the 
budget to fund it, we will. But I doubt very much that we can fund it up to $100,000. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Apology to Speaker 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I think I owe you 
an apology for making an offhand remark about being cut off. I think I was properly cut off for an extended 
answer to a question and I apologize to you and the members of the House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I might say to the Attorney General, it wasn’t an extended answer. It was lapsing into 
debate. The Attorney General knows well I do not allow that. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — CONTINUING EDUCATION — VOTE 5 
 
ITEM 1 Cont’d. 
 
MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I just want to preface our discussion of the estimates today 
with a few remarks. First of all to the deputy minister: in yesterday’s discussion we were asking a number of 
questions about your position. I want you to understand, sir, that it was in no way directed towards your 
competency but we are wanting to find out for ourselves and the people of Saskatchewan the amount of 
public moneys that are expended at the deputy minister level and at the higher echelons of these departments. 
You heard my introductory remarks, you know my philosophical stance that the money is best spent lower 
down in the level, closer to the student. So I just want to assure you and other members of your department 
that there was no attempt by me or the other members of this party to try and cast any reflection upon your 
competency. I wanted to try to make that point to start with. However, I think there are a number of 
questions that we asked yesterday — things for which the minister, at that point in time, I believe, was 
looking for some answers. 
 
Perhaps you would like to supply some of those at this time, Mr. Minister — answers to questions that were 
left over on Vote 1. I would like to hear these at this time. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I am not quite sure just which questions we were to  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
918 

answer but I will give those which I think we agreed to answer. 
 
First of all, the Deputy Minister’s salary. I think there is some difference here as to what figures we were 
giving and I will, in order to make absolutely certain that there is no mistake, the 1978-79 projected actual 
salary for the Deputy Minister was $45,085. The 1979-80 budgeted salary (that’s what we are talking about, 
the budgeted salary) is $48,460 which includes provision for the 6 per cent economic adjustment, as of 
October 1, 1978 and any amount over and above the 6 per cent, which is discretionary, as I pointed out 
yesterday, based upon perceived performance. O.K.? 
 
That’s the one on salary fringe benefits. I think you wanted to know about fringe benefits. I indicated 
yesterday that fringe benefits were sick leave, group life insurance, pension, vacation, statutory holidays, 
long-term disability insurance, unemployment insurance commission benefits and Canada Pension Plan 
benefits. O.K.? 
 
The Deputy Minister’s car, as in other jurisdictions in Canada, persons at the Deputy Minister’s level, are 
provided with an automobile for performing business travel requirements. The recipient of said automobile 
pays 1 per cent per month of the purchase price of the automobile for personal mileage. The maximum 
purchase price of said automobile is $8,000. 
 
Memberships in organizations — all organizational memberships in the name of employees, including 
deputy ministers are: those directly related to the duties of the employee in carrying out the function of his 
office, or, memberships required as a condition of employment to practice his profession in carrying out his 
duties. Those are the ones that would be paid for him. As we indicated yesterday, there are very, very few in 
this regard. 
 
Attendances at conferences — I think someone asked about attendance at conferences. All meetings and 
conferences attended are directly related to the duties of the employee, including the deputy minister. While 
attending such conferences, the employee is representing the department and has been assigned to attend the 
conference. Compensation for employees attending conferences is set out in Articles 81, 82, 83 of the 
collective agreement, and Regulation 5(4) of the Public Service Commission. The rates are the same for all 
employees. I think those were the questions that you had asked and I agreed to bring answers. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for looking those answers up for us. That helps me 
considerably. I don’t want to belabor the point of cars but one question, there’s a lot of discussion on cars. 
Yes, there’s one question that I was going to ask. In the executive administration branch the deputy minister 
is the only member that has a car. You mentioned something about 40 cars in your department. I’m not 
planning to pin you down on all other 39 but he is the only one in the executive branch that has a car? . . . All 
right fine, thank you. Now I’d also like to just indicate that it isn’t my intention at all to hold up proceedings. 
We have a lot of estimates to go through. As you realize Vote 1 is the one where we get into the wide 
discussion of things and I don’t want to hold these up. I’ll have various questions to ask and so will the other 
members of our caucus as we go to succeeding votes so I would be willing to proceed on at this time. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Yes, Mr. Minister, if you had given it in Hansard yesterday, I 
think we’d have saved ourselves an awful lot of time. Unfortunately, we don’t have the Hansard for today 
and I can’t confirm the figure, but as I understood the figure you gave us yesterday on salaries, you suggested 
$48,640 the ’79-80 budget,  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
919 

right? You also indicated last year it was $42,000 not $45,000. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — You asked the actual. My understanding was what I gave you was the estimated salary, 
yesterday. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Then the ’78-79 estimate was $42,000 is that right? I’m still not clear on it and if you 
can clear that up we’ll move on. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The deputy minister’s salary 1978-79 projected actual salary . . . how much he got, 
$45,085. The 1979-80 budgeted salary, that’s what we’ve budgeted for, $48,460. O.K.? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Where did you get the $42,000 figure? Let me put it to you that way. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That given number was budgeted for last year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . For ’78-79 
what was budgeted for was $42,240. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Now, you budgeted for $42,000 paid $45,000. Will the same thing happen this year 
where you have budgeted for $48,000 and increase it by $3,000 it comes $51,000. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That will depend on the salaries that are negotiated and whether or not he will get the 
performance increment, and I can’t tell you. I’ll ask. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Seeing that we are still on this, has the deputy minister been getting the merit over let’s 
say three years? Let’s go back three years, Mr. Minister, and see if there’s been merit in each case. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I’m a little hesitant here to get up and make a definitive statement but my 
understanding is that it started only this past year. It started only one year ago. He didn’t get it three years ago 
because it just started this past year. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Would it be safe to ask if it’s going to be included again this year? Is this a pattern 
you’re establishing or is it a one-shot thing? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It’s a government policy and I really can’t speak for the entire government here but I 
would think that if we find that the merit performance increment is worthwhile we will continue with it. If 
government decides to cancel it, I suppose some time in the future, that will be the government decision, but 
as far as I’m concerned right now it’s in effect. That’s government policy and it’s not automatic. They’re 
under review and it’s not automatic so I can’t tell you whether he’ll get it or not. I don’t know. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, if the answer had been given yesterday this way we 
would have understood. But I made the point yesterday and was laughed at for making the point. I repeat the 
point that I made yesterday: that, in fact, using the figures you’ve given us, using the projection that perhaps 
there might be a merit increase, we are talking about a 15 per cent increase in the deputy minister’s salary, 
not 6, if you take the two into consideration. And that’s all I have to say on it. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, if I might direct this question to the minister (and, 
Mr. Minister, I think this is a very straightforward question). You make  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
920 

estimates for the expected expenditures for deputy ministers’ salaries. Now you were $3,000 out. You have 
made an estimate now for the next year. My question, very simply, Mr. Minister, what is the criteria by 
which you made the estimate? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It will depend on the salaries that are negotiated and whether or not the deputy minister 
qualifies for the merit increase. That is what it is. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, that really doesn’t answer the question because that was the answer 
the minister gave us when we asked why there was the overpayment to the minister in relation to what you 
had estimated. Now you can provide the same answer to two different questions but there must be some 
criteria by which you make estimates as to what you expect the salaries to be, other than, well it depends on 
what the negotiations are going to be. If it depends on that, then why increase the estimated expenditures at 
all? Why not just leave them as they are? That’s all I am trying to get at, Mr. Minister, you must have some 
criteria by which you make increased estimates or decreased estimates for any expenditures, whether it be 
deputy ministers or what it may be — supply, services, it doesn’t matter. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I’ll read the statement again to the member that I read yesterday. I don’t know if he was 
in the House but fine with me, I’ll read it again. Provision for salary increases in 1979-80 estimates. The 
1979-80 estimates include a 6 per cent provision for salary increases based on the salary schedule in effect to 
September 30, 1978 to cover salary agreements and schedules extending to September 30, 1979. The 6 per 
cent is the negotiated average bargaining unit increase for that period. The 6 per cent is applied to the entire 
fiscal year but covers the contract period for the first six months of the fiscal year. The practice of not 
providing for anticipated salary increases in the last six months of the fiscal year has been continued because 
the new contract for that period is still in the negotiation stage. Also, experience has shown that departments 
are usually able to absorb the added expenses of the contract settlement due to vacancies, filling of vacancies 
at lower steps in the range, etc. Comparison of year to year changes of salary levels in the estimates may be 
affected by several other factors in addition to annual salary increases, such as: changes in the number of 
positions; annual increment; reclassifications; promotions and the appointments at various steps in the salary 
ranges. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
ITEM 2 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Will the minister please explain to me some of the things that are in the administrative 
services, just kind of an outline, Mr. Minister, of what this covers? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — In the Administration Branch, this branch of the department is responsible for 
administrative functions including: accounting; budget preparation and control; personnel transactions and 
records; office accommodations; office services; telephone services; mail and messenger services; and 
information services. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I notice an increase under other personal services here from $24,000 to $35,000, an 
increase of $9,000. Is that another position or is that a negotiated increase? What would that be? $11,000, 
excuse me. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K., we dropped the permanent by one but we have increased the  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
921 

non-permanent from 2.5 to 3.42. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, you dropped your permanent positions by one, increased your costs by 
10 per cent in salaries. Has there been a realignment of positions? Is there more at the top? Why the 10 per 
cent and fewer people? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I said fewer people — more and fewer people. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That includes the 6 per cent increase of course and the increments plus the temporary 
staff . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, yes, from 2.5 to 3.42. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’m not referring to the other personal services. I’m referring to permanent positions. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Last year’s estimate in that particular subvote for permanent positions was 
underestimated once the agreements had been signed. Therefore, it takes into consideration that 
underestimation plus the 6 per cent, plus the increments. Our estimate last year wasn’t high enough once the 
contracts were signed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, last year you say the estimate was underestimated so what was the 
actual? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We’ll have to get that for you. We haven’t got the actual for that branch with us. You are 
only interested in the permanent positions in that particular branch. The officials tell me that they haven’t got 
that with us here; we’ll have to get that. You have to also remember that the year is not over yet. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You indicate that your estimation last year wasn’t correct — this is the second subvote 
here. Were your estimations not correct in many of the other areas last year? Do you feel that your estimates 
are high enough this year for what may be the negotiated increase? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, I know but they should be somewhere close, shouldn’t they? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Well, I think it is fairly close. We’re not that far out. We’re hoping that we’re as close as 
we could possibly be. If you ask me do I think I’m under, my answer would be no. If you ask me do I think 
I’m over, my answer would be no too. I hope we’re right on, but are we right on? I don’t know. It will 
depend on what the final outcome of the negotiations will be. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — One question on that. You say you don’t know; you could be low or high. But if, in 
fact, you know, the average . . . well let’s say the salary of the person you dropped is around $20,000, you 
could be out 20 per cent, on this one subvote 2. The top two or three, could you give us that in salaries in that 
department, please. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The top two or three people? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The actual for Frank May, who is sitting directly behind me here, which is in the 
management series, the actual that he’s receiving right now is $31,368.84. 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
922 

The approved for 1979-80, the estimated, is $33,560. Now, I can only give you one, because the only actual 
one we have in the management series is this one. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — One question on that one point, and very quickly. Was the $31,368 estimated or was 
that actual? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Actual. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That’s actual. What was the estimated? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — $28,710. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — $28,710, which makes an increase of $2,500 over estimated actual. Can the same 
thing happen again this year on the $33,560? Can we expect the same underestimated amount and going up 
again. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I don’t know that. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You don’t know it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Possibly overestimating. 
 
Item 2 agreed 
 
ITEM 3 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, maybe you could rule on this. Can I ask a question on student services 
relating to student loans or does that come up later? From the suggestion made by the chairman yesterday I 
don’t want to miss it. If it has to come up now I’ll bring it up now; if it comes up later I’ll bring it up later. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — This one, student services. Again seeing that you’ve gone up on your figure here on one 
staff member, and your total increase is $72,000, $6,000 in the other expenses, here are a couple of things 
that come to my mind in looking at these. It seems that under other personal services there are a number of 
employees tucked away in here. I don’t know why these figures aren’t given in the columns, you know, if 
they are temporary or whatever you’re bringing in. It would expedite the discussions. There’s $40,000 
difference in the personal services and $26,000 in the other personal services — both increases. Now I 
understand . . . we won’t have to go through the six per cent; we’ll accept the fact that there’s a six per cent 
negotiated increase. I’ll accept that. But could you explain . . . when you went up one person from 13 to 14 
in personal services you went up $40,000. Was that one job and what was the salary of it and what does the 
person do? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That position, of course, is vacant. It is for the coming year. You understand that it’s for 
the coming year and so the estimated salary for that particular position is $24,220. It’s an educational 
consultant in guidance counselling . . . Guidance $24,220. O.K.? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — In what are would this guidance person be working; in what institution or in what area 
of continuing ed? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Co-ordinating services to provide services to the institutes and  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
923 

community colleges throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Once again I’ll go back to the same question I’ve had all along and I’d like the 
answer for that, the top salary paid in that department. Secondly, rather than breaking it down and maybe you 
don’t have these figures at hand, then you’d have to give me the individual, the first one. But could you give 
us an indication of the actual permanent positions for 1978-79 versus the estimated of 224,910. Do you have 
the actual? Can you not hear me? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I didn’t understand the question. Say that again. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K. You’ve indicated, subvote 2 for example, an increase of $2,600 over the 
estimated to the actual, O.K.? Do you have a figure there with you, the actual cost of permanent positions for 
’78-’79 versus the 224,000 estimated? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think the member must understand that we are not at the end of the fiscal year; 
therefore we haven’t got an audited statement. We still have to go until the end of March before we know 
what the actual for this year is going to be. I can’t give you that. I just don’t have it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — If you can answer, why how could you give me the figure of $31,368.84 for subvote 
2 in that one position? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — My staff worked late last night because of the questions that were asked yesterday in a 
management series; they worked those out last night; they projected them and worked them out. Obviously, 
they didn’t work them out for all of the staff. That’s why we can give them to you for the management series. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — All right, I accept that. I know that some of these questions are premature, perhaps, at 
this point. Can we assume that this is a trend, that this increase over estimate is actually the trend throughout 
your department? Yes or no on that. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The answer to that is no because if you took note of the statement that I made before . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . no, no, throughout. I said comparison in year to year changes of salary levels in 
the estimates may be affected by several other factors in addition to the annual salary increases, such as 
changes in the number of positions, annual increment, reclassifications, promotions and appointments at 
various steps in the salary changes and that we can pick many of these up through recruitment and may get a 
lower salary. Through vacancies that exist during the year, we expect to pick those up. So, the answer to your 
question is no, I do not think that it is an underestimate of our salaries, our total salaries. 
 
Our experience in the past has been that most departments can absorb the extra cost that there will be. That 
has been our experience. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I realize that it’s not the end of the fiscal year yet so it’s difficult. I accept that. To get 
back to my original question, will you give us the top salary on that one please? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — $32,428.80. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — And the projection for next year? 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
924 

MR. ROLFES: — Which one? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K. the estimate, the actual and the ’79-’80 estimate? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K. The estimated for last year was — $30,630 and the approved for 1979-80 (or the 
estimated) — $32,840. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — One question again. I would like some clarification from the minister regarding the 
positions and payments made under Vote 3 — student services as it relates to community colleges and why 
that isn’t down under Vote 6? Are there any duplications of services? You have them listed under 3 — I 
realize that students can be in service either to universities or to community colleges, but why are they not 
listed under community colleges — Vote 6? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think it should be understood that this particular individual is not an employee of the 
community colleges or of the institute. He is there to facilitate and to assist these institutes and the 
community colleges and to provide them with services to their students and supplies in regards to career and 
post-secondary training resources throughout the entire province. That’s his job in that particular subvote. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned he was in the co-ordinating and guidance services and I 
understand that. Out of your 13 employees in student services how many, would you say, are in student 
guidance (not the co-ordinating but just the guidance)? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The one that we were just talking about — three. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
ITEM 4 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — On program development, I think the minister must realize from my introductory 
remarks yesterday that this program is certainly one of my main concerns and I see that there is a drastic cut. 
Of course, I must say that if these cuts are justifiable we certainly would be supporting them, but again, 
emphasizing the importance of program in any type of education venture. I would like you, Mr. Minister, to 
explain to me why there is such a drastic cut in program. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — My understanding here is that last year the department gave a high priority in contractual 
arrangements with people from the university and, I believe, from the institutes, in making sure that 
modularized programs, in the various areas, were developed as they were required, and my understanding is 
that we gave that a high priority and spent a fair amount of money in that area. We have sort of caught up — 
we think we have caught up in that area and we don’t need to contract as many projects this year as we did 
last year. That is a reduction of $75,000 in that particular area, so it is not the program that has been reduced. 
It is the contracting of services, of expertised services for the development of those kinds of programs. 
 
Secondly, also in educational supplies, there has been a reduction of $25,000. Those were the two main 
areas. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, contractual programs, if I understand you correctly, you paid out moneys 
to have these programs developed. These programs were developed  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
925 

last year; they are being offered this year. Could you tell me how many of these programs were developed, 
and what these programs were? Were there three or were there 15, and what was the cost, and the names of 
them? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — There are about 23. If the member would like, I can make the page available to him. 
Some are marked with asterisk; those will not be ready until . . . they’re not quite finished yet. The others 
have all been developed and should be ready to go. But I can give you this and save us some time, O.K.? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes. I’ll accept the page. 
 
Mr. Chairman, a standard question again. Would you, just to save the time on the questions, I suppose we 
could get them all on subvotes, the salary of the top position in each subvote; I’d like to have that, estimated, 
actual and ’79-’80 estimate. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Estimated for ’79-’80, $31,110; actually paid $29,362. We estimated $35,930. There was 
a change in personnel there. In ’78-’79, estimated $35,930, but it must be remembered there was a change in 
personnel, O.K.? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Looking over your sheet of programs that you had contractually developed, I see there 
are 23 as you say, and they seem to be, a lot of them seem to be farm oriented, which I’m glad to see. Would 
I be safe in assuming that they cost approximately $5,000 each and were there 23 people that developed 
these or how many people were involved in developing these contractual programs? I want to know did two 
men or five men, or just give me an idea on that please? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I think that we would have to give you a complete answer, as I indicted 
before. Some of these were people from the outside who had the expertise; others were people from the 
universities; others were people from the institute. We haven’t got those figures right here. We would have 
to research that and give you a written answer. We just don’t have that here. Some of that it must also be 
remembered, was also volunteer work so that would take some time to work out. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — That’s fine, Mr. Minister. When you have this, I’d just like to know that. I’ll accept a 
written answer, you know, within reasonable time. 
 
There’s one thing I want to bring up and I don’t know if it should be under program development. It’s 
actually under program. I think it’s a valid question. I’d like to ask it at this time, if it would be O.K., Mr. 
Chairman. It has to do with enrolments and I believe that your people will have to take some time to figure 
these out. It would be in your institutes and universities. Now, I’m not going to pin you down on every 
subject and every class and so on. If this is the correct place to ask it, I will ask it now, if not, I just want to 
make sure I get it in under one of these correct sub headings. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Could you ask those under the institutes under those sub headings as they pertain to the 
institutes and the universities? We would have the figures under those subvotes, as they pertain to the 
institutes and the universities. We would have those figures under those subvotes. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I would be quite willing to do that. I was wanting to know what your smallest classes 
are, your average classes and so on. But if you prefer for me to do it as we go through the institutes, I would 
be glad to do it then. 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
926 

MR. ROLFES: — I would appreciate you just giving us warning and then the officials can get the answers 
when we get there. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Then so that you have some guideline as to what I am looking at: It would be for your 
institutes and for the universities and their average enrolment. I am most interested in your smallest 
enrolment, say classes that are under 10 or something of that nature. The number of those. That will give 
your officials some guideline to go on and it will probably speed up our procedure. Item 4 agreed. 
 
ITEM 5 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Repeat the same question again, the estimated top salary for permanent positions, 
1978-79 estimate, the actual and the 1979-80 estimate please? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Direct or, actual ’78-79, $41,066; estimate, $38,500; estimate, ’79-80, $44,390. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I may be ruled out of order. I will ask the question because I don’t 
know whether I can or not; however I will, at the risk of having the Attorney General losing his cool as well. 
 
Mr. Chairman, yesterday I asked you how your department handled the leasing of the 40 automobiles. You 
were going to give us the answer to that today and you did not. May I ask that question? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Did the minister make a commitment to that effect? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I can’t recall whether I did, but if I did we’ll provide the answer. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Certainly the question would be out of order under this subvote, but if the minister 
has made a commitment and he wants to . . . 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, we’ll provide the answer very shortly. Would the member accept a package of 14 
pages, as an explanation. If you are not satisfied with the 14 pages, I have to read it because of the difference 
in how each one is handled. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I will gladly accept the 14 pages. I will gladly accept all of the records you have in 
your office. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Just the 14 pages, O.K.? 
 
MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Hold it, hold it. Let’s just look at it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Under subvote 5, you have 16 people last year; you still have 16 people. The difference 
there shows about a 15 per cent increase for everybody. Is that what we can expect? Are those the facts? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — . . . the same answer as I indicated to the member before — the salary increases from last 
year, plus the 6 per cent anticipated, plus increments. 
 
MR. SWAN: — That does amount to 15 per cent, and it is a one-year figure that we are  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
927 

looking at — the same number of people. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Two-year. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Well, the difference between the two should only be one year. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I indicated before that it was underestimated last year because of the settlement that was 
made last year. We told you that in subvote 2. Therefore, we had to make up the difference of last year’s 
settlement and what we anticipate this year — the 6 per cent that is included for this year plus the increment. 
That is the difference. 
 
MR. SWAN: — When you were asked if this was going to be a factor that would be appearing in each 
subvote, you said, no. Now you are saying, yes. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I indicated to the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau), that the answer could be yes 
or no. I don’t know whether it will be underestimated by a certain amount or overestimated by a slight 
amount. I am hoping that we would be right on. It may be that in many of the subvotes we will have 
underestimated, but I’m hoping that we haven’t. In some instances you will find that we did underestimate 
because of the agreements that were signed. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I think that we are going to need to identify the subvotes that were underestimated so that 
we can get at what actual increases occurred. That is what we are trying to establish — what type of an 
increase was actually given — and we are not getting a clear answer. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Well, I think I indicated to the members before that we have not reached the end of the 
fiscal year. We haven’t got those figures. If you want to find out what they were in the previous year, then 
we’ve got to go to public accounts. We can find out there. We can’t find out for this fiscal year, but you 
could find out for the previous year by going to public accounts. We don’t have the actual. We have not 
reached the end of the fiscal year. What we worked out for you is the management series (the officials 
worked that out last night because we anticipated you would be continuing to ask those questions in the 
management series, but certainly we can’t expect them to work through all the others). So I can’t give you 
that answer. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I think the minister is probably aware of what we’re trying to 
establish, but just to follow up a bit on the member for Rosetown-Elrose’s (Mr. Swan) question. Could you 
from here — I realize I can’t go back on subvotes 1, 2, 3, 4 — but from here on in could you indicate to us 
the number of managerial positions in each subvote, their top salary — the first position’s salary, as I have 
asked — and the (there was one other question I was going to ask) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, I’ll 
try for that for now and I’ll think of the other one I had in mind. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We’ll supply it to you on each subvote. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
ITEM 6 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, the question I would like to 
direct under this vote is: what, basically, is the function of these 20  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
928 

positions that you have listed under Vote 6? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think if I just read to you the titles of the individuals, they are self-explanatory. There is 
a director of the particular program, a community college program, an assistant director. We have one co-
ordinator. He spends a fair amount of time in the grade equivalent exams, and I think the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) or the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) will be able to explain those. 
We have 12 field representatives — there’s one in each college. There’s a personnel administrator who does 
the accounting, an adult education consultant I who is an assistant in the labor relations field, a clerk steno III 
and a clerk steno II. Those are the people. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, further to the positions, could the minister tell me where 
they are located? Now you say there are 12 field representatives, are those 12 out in the 12 community 
college zones? That’s the first question. Secondly, where are the other employees located? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — In Regina. The field representatives are all in their respective community colleges, 
except the Indian community college. The others are all in Regina in the central office. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, further to community colleges, can the minister tell me if they are 
planning any new programs that have not been announced yet? Might I suggest one in the field of oral 
communication? In our traditional education systems we teach basically reading, writing and arithmetic but 
what we don’t do is teach our young people, whether it be through the institutional system or whether it be 
through the community college, to orally communicate thoughts of people. Sure, Mr. Minister, that’s what 
we have to do here as legislators and it is what we do most in our lives. I am wondering, do you have any 
plans, Mr. Minister, under community colleges, to introduce such a program throughout the various 
community college areas in the province? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think the member has a slight misconception of how community colleges work. We 
don’t direct from central office as to what kind of program they are going to have or not have. We will assist 
them. If they find a need, let’s say in Meadow Lake, if we find that there is a need out there (and the 
community college, by the way, find that there is a need out there) we will assist them in developing that 
program. We’ll give them whatever help we can from central office. But establishing the need in each 
particular area will be determined by the people in that area and by the board of the community college. They 
will decide and that’s why you will find that there is a wide variance in the programs throughout this 
province. That’s the way it should be. That’s the way we wanted it and so I can’t answer that question for 
you. If they think that there will be a real need and if the member, for example, feels there is a need in the 
particular area that he represents, I would suggest that he go to the community college board and make them 
aware of it. If there are sufficient people I’m sure they’ll put on such a program. We’ll assist them to develop 
the program and in the delivery of the program in whatever way we can. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Then, Mr. Minister, am I to assume from your remarks that you are prepared to 
accept any program that the community college board suggests that they want to put in place, in any of the 
community college zones? 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
929 

MR. ROLFES: — If you read The Community College Act, you will find that is their legislative 
responsibility. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, then, you have no control whatsoever as to the kinds of programs that 
they institute? None whatsoever? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Direct control, no; influence, yes, certainly. There are various ways; we can do it through 
counselling, by consultations, certainly through our funding mechanisms. There are ways of doing it, but let 
me say that I, as the minister responsible, would be very reluctant to tell adults in a particular community 
that they don’t have the right to determine the kinds of programs that they think are beneficial to themselves. 
Now, certainly, I think there would be some that maybe would be unacceptable to anyone. I don’t know what 
they might be, but I just don’t think that we would like to tell adults in a particular community the kinds of 
programs that they should have for themselves. Having said that, that doesn’t mean that there wouldn’t be a 
time, if I find a program so unacceptable, that I wouldn’t try to use my influence to convince them otherwise. 
I have not found that necessary so far. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the minister’s concern for the local boards and their 
decisions and his respect of those decisions. It’s rather ironic that we find that evident from time to time, but 
not very consistently from your side of the House. What I am suggesting, Mr. Chairman, I would just ask the 
minister if he would not mind using his influence, possibly, in a few instances at least. I might suggest that 
oral communication should maybe take precedence over belly dancing and the likes of this. Now, that’s my 
suggestion. Surely, there must be some priorities that you have as the head of continuing education. You can 
say that you want to respect those local boards and that you don’t want to interfere with the decisions that 
they make. I suggest to you that there are times when you have to exercise your responsibilities as a minister. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I think if we are going to continue this line of questioning, then we’re 
going to get into some differences of opinion as to how much you’re going to respect local autonomy and the 
decisions of people out there. I don’t know what’s wrong with belly dancing. I haven’t participated in it, but 
maybe some people find it offensive. I don’t know. Let me say this. Maybe if the member for Moosomin 
finds belly dancing offensive . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, O.K., I’m just saying if you did and it was 
offered in the community college in which you are the MLA, I would hope that you would use your 
influence there with the people and say hey, I’m the elected member of the provincial legislature. I find that 
program unacceptable and I would like to advise the board of that and do it in writing. If I find the same 
thing as a minister, I can assure you that I will take whatever means I have at my disposal to make it known 
to the people that I don’t find those programs acceptable. I am not so sure whether belly dancing is offensive, 
or basket weaving, or whatever it may be. I would rather place my confidence in the people at the local level 
until they prove otherwise. I think it is a good concept and their responsibility as prescribed by The 
Community College Act should remain intact. I think the less interference by us here the better, unless we 
find that it is really a particular program that is unacceptable. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Last question, Mr. Chairman. Of course the minister had to attempt to misunderstand 
me. I did not say that I was opposed to belly dancing. Now that is what you are suggesting, that I might take 
offence to it. What I am saying, Mr. Minister, is that there are other worthy programs and that I would like 
you to use your influence if you so choose. But you have reneged on that, you said you’re the MLA in that 
particular community college zone and that’s your responsibility. So I accept the challenge, Mr.  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
930 

Minister, I will take and be responsible for the kinds of programs. If I don’t like a program or want a 
program instituted, I will bring it to the community college’s attention. I don’t require an answer, Mr. 
Chairman. Those are my final remarks on it. His answer might precipitate another question. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I just don’t want to leave those remarks unchallenged. I don’t care 
whether it anticipates another 20 questions. I don’t care, if you make some irresponsible statements like that. 
I simply will not accept them. I did not accuse you of being opposed to belly dancing. You’re the one who 
brought it up. You brought them up as though it may be something in which the minister should intervene. 
You indicated that there should be a higher priority list. I simply say to you, you give me the higher priority 
list and I will do whatever I can to scrutinize it and if I agree with you I will try to put into effect. But, having 
said that, if you have a priority list I think it is incumbent upon you to make that known to the community 
college in your particular area. That’s all I am saying. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I have a series of questions, I’ll take them one at a time. Who is the 
director of community colleges? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Jake Kutarna. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — His salary? The three salaries, the estimate ’78-79, the actual and the ’79-80? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Estimated ‘78-79, $35,500; actual $35,418.98; (Hey that’s not bad you guys, we’re 
getting better) approved for ’79-80, $37,460. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would you indicate also, Mr. Minister, the amount you pay to the field reps, just 
one? If they are all the same, give me one. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — There’s a fairly wide variance between these. These are union-negotiated, as the member 
well understands. But I can give you one at $23,310. That’s maybe a little bit on the low side but about the 
middle. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I just received the information on the automobiles. I have a question 
on that if I may. I don’t quite understand the system you’re using here. First of all you have on the form 
subvote 1, 2, 3, 26, 27 but there is no subvote 27 in continuing education. Then, for example, under subvote 
27, on the field cars you show a mileage of 15,000 miles per car at a rate of 16.8 cents and $2,520 rental. 
Now I can’t believe that each of those gentlemen drove 15,000 miles exactly, so what does that indicate? 
Does that indicate the mileage allowed or does it indicate that they pay over that or what’s your answer? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — These are estimated figures for next year. I am given to understand that they drive 
anywhere from 15,000 to 20,000 miles doing their job. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — These are all right. I should have read that ahead. It’s ’79-80 fiscal year estimates, so 
you’re estimating 15,000 miles per car. Is there a mileage charge to the individuals for personal use? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think the answer is on the third page of the materials that I gave you — personal use of 
a central agency vehicle. 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
931 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — You told me you were going to give me 14 pages but I only received six. 
 
O.K., Mr. Chairman, on the personal use of the vehicle, you indicate here $50.00 per month minimum 
charge for the use of a CVA vehicle to cover travel of up to 298 miles or 476 kilometres. Have you charged, 
in fact, any mileage to any of the 40 automobiles that are being used by your department? Has there been in 
1978-79 any charges made to any civil servant or assistant deputy minister or whatever for excess mileage 
and usage and if so, what amount of money, total — I don’t want a breakdown — just a total? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yeah, I think the member understands that we will not have that figure with us. We can 
get that for you. I’m pretty sure. We’ll have to get it to you in writing. We haven’t got that with us here. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You don’t know whether or not there’s been any charge made? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We’ll try and . . . not even try, we’ll reply to you in writing. I just don’t want to say yes 
and then be committed — Yeah, the minister said yes. We think the answer will probably be yes, that there 
were some but we want to make absolutely certain. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’m surprised you don’t know that answer. However, I accept that. 
But I would like to know the amount of money that was charged out totally, not the breakdown, but the total 
amount that was charged for the personal use of automobiles last year. 
 
Another question that I have here is how many in that subvote are management and again, I can’t recall 
whether you’ve given this answer or not, but do they all qualify for the merit increase in that subvote? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — There are two in the management series. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The second part of my question, do they both qualify for merit increases? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — They are both eligible, but I can’t tell you right now whether or not they . . . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Eligible is good enough. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Okay. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
ITEM 7 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I see in this subvote that your number of employees remain the same. I’m not quite sure 
on what your occupational training is. Are some of these contractual services or programs that you were 
talking about earlier? You could give me a little explanation, Mr. Minister. And secondly, I see quite an 
increase there — of $40,000 — under your ‘other personal services’. I’d like some clarification as to how 
many positions that may be or what would explain that $40,000 increase. 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
932 

MR. ROLFES: — First of all, you asked what this particular subvote is about. I can read it to the member 
very quickly. The occupational training division is responsible for the following: 
 

1. Co-ordination of all training delivered under the Federal-Provincial Adult Occupational Training 
Agreement, including skill, adult basic education, apprenticeship, and industry-based training; 

 
2. Co-ordination of all training delivered through the non-registered Indian and Metis program, 
including the payment of living allowances; 

 
3. Co-ordination of the payment of course costs and living allowances associated with a vocational 
rehabilitation of disabled persons program; 
 
4. Administration of the Trade Schools Registration Act; 

 
5. Negotiations with the federal Department of Employment and Immigration for the provision of 
training under the Adult Occupational Training Agreement. 

 
The increase to the $44,000, I guess you said; there are two temporary positions added. Industrial field 
representatives at $22,260 each. These funds are recoverable from the federal government under the Adult 
Occupational Training Agreement. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — May I interrupt the proceedings of the House and beg leave to allow one of the 
members — I believe it’s the member for Turtleford — to introduce a group of students, please. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford): — Mr. Chairman, with leave of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce to you and the other members a group of some 26 students from the upgrading class in Debden. 
They are attending the Debden Training Centre. They are seated in the west gallery with their teachers 
Shirley Merchak and Mary Gerow. I will be meeting with this group afterwards for some light refreshments, 
pictures and to answer their questions. 
 
They left Debden I understand some time around 6 o’clock this morning and are leaving here after they have 
toured the sights in Regina. I hope that they will have a very good trip home and that they enjoy their stay 
here in Regina. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Committee of Finance — Continuing Education — Vote 5 Cont’d. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The standard question, 1978-79 estimates, the actual and the 1979-80 estimates. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — All right. Budgeted for 1978-79, $30,120, actual $32,935.56; estimated for 1979-80, 
$35,210. 
 
MR. G. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — My question is regarding the adult basic education  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
933 

program. As I understand this, and you were saying that a great number of the chairs, as they call them in 
those classes, are purchased by the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission and by others, by 
industry and so on. Is there any provision in there for certain students to come into that adult basic education 
program directly from the regular school system? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — You know, it could happen, but not very likely. Those who are federally sponsored have 
to be out of school for one complete year (I think you are well aware), and also have to be past the school 
leaving age by one complete year. I’m not sure that it is even worthwhile discussing those who would be 
eligible. Hardly anybody would be eligible. There could be a . . . 
 
MR. G. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — I don’t want to prolong this, Mr. Minister, but I do know, and I 
have known in the past, of cases like this. Now, what I am asking is, is there any provision, or could there 
ever be a provision for that? Because, as you will agree, there are students who, if you put them on the street 
for that year, that interim year in between, it would probably be a bad thing. That is basically what I am 
asking. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It is at the discretion of the college, and if the student is prepared to pay his own fees, or 
her own fees, but it is at the discretion of the college . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That’s right; that’s correct. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 
ITEM 8 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I imagine there is a very simple explanation to this, but you have a vocational centre 
there and you show no expenses for personnel. Are the personnel who are working there shown in another 
subvote? That is my question. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Maybe it is best if I simply read a brief explanation here. This subvote incorporates funds 
formerly allocated to the Prince Albert vocational centre and now disbursed for comparable programs 
operated by the Natonum Community College. Programs facilities are rented from the Prince Albert Public 
School Board, and all personnel services are provided under a contractual arrangement with the board. That 
is why they do not appear here. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — If this is correct, then why is this not shown under community colleges if it is 
community colleges expenditure? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Sorry it took us so long. I’m still not sure that I understand the explanation. But my 
understanding of this particular program is that it’s a specific program for adults which is almost totally paid 
for by the federal government. In other words, moneys will be allocated as programs are offered, and if, for 
example, we didn’t expend all the money because programs weren’t implemented or delivered, then the 
moneys that we would recover from the federal government would correspondingly drop. So it’s a different 
kind of program than any of the others in the community college. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I’ve been quite pleased with your answers up to this point. But in this one, 
when you say you’re recovering the money from the federal  



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
934 

government, you’re budgeting for $875,000. I don’t see any personnel. You tell me it’s under the community 
college. I ask you why you haven’t shown it there. You have to take another run at it to get through to me on 
this one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’re going to have to, that’s for sure. You’ve been good so far but 
this time . . . 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The Prince Albert Vocational Centre was in existence before the community colleges 
were established and because they had a fairly extensive program, the arrangements that were made at that 
time were to keep that as an entity unto itself, rather than amalgamating it with the community college as we 
have done with all of the others. We have left it by itself and have set up a contractual arrangement with the 
community college and the — which board is it — Prince Albert Public School Board and we have left it as 
a subvote by itself. You might say, why the subvote? We have to expend the money first and then have to 
recover it from the federal government. So, we have to have money in there so we can expend it and then we 
recover it from the feds after we expend the money. So if we expend — what have we got in it? — $875,000 
we simply then bill the federal government for it. If we only expend $600,000, that’s what we bill the federal 
government for. But we have to put it in there to give us the authority to expend the money and then we 
simply recover it. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — O.K. on that point. You’ve explained that, thank you. But I still don’t understand the 
expenditure on other expenses and no expenditure on personnel. Explain the personnel aspect to me and I 
think we’ll have it? How many? What were they? I don’t see any people that are teaching there. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — These people are employees of the Prince Albert School Board who are contracted by the 
community college to deliver the programs. That’s why they’re not in here. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I take it then — a yes or no answer — I take it then that those employees 
you contract with the Prince Albert School Board are included in the $875,430; then answer this question. If 
you have $875,430 expenditure budgeted for and you say you’ll get it back from the federal government, 
why is it in here at all? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We wouldn’t have the authority to spend it. How would we expend it; we would have no 
authority to expend the budget. This is not uncommon, by the way. I have quite a few of those in the 
Department of Social Services. You have to have some way of expending the money and then you simply 
recover it again from the federal government. It may take a year or two years before you get it back from the 
federal government. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — One final question. Where does the money come from into the consolidated fund? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Is there any indication anywhere in your department which shows how much moneys, (I 
know it isn’t in the estimates of expenditure,) come into the consolidated fund from the federal government 
for programs that are cost shared? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It’s in the blue book, under consolidated funds summary of estimated budgetary cash 
flow 1979-80; it’s the fourth page. In the estimates on the middle of page 8, under receipts from other 
governments it says, manpower agreements $11,655,600 and the $875,000 is included in that $11 million. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I notice that you have a reduction in staff here in permanent positions  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
935 

of three people — a reduction of $46,000. Does this indicate that your cutback in staff is also a cutback in 
program? What three individuals or three positions, which is what I’m more interested in, are not filled? 
Would you explain the reduction from nine to six please? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — You wanted to know the three positions? O.K. Number one is the instructor technical 
institute counsellor. The reason as I understand it is because student numbers declined by mid May of last 
year and it was felt that a nine month labor service position could cover the counselling load. This labor 
service position has been offered to the same individual. All three I think are the same thing. The next one, 
technical institute for motor vehicle mechanical repair; the third one is for carpentry and pre-employment. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Does this indicate — now what I’m asking is, did you have two people in some of these 
fields or no, or does this indicate that the Meadow Lake Vocational Centre is also having a program 
reduction? When you lost one of these individuals, did that program of, say, carpentry have to be discarded? 
Explain the three programs that these people were in? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — As I indicated to the member, all three positions have been offered to the same people 
again but it is a nine-month service position and we felt that that was sufficient. So the positions were 
permanent and we have now offered them back to the same people again on a nine-month basis and that’s 
when the students are there. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — In this subvote of the other expenses of $79,890, will the minister tell me how much of 
that, the expenses in there, is for supplies or equipment to be purchased for anything in the food services 
area? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — None. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Could you give us a breakdown? You know, I don’t want to prolong this too much but I 
would like a breakdown for the cost of supplies for construction, for the building construction and also for 
the mechanical area? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — For apprenticeship carpentry it’s $4,500 . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. McLEOD: — The reason I’m getting into this a little bit, I find I’m very familiar with this place and I 
just can’t see the expense under ‘other expenses’ once you get away from salaries of $79,000. I would like to 
ask you, and you may want to get that in writing or something easier or send a page over, whatever, of the 
breakdown of those expenses, that $79,000. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I can give you some of those estimates; repairs to equipment, $4,000; travel and 
sustenance, $3,950; CVA (Central Vehicle Agency), $3,200; miscellaneous contractual, $4,450; educational 
supplies, $27,510; educational equipment, $17,040. There is another one for $19,740 but they tell me that’s a 
long list of small items. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Can you give us some example categories so we know what that $19,740 might be? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Telephones, taxes, freight, cartage, express — all those things. 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
936 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, a standard question. The 1978/79 estimate, the 1978/79 actual, and 
the 1979/80 estimates would be what? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — 1978/79, $25,386; actual $28,044.48. There’s a slight problem here. The estimate for 
1979/80 is $27,910. You guys are going to have a reduction. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — It does slightly disagree with the minister. It’s an increase of $2,600 over budget. Just 
to add to that you’re contradicting the statement you made earlier. If the merit increases account for the 
increase from the budget of $28,044 over that, your merit increase will bring it up over the $27,910. I don’t 
know why you’re concerned about it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Oh I’m not concerned. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I can believe it. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — This has to do with the kitchen and cafeteria facility at that vocational school. I would 
like to know the cost of the facility itself and the equipment that’s in there now. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We will have to supply you that in writing. What you want to know is the cost of the 
facility and the cost of the equipment in the kitchen? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. You want to know 
what the original cost was, right? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That’s right, and the equipment that is in there, as it sits right now. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, the reason I am asking this question (and we have talked about program 
development and so on in some of the other subvotes, and I know that). As you are aware, that facility is 
there and it is an excellent facility. There is no question about that. You have indicated that none of the 
expense that you are indicating there in the $79,000 is for food services. I am asking you, why not? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I am not avoiding answering your question as to the original cost. We don’t know. You 
are simply saying, why are we using it. I guess for two reasons. One is the high cost involved in providing 
the food, and secondly, a lack of students. Of course that second one is partially responsible, or most 
responsible for the first one. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — You know what the question that follows from that of course, is (and certainly, Mr. 
Chairman, the facility is there). You say that the high cost of it, but certainly that should have been 
considered at the time to put in a facility like that, and not to be used. You will have to agree, Mr. Minister, it 
is quite a white elephant situation and I am sure you have been in there yourself and have seen it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I have been in there and I wish the member would convey that to DREE (Department of 
Regional Economic Expansion). 
 
Items 8 and 9 agreed. 
 
ITEM 10 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
937 

MR. TAYLOR: — I notice again that you have a reduction of seven people, from 165 to 158 permanent 
employees. My question is, what is the enrolment? Has the enrolment been going down? Are there any 
programs that have been dropped? Also, on your other expenses, a reduction of $219,000 — just an 
indication of, why that reduction? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Would the member, again, be satisfied if we supplied him with information on the 
specific enrolments in the various institutes? We have the information here. I think it would save us a lot of 
time and I think it will provide you with the information that you want. 
 
In regards to Wascana, I think that was answered in question period, yesterday, or maybe in yesterday’s 
estimates, that it is really due to the . . . 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, you are referring to the reduction of the Manitoba dental plan. Are your 
fellows working on the low enrolment classes? I would like that, Mr. Minister. Your average enrolment at 
Wascana. I would also like your low enrolment classes. I have this book, I could send it back. I’m capable of 
reading my own. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I didn’t know you had that. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, I have it and I will have to look through it if that is the answer that I am getting, but 
maybe you can do a little work on these for me, please. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I am not sure if this is what you are asking for, but let me see if we are providing you 
with the right information. 
 
In the apprenticeship programs the average is between 8 and 10; that is right across all the institutes. In 
technologies, the average size is about 25. In some of the other group instructions it could go as high as 100 
students, as for example, in nursing. O.K.? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I asked you a question. Do you have any low ones, something where you have 5 or in 
that neighborhood — 5, 3. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Member, could you just elaborate what you mean by . . . we’re finding it somewhat 
difficult because in some of our programs it’s a one-to-one relationship instructor to student. For example, in 
the dentistry program, it’s got to be a one-to-one and yet it’s not a one-to-one when you take the number of 
instructors and the number of students. I’m not quite sure what you want. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I understand what you’re meaning there and that’s not what I’m driving at. I can 
understand that there’s probably parts of courses and there’s areas where you have to be one-to-one but what 
I’m saying are there . . . Let me put it this way, are there major courses? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — In resource technology, for example, do we have a course like that where there are only 
five students in a class? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Yes. I mean for major courses where there are very low enrolments. I’d say under eight. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Could you go on to another question and another sub-heading. We can’t seem to find 
any. We’ve come down to nine again but if we find some, can we provide the answer to you a little later so it 
won’t hold up everything here? 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
938 

MR. TAYLOR: — That’s why I asked it before, Mr. Minister. I agree that it might be difficult and I’m quite 
willing to wait until our last . . . as long as I know if there are low enrolment classes and what ones they are. 
I think that’s a fair question . . . inaudible . . . That’s fine and dandy with me. However, I do have another 
question here and it’s on subvote 10. Again, the high paid position at Wascana — I suppose it would be the 
director — and it’s a question that my seat mate has been asking about the ’78-’79 estimate, the actual ’79-
’80 estimate for salary, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes. The budgeted for ’78-’79, $37,180. The actual, $35,495.32. The approved for ’79-
’80 or estimated, $39,860. 
 
MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — I asked you a question yesterday, Mr. Minister, dealing with that 
staff reduction that appears and you told me that there were vacant positions involved in the 165. Could you 
tell us how many vacant positions, and if there were vacant positions in the 165 and you had budgeted 
$3,151,000, how many dollars were left over because of the number of vacancies? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That’s a rather difficult question to answer because of those positions that were vacant, 
for part of the year some weren’t vacant and some weren’t filled immediately. So at the end of March we had 
five positions that were vacant but that doesn’t mean that they were vacant all year. The department, also, 
(because we were going through budget preparations and there was a clear indication that we would have to 
give up some positions) was, I suppose, wise enough not to fill those positions. If you want the actual man-
months that were either put in or that were vacant, we would have to calculate that, you know, how much 
time one person spent and how much time another spent; we’d have to add those up. The other thing is we 
can’t give you the actual figure because the fiscal year isn’t over yet. That ends in another week or so. 
 
MR. SWAN: — The reason I’m asking the question is because I’m concerned when you show an estimated 
number of posts and when I asked you the question yesterday in one particular subvote you said there were 
10 positions not filled. Then you come across and show a fairly large increase in salary. You know, 10 
positions not filled should have amounted to a couple of hundred thousand dollars and it doesn’t show up 
and that’s what I’m trying to get at. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — There is a reduction in Wascana and again the member ignores the point that I made that 
some of these ten positions should be $200,000. You are assuming that they were vacant all year. I just made 
the point that some were not vacant all year. They became vacant towards the end of the year. Because we 
were in budget finalization and the department knew they had to reduce staff, simply didn’t fill those 
positions, and kept them vacant, so that as of March of this year, those positions are vacant. Rather than 
hiring people and having to let them go, we just didn’t fill them. That’s the explanation for it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, with 158 permanent positions budgeted for, can you tell me out of the 
158 how many are management and out-of-scope, please? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I can tell you there are two in the management series, that’s the principal and vice-
principal, but I can’t tell you just how many are out-of-scope. We’ll have to look that up. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, if the minister will get me the information, I would  



 

March 22, 1979 

 
939 

appreciate it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, we will do that. 
 
Item 10 agreed. 
 
ITEM 11 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Again, on the permanent positions, I see a reduction of 11. I know you’ll be working out 
the enrolments for me into those classes, so I’ll expect this later, but what positions were deleted from 
Kelsey? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — One position terminated and that was an instructor in renewable resources. These others 
were all vacant positions: renewable resources, two in recreational technology, three in the nursing assistant 
program, four in diploma nursing, one in secretarial services, and one medical lab technologist, I guess it is. 
Those were the positions. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I’m very interested in the first one in renewable resources. You said there was a position 
terminated. Now, I’m not sure if that means you let someone go, or if you deleted that position. In my 
experience with the graduates from the high schools who have wanted to get into renewable resources 
there’s been a tremendous waiting list. It’s one of the most popular courses, I believe, in your institute, and 
why would you be cutting back? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It is a very popular program. I remember my days as a high school counsellor and it was 
a very popular program. At that time, seven, eight years ago there were lots of jobs available. There simply 
aren’t jobs for the graduates, and we don’t have sufficient jobs for the number of graduates that come out of 
the school. That is why it has been decreased from 96 to 72. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Your waiting list of students wanting to get in is going down too. This has been 
transmitted to students, has it? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It’s been transmitted to students but as I indicated, it’s still a very popular program. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Perhaps we should have a word or two with the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources (Mr. Matsalla) to create a bit of employment in this field. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The same question, the ‘78-79 estimates, the actual ‘79-80 estimate, and also the 
number of management or principals in that one, an out-of-scope which you’ll have to get me later. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Two in the management series. The highest salary there budgeted for ’78-79, $37,120. 
The actual for ’78-79, $39,352.08, and the estimated for ’79-80, $41,570. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Regarding the nursing, you mentioned three positions in nursing and I think one in 
diploma nursing. It seems strange to me that we’d be cutting back in nursing programs. I understand that 
Wascana is being expanded and the southern part of the province is taking their training in Wascana, but I 
would think there’s quite a demand for nurses. Would you explain why the nursing program has been cut 
back? 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
940 

MR. ROLFES: — Again, it’s the same thing. We do have a surplus of nurses in this province, and we have 
cut back in the number of positions available at the institute. While I’m up on my feet, Mr. Chairman, I think 
I can provide the member with the low enrolment classes. We can’t come down to five but surveying, I’m 
told, is eight, painting and decorating, eight, information retrieval program, I hope that’s what it says, eight. 
That’s at STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute). In Wascana, operating room nursing, nine, health record 
technology, 15 and survey, 87. In Kelsey, chemical technician 14, plumbing and gas fitting 14. Sorry we 
couldn’t get down to five. 
 
Item 11 agreed. 
 
ITEM 12 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I see there is just a reduction of four, which in proportion to Kelsey seems to be fairly 
well in line. Again, Mr. Minister, what four positions have been deleted at STI (Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute)? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Clerk II, general services, an instructor in machine shop, an instructor in educational 
staff development, and an instructor in welding. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I am not very clear on what the educational staff development officer is. Could we have 
a little clarification? It seems strange to me. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It is in-service training. Very often, as my people tell me, we recruit fairly heavily from 
industry itself, but these people have never taught before. They are experts in their particular field. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, standing question — 1978-79 estimates, the actual, and 1979-80 
estimates? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Budgeted ’78-79, $33,184; actual for 1978-79, $35,107; ’79-80, estimated $39,852. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, has a decision been made on a merit increase on that one already? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Can I provide you with a breakdown on that and the answer to your question is no. But I 
would like to give you a breakdown on that one. We do have some effective figures on one that one. But the 
answer to your question is no. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Are you providing the breakdown today or tomorrow? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Tomorrow. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Fine, because it’s certainly out of line. If you don’t have the answer, then I want the 
answer for it. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We’ll get you the answer. 
 
Item 12 agreed. 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
941 

ITEM 13 
 
MR. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Yes, in this one I see drastic cuts and they may be very 
justifiable. Again, I would like a little explanation of just what this is and as you can see, from $255,000 to 
$60,000 is a drastic cut and there’s nine people that have been let out. I’d just like a general explanation on 
all three topics here, Mr. Minister, please. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K. It’s government efficiency. No, really, on this one, when the Science Policy 
Secretariat and the Science Council were established back in 1974-’75 — I think it was ’74 and brought in in 
’75 . . . it had been the hope of government that we, the Science Council and the science secretariat would 
keep the government abreast of various science policies and science technologies and research that the 
government could take advantage of in the various areas and pertaining to each department in the 
government. We have found over the last three or four years that this really wasn’t happening, and I’m not 
blaming anybody in this particular regard, but I think we found ourselves that it wasn’t as valuable to 
government as we had hoped it would be. It may have been that rather than the science secretariat and the 
council, in keeping government abreast on various research and technology that the government should be 
aware of, they got themselves involved in rather in-depth research and we felt that there were other personnel 
and other departments in government that could give us that kind of research. So, we finally came to grips 
with it and said, let’s maybe, start over and see if we can’t come up with a secretariat and council that would 
keep this government abreast of research, not just in Saskatchewan but in North America and in the world, 
particularly with the economic development in uranium, potash, and heavy oil. What we have done is 
reduced the secretariat. We have also reduced the council and have taken measures to put people on the 
council who are experts in their particular area — in other words, scientists or economists who are experts in 
their area. 
 
What we’re going to be doing in this particular year and hopefully in the future, if it’s effective, is to second 
staff from various departments who can be used by the assigned secretariat to help it accomplish its 
particular goal. I’m hoping it will be effective and if it is I’m sure we’ll find some expansion in future years 
and further development in this particular area. 
 
MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Thank you for your explanation of what can be classified 
as rather a faux pas government, I imagine. I understand that this was basically to keep you abreast of 
research. You admitted that it didn’t do this. I compliment you on your efficiency. If it is not a functioning 
organ, then it should be dropped. When you set this up, did you not realize that this was part and parcel of 
the university’s life and that there’s good research going on there and perhaps we can use the university? 
Maybe you did consider that. I’m not saying you didn’t. 
 
I detect in your words a little bit of doubt about the future. You said ‘if effective’ and ‘I have some doubt’. 
That’s fine. I’d like to know who the two people — I’m not interested in their names, Mr. Minister — I want 
to know their fields of expertise. It appears you kept two people on at salaries of $30,000. That would be the 
answer I would require. In what field of expertise are the two remaining? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I’m sorry. I should’ve introduced the gentlemen beside me, Dr. Leon Katz, a well-known 
physicist. He is certainly well respected, not only in Saskatchewan but in the world. He is the director who 
has been kept on, and a stenographer who will be assisting him. 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
942 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, there are two positions. For the top one again, will you give us the 
1978/79 estimate, the actual, and the 1979/80 estimate please? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I should have mentioned probably, Dr. Katz’s term comes to an end at the end of July, 
the 1st of August. He is on a contract basis with us. His approved salary last year was $48,000. We have in 
the budget $46,000. That’s an estimate. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You mentioned that you were hoping to second people from other areas, would they be 
paid out of continuing education or would they be paid in the area from wherever you’re planning to get 
them? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — From wherever we are planning to get them. 
 
Item 13 agreed. 
 
ITEM 13(2) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There is a second part to Item 13. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I would like to ask a question. Where did this go? Has it been transferred to another 
department? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It went to the communications secretariat and I believe that comes under the Attorney 
General’s department. 
 
ITEM 14 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — One question here, Mr. Minister, I know you have a bill before the House to create a full 
time head of the University Commission. I see the increase here is $56,000. My question is how much of this 
$56,000 are you budgeting for this full time head of the University Commission’s salary? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I want to apologize to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley and 
possibly to the House. I think I misled him the other day in question period. I discussed it with him and 
certainly it was not intentionally done. When I said it would cost us $20,000 to $30,000 this was a 
misrepresentation because we already have a full time University Commission chairman and his salary is 
whatever we have in the books here, $50,000. What the bill that I’m bringing in does is to appoint the 
chairman for a period. 
 

MR. TAYLOR: — Well, then I’ll go back. I’m glad you indicated that his salary is $50,000, which is rather 
staggering, but are you planning with this full-time open-ended job that you are planning to create, is that 
salary going to be $50,000? 
 

MR. ROLFES: — No. My understanding is that the university commission determines the salary of the 
chairman, except on the original appointment that was $50,000, which was an OC, the commission 
determines his salary. 
 

MR. TAYLOR: — I’ll accept that but if you’re creating a new position now that’s a different position than 
you have there. Then, on the initial appointment I’m sure that there’ll be an initial salary. That’s what I’m 
asking. What is this salary? 
 

MR. ROLFES: — I’m sorry, but the member does not understand. The new legislation that is put in does 
not establish a new position. That position is there. It simply gives us 



 

March 22, 1979 

 
943 

the authority to extend the chairmanship of the commission for longer than one year, so it is not a new 
position. The position is already there and when he was hired his salary was $50,000. The commission now 
determines, or determines at that time, what the salary of the chairman will be, and it is not for us to 
determine here. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You’re saying that his position when he was hired was $50,000. That doesn’t mean that 
the position at this time is $50,000. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — He was hired July 1, ’78 I believe so I would assume that his salary is $50,000. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — On this we could maybe talk a little further. Is it your intention, in your new bill that 
you’re drafting there, to extend it as we say open-ended to keep this same person in? It’s just giving him an 
open-ended contract? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — His appointment is subject to the lieutenant-governor in Council. Is it our intention to 
keep this particular gentleman in his position for the present? Yes, it certainly is. I think, again, he’s a well 
respected individual. I have had the opportunity since I’ve been appointed as Minister of Continuing 
Education to meet with Dr. Bill Sibley, and I would hope that more members in this House would be able to 
meet him because he is, I think, a very respected educator in Canada. I’m very pleased that we have him as 
chairman of our commission. 
 
Items 15, 16, 17, agreed. 
 
ITEM 18 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Just a little explanation here — some of those, I understand, must be the institutes. 
Would you give me a little elaboration, Mr. Minister, on which these are? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Federated colleges. For example, Campion College and Luther College, St. Thomas 
Moore College in Saskatoon; the affiliated colleges and they would be Athol Murray College, Wilcox; the 
Canadian Theological College, the College of Emmanuel and St. Chad in Saskatoon; Lutheran Theological 
Seminary in Saskatoon; St. Joseph College, Yorkton; St. Andrews College, Saskatoon; St. Peters College in 
Munster and the Western Christian College in Weyburn. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, is this also where you grant to the schools — for 
example, in my own constituency we have many Mennonite high schools and so forth — is this the grant 
area or is that education? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That’s education. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Fine. 
 
Item 18, 19, 20, 21 agreed. 
 
ITEM 22 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Just an explanation from the minister again, i.e., where are these traded out occupational 
training outside centres? What ones are you meaning there, Mr. Minister? 



 
March 22, 1979 
 

 
944 

MR. ROLFES: — Those are almost exclusively community colleges — there are some in the institutes and 
some in private trade schools and some in the universities. But mostly they’re in the community colleges, 
almost exclusively, community colleges. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Again as to your grants to community colleges. Does that mean that there are more 
moneys to community colleges than Item 17 shows? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — These are contracts that we have with the community colleges, where they deliver the 
adult basic education programs, the skill upgrading programs and the NRIM (Non-Registered Indian Metis) 
program. That’s under the Occupational Training Act. Okay? 
 
Item 22 agreed. 
 
ITEM 23 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — There’s a slight reduction here. Where is this training taking place and why the slight 
reduction? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We have been very successful in this program over the last few years, and we’re catching 
up. There have been fewer trainees in this particular area and it’s levelling off. Last year, we had 625. We are 
anticipating about 585 this year. 
 
Item 23 agreed. 
 
ITEM 24 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — This is the one I had asked the minister about some time ago. I think he knows what’s 
coming up and he promised me an answer. I’ll refer you to page 10 of your document here — Student Aid 
Fund — and there are two items here that are a concern to me. The first one says loans written off $5,935. I 
would like to know why these loans were written off; how many of these loans are written off? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I have again three pages here under the following heading, ‘Accounts Receivable’. 
Accounts receivable includes Saskatchewan student loans, Saskatchewan student bursaries repayable by 
default, teacher training loans, emergency loans, interest on loans, accounts receivable March 31, 1978, and 
then summary of loans receivable March 31, 1978. I have three pages of explanation here. If that is 
satisfactory to the member, I’ll simply turn it over to him. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I don’t think we need three pages to explain why there are loans of $5,000 written off. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. We have supplementaries; we have heritage fund to cover yet under 
this. I think that it now being 5 o’clock, I’ll leave the Chair until 7 o’clock. 
 


