



















































Hansard: April 23, 1979


1919 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 

April 23, 1979. 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. D.F. McARTHUR (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, Mr. Whelan, 

who regrets very much that he was unable to be with us this afternoon at this time due to another 

engagement, I’d like to introduce to you and to this Assembly 52 Grade 8 students from Coronation Park 

School in the west gallery. These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Forrest, Mr. Klempner 

and Miss Thompson. I’m sure all members will join with me and on behalf of Mr. Whelan in wishing 

these students and teachers an enjoyable afternoon at the legislature as well as an educational one. I look 

forward to meeting with the class at 3:00 p.m. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you and to the House a visiting couple from the province of Alberta, the Minister of 

Government Services, the Hon. Steuart McCrea and with him Deputy Minister of Government Services, 

Mr. Jack Kyle. Some members on this side of the House will recall when the deputy minister from 

Alberta was the deputy minister of public works in the province of Saskatchewan in the mid and latter 

1960s. My deputy, Mr. Foley, is giving them something of a conducted tour of the Legislative Building 

and they have shown a degree of interest with the refurbishing that has taken place in our Legislative 

Building. I’m sure that all members will want to join with me in welcoming them to the province of 

Saskatchewan and to our Legislative Building. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

DIRECT BILLINGS — SASKATCHEWAN DOCTORS 
 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct my question to the 

Premier. The Premier will be aware of the comments made by Dr. Murray Fraser, Dr. MacRae and Dr. 

Kendall at the Saskatchewan Medical Association (SMA) meeting. He will also be aware that Dr. Ernie 

Baergen of the SMA stated that the minimum number of doctors who were selectively direct billing in 

the province was 30 per cent and that it was more likely to be closer to 50 per cent. Is the Premier (a) 

aware of the confrontation that has been developed between the SMA and the Government of 

Saskatchewan by the Minister of Health; and (b) if he is aware of this confrontation atmosphere, is he 

prepared to do anything about it? 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am aware of no confrontation atmosphere 

between our government and the SMA. We are aware of some difficulties but I would not characterize 

them as confrontational. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1920 

MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier inform this Assembly and 

the people of Saskatchewan what he intends to do about the fact that seemingly all of the leading doctors 

in the SMA and those who are elected to office with the SMA continuously refer to the confrontation 

attitude? What is he prepared to do about this attitude on the part, at any rate, of the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association. What is he prepared to do about that, because they believe there’s a confrontation 

attitude? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to do anything with respect to the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association’s views. I think they are well able to formulate their own views without assistance 

from me. I would have thought, however, that our best course of action and the one we propose to follow 

is one whereby we will attempt to minimize any friction between ourselves and the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association, and to take such steps as appear both reasonable, and at the same time directed to 

have the patients of Saskatchewan protected from uncertain billing practices which may adversely affect 

them. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Final supplementary question. Mr. Minister, would the Premier not agree that the 

patients today are certainly not being protected from that unfortunate atmosphere in Saskatchewan? 

Would the Premier also not agree that the attitude of his minister and of the head of MCIC (Medical 

Care Insurance Commission), Dr. Penman, are such that this confrontation attitude does exist? Would 

the Premier not agree that they certainly believe the confrontation attitude exists? Would the Premier not 

agree that the only possible course of action for the Premier of Saskatchewan to follow given his 

statement that he wants to protect the citizenry of Saskatchewan from this uncertain future, is to fire the 

Minister of Health (Mr. Tchorzewski) and fire Dr. Penman? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I would not so agree. 

 

GOVERNMENT CHARGE FOR SANDBAGS 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, last week in 

question period I attempted to receive some acknowledgment of responsibility for direction from a 

minister on that side of the House in making decisions in the flood down in the Estevan area. The 

Government of Saskatchewan is charging the people for these sandbags, 25 cents a bag. Now, Mr. 

Premier, don’t you think this is kind of rubbing salt in the wounds and this certainly should be in the 

SGIO policy, charging for these sandbags? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I’ll ask the minister in charge of Emergency Measures Organization (EMO). The 

minister of sandbags will reply to you. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I think that the policy of 

the Emergency Measures Organization has always been in fact to charge for the sandbags, both with 

respect to the municipalities and with respect to the application to personal property. What the 

Emergency Measures Organization does is to make sure that there are sandbags available and that in fact 

is what it has done, and is seeking to do. As you know, additionally, grants are made to Emergency 

Measures Organizations within the communities to maintain an organization there, but with respect to 

the issue of sandbags the policy that we have had in the past is continuing so far as this year is 

concerned. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1921 

MR. LARTER: — Supplementary to the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. MacMurchy). Mr. 

Minister, in spending some time . . . (inaudible interjection). . . pardon me, Mr. Speaker. In spending 

time in Estevan over the weekend, Mr. Minister, I found that there are no EMO (Emergency measures 

Organization) people in place until today. Today, I believe, you have a man going down from EMO, but 

tonight we should hit the 1976 flood level and I find it very concerning we don’t have anyone that will 

make a decision down there. The R.M. won’t make a decision, the city won’t make a decision and, I 

think, this is really a deplorable situation because in one instance there are 120 people behind a dike on 

the river. I think this is very, very urgent. Anything could happen to these dikes. Don’t you think there 

should be ministerial responsibility in a place like this? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Minister, I think looking at the broad area of the flooding problem, we see 

some relief, particularly as it relates to Moose Jaw where there was expected fairly severe flooding. 

That’s not going to be the case now as it appears. In Regina, the focal point is now the Souris area, 

which is immediate, and the northeast and the Carrot River area, which is not so immediate. What has 

happened is that the EMO’s have been able to therefore now focus their attention on the Souris area, 

particularly in the Estevan area which, indications are, will receive the most flooding. And as a result, as 

the hon. member points out, Mr. Speaker, an emergency operation centre has now been established at 

Estevan. The hon. member will also know there remains in place some significant diking as a result of 

the 1976 flooding and it is felt by emergency measures people, working in the Estevan area now, that 

some additional sandbagging on top of those dikes will prevent what we would call very serious 

flooding; there will be some flooding but, with the application to the given situation, it will not be as 

severe as it might have been. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Final supplementary. Mr. Minister, I agree with you that there does have to be some 

sandbagging done. The EMO office is not being set up until this afternoon, so it hasn’t been done 

previously, but would the Government of Saskatchewan give me the responsibility of making some 

decisions down there? I guarantee I’ll make decisions, and they’ll be ones that will protect the people in 

that area! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Minister, I think, looking back over the more recent years of flooding in 

the province of Saskatchewan (and it has been relatively severe in the latter years compared to the past) 

in that given situation, the present responsibility has been left with EMO (Emergency Measures 

Organization) and I think they have done a pretty good job. I think the director of EMO (Mr. Eaton) is 

very competent to work with the people in the Estevan area in terms of getting the matter in hand. He 

has had the ability to do that in the past. I anticipate he will handle it again and therefore, I feel confident 

in his ability, working with the people in Estevan and the councils there, that the job will be done. 

 

NORTHERN HELICOPTER SERVICE CONTRACTS 

 

MR. J. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan (Mr. 

Byers). 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1922 

Mr. Minister, is it true that your department is in dispute over awarding contracts for helicopter service 

in the North in the 1979 season? 

 

HON. N.E. BYERS (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any 

such dispute. 

 

MR. GARNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, have you awarded the contract for the 

1979 season yet? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. member would be more specific. Is he referring to 

helicopters? His question was, has the minister awarded any contracts for this season? His question did 

not refer to helicopters. He did not say that. 

 

MR. GARNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since the minister is not up in northern 

Saskatchewan, I guess it doesn’t matter, but helicopters are what they use for planes up there (outside of 

other planes). Mr. Minister, have you or your department awarded contracts for the 1979 season for 

helicopter service in the North or the Department of Northern Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. BYERS: — The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has awarded some contracts for this 

season. 

 

MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, is it not true the contract was awarded in 19 . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I will take a new question. 

 

HELICOPTER DISPUTE 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Is your department in dispute over a helicopter contract for the year, 1979? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the former questioner I was not aware of any dispute 

existing. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — A supplementary. Mr. Minister . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — A question to the Minister of Northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Have you notified an individual in the helicopter business in the northern part of Saskatchewan that you, 

personally, would be meeting with him to discuss the dispute in the helicopter service? 

 

MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, no. 

 

CLAY REPORT RE CULTS IN SASKATCHEWAN 

 

MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1923 

of Education. 

 

Is your refusal to provide me with the requested copy of the Clay report on cults in Saskatchewan an 

indication that the spread of cults is a serious problem in the high schools of Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education): — No. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — A supplementary question. Why will you not supply me with the report? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: —It was written by the author under the assumption that the report would be 

kept confidential and that is the position I have taken. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — I would like to know what is in the report that requires this degree of secrecy, but a 

second question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In view of the fact that Clay stressed the need for prompt initiation of information programs in 

Saskatchewan schools, what action is your government prepared to take in preventing these cults from 

spreading through the schools of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, government policy will be announced in due course. 

 

IMPORTING HEIFERS FROM THE UNITED STATES 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Is the Minister of 

Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture now into the business of importing Holstein heifers from the 

United States? Is there any reason why you are not bringing Holsteins in from other parts of Canada and 

why have you gone to the United States where the prices are much higher than the Canadian prices? 

 

HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure that the member is 

accurate in that we are in the business of importing heifers from the United States. I know that the 

Market Development Fund is looking anywhere that we can get breeding stock which is good quality 

breeding stock. I suppose that in doing so they have probably looked at the American market as well. So 

we are certainly not dealing exclusively with the American market. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Then why is a note from Mr. Dave Ewart of your 

department has gone out to the people that test the milk to inform them to advise farmers who are on 

tests that the Government of Saskatchewan will have Holsteins available to them for the price of 

approximately $1,700 to $2,000 if your department is not in the business, as you indicate? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, I did not say that we were not in the business. We are attempting to 

find livestock for people who want to go into the dairy business. I think that is a good activity for our 

department to be in. I think it is important for us to be able to get these kinds of livestock to our 

producers. We have a need, in Saskatchewan, for about 75 new producers. We think that any effort we 

can make to help the farmers get the stock they need is a good effort. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — A supplementary. Mr. Minister of Agriculture, is it not true that you 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1924 

have driven more than 75 producers out of the province of Saskatchewan by demanding certain 

standards be met in certain areas and allowing other areas to people not to meet the standards, therefore, 

you have caused the depletion within your own department? 

 

MR. KAEDING: — . . . a false statement. The standards we have in the province are standards which 

are set for the whole province; they are set in consultation with the dairy industry. The dairy industry has 

been in full consultation with the department with regard to setting standards and it was at their request 

some of these standards were set. I think for you to suggest that is driving our producers out of the 

market or out of production is not a reasonable statement. 

 

DISCREPANCY IN INTERIM FINANCING FOR SASK POWER 

 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. 

Minister, about two years ago the Department of Finance arranged some interim financing in the United 

States through the Nassau Branch of the Chemical Bank of New York, for Saskatchewan Power, for the 

purchase of a drag line. That note was for $44.5 million and was questioned in the House in this session. 

You were asked what the status of that note was. You replied that the note was now $48.5 million; it had 

been rolled over on April 4 and was due on September 29. Can the minister explain the discrepancy of 

$44.5 million last year and $48.5 million at this point in time? 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the detail but will take 

the question as notice. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. For the benefit of the Minister of 

Finance, perhaps I should inform him that it’s a currency differential that has cost you $4 million . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take a new question. 

 

BEAVER RIVER — EFFECTS OF HEAVY OIL PROJECT 

 

MR. G. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Environment. Mr. 

Minister, I’ve had a number of concerns expressed to me by ranchers along the Beaver River in my 

constituency, regarding the possible effect of the Esso resources heavy oil project on the flow pattern in 

the Beaver River. Will you inform the House as to the information you have now regarding the effect of 

this project on that river, in view of the fact that waste water from their steam injection process will be 

flowing into the Beaver River? 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of any 

definitive or conclusive decisions that have been made with respect to the flow or with respect to the 

effects of that flow on the Beaver River. I am aware the Department of the Environment made a 

presentation to the Alberta energy control hearings that were being held in Cold Lake but, with respect to 

the absolute effect, there has been no decision made at this point in time, that I’m aware of. 

 

MR. McLEOD: — A supplementary question. Mr. Minister, could you give me some indication as to 

what you based your information on to present the brief to the hearings in Alberta? In other words, what 

study was done and to what extent was it done in that 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1925 

area? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Department of the Environment was responding to the 

environmental impact assessment that was done in the area. It was responding to that report but has gone 

no further (in my understanding at least) in attempting to determine what that impact will be until they 

know what in fact will be done at Lloydminster and those points related to the heavy oil industry. 

 

There could be an accumulative effect which is being considered but, until one knows all the 

implications of the proposal in the project, no conclusions can be arrived at. 

 

MR. McLEOD: — I just have one further supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and I would bring to your 

attention it has nothing to do with the Lloydminster project. It’s the heavy oil at Cold Lake, Bonneville 

area in Alberta, mainly. This question may be as well directed to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 

Resources (Mr. Matsalla). It has to do with the Waterhen River. 

 

As you will know, the proposal is in place. There is certainly no indication it won’t happen that way, that 

is up to 600,000 gallons of fresh water will be drawn from Cold Lake to be used in the steam injection 

process. I would like to know also what effect this will have on the Waterhen River, because the Cold 

River and the Waterhen River run through Meadow Lake Provincial Park, so will you give us some 

indication as to that as well? 

 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have attempted to point out, that is the proposal which 

is being made. I am not aware of a decision being rendered as yet as a result of the public hearings. The 

Department of the Environment made a submission to that public hearing process and attempted to 

express our concern at what the potential effects would be on the Beaver River and Waterhen River as a 

result of that proposed withdrawal of water from Cold Lake. But there has been no decision rendered 

which I know of that has come down as a result of the public hearing process. I don’t believe it is a fait 

accompli that that will be done. It will be done as the member suggests. I have nothing further, really, to 

report to the member. 

 

LIMITATIONS OF WASCANA CENTRE AUTHORITY 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, a few days ago I took notice of a question 

from the hon. member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane), respecting the question of the Wascana police force 

and the scope of jurisdiction of the Wascana police. He tabled at that time, or at least gave me some 

letters, in this regard. The situation is essentially unchanged from the correspondence which the hon. 

member gave me and tabled in the House, concerning namely the Wascana Centre police. After a series 

of meetings involving the Regina police, Wascana police and the Department of the Attorney General, it 

was concluded they should maintain themselves in the present function of policing the centre and the 

by-laws with respect to the centre. They do have a connection with the Regina city police on a radio 

system and it is felt that for the time being that no expansion of that authority or power should be 

granted. 

 

MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister. Would the minister undertake to check with the 

Wascana police themselves (who do not share the same view as the minister) and have expressed, I 

believe, some very serious concerns about the position which they are in — their inability to pursue 

beyond the boundaries in many instances. The fact that they are called — and I have a list of motor 

vehicle accidents, calls outside of their jurisdiction and people who are arrested outside of the Wascana 

Centre 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1926 

Authority — and it’s a fairly significant number less. I would ask that the Attorney General undertake to 

deal or have his officials deal directly with the Wascana police. As I say, they do not share the same 

view as the minister and have expressed serious concerns particularly about the delay in coming to grips 

with what they perceive to be a very serious problem. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’m informed (I don’t want to make a big issue out of this) but the 

police themselves have not formally communicated this to the Wascana Centre Authority people. They 

may have, individually, or in some other form to the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane). But leaving 

that as an aside, I think that it has been two or three years at least since this matter has been reviewed to 

the best of my knowledge, judging by the correspondence that was last looked at in 1975. I think that I 

would be prepared to undertake to the hon. member that I would ask somebody from my department and 

from the Wascana Centre Authority to sit down and take a look again at the role and the function of the 

policing in the Wascana Centre authority and the jurisdiction. Perhaps the Regina police could be 

involved as well and take another fresh, up-dated look as to whether or not an expansion of this authority 

is needed. I’ll be prepared to do that. 

 

CONFRONTATION BETWEEN DOCTORS AND GOVERNMENT 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the 

Premier in the light of the response that he gave to me earlier today. He said earlier that he was not 

aware of any confrontation between the doctors and the MCIC (Medical Care Insurance Commission) or 

the Government of Saskatchewan. I wonder if the Premier could elucidate for this Assembly how he can 

compare that statement with the statement of Dr. Frazer who said that ‘unprecedented move against the 

medical profession by imposing a 1978 payment schedule’. A further quote: ‘there is no need for a 

repeat of 1962’; a further quote: ‘was to intentionally provoke a confrontation’ or from Dr. McRae who 

says ‘organized begging on the part of the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association)’, that that was 

what it became, not negotiation but organized begging. How do you reconstitute your statement that 

there is no confrontation with these two senior doctors in the province who say with no question at all 

that there is? 

 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I suppose these are always questions of semantics 

and it may well be that my previous experience suggests that confrontation bears a somewhat different 

connotation but it would be my judgment that the present state of difficulties between the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association and the Government of Saskatchewan would be inappropriately characterized as 

confrontation. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Would the Premier not agree then, that it might be if since he has this attitude and 

the doctors have another attitude that perhaps a direct discussion with the medical doctors in the 

province of Saskatchewan between the Premier and the medical doctors might bear some fruit and might 

possibly end this absolutely atrocious situation with ever increasing direct billing and more and more 

patients who are having to foot the bill? 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think there are a number of factual statements, or statements of 

the latest facts in the hon. member’s question, with which I do not agree. I do not believe that there is an 

ever increasing number of accounts being rendered by the mode three or direct billing method. It appear 

to be at about the same level it was some time ago. I have every confidence that the Minister of Health is 

pursuing this issue 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1927 

with caution and with diligence, and I have no reason to believe that my intervention would in any way 

improve upon the very excellent work already done by the Minister of Health. I mention one point. 

There is a very significant difference between the number of doctors who may be using direct billing for 

one or two accounts, and the number of accounts which are rendered on the direct billing basis. While I 

have no way of knowing whether 30 per cent, or even 40 per cent, of the doctors send out the odd bill on 

a direct billing basis, I do know that the number of accounts rendered on the mode three, or direct billing 

basis, will be of the order of five or six or seven per cent. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

PRINCE ALBERT RAIDERS WIN ABBOT CUP 

 

MR. J. HAMMERSMITH (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’m 

sure that the House will want to know that on Saturday for the fourth year in a row the junior hockey 

championship of western Canada signified by the Abbott Cup was won again by the Prince Albert 

Raiders. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I am sure that all members of the House join me in congratulating the city 

of Prince Albert in once again bringing this honor to Saskatchewan and that all members of the House 

and all citizens of Saskatchewan wish the raiders well in the Centennial Cup series that will be coming 

up in Prince Albert. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

NOTRE DAME COLLEGE - WILCOX - HOCKEY 
 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I am sure members of the Assembly would wish 

me to acknowledge the very fine performance by Notre Dame College at Wilcox in the national midget 

championships over the weekend in Winnipeg. They came third in Canada. They won the bronze medal 

and missed the championship final by virtue of two goals. They, in fact, had the same record as one of 

the finalists. I think they are to be commended. I think that is the first evidence that we have had of the 

new policy of Notre Dame as it attempts to lead the way in Canada in both academic and athletic 

excellence. I’m sure that all members will join with me in congratulating Notre Dame College. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

CONSOLIDATED FUND 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 
 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Chairman I have the following resolution to 

present: 
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding three hundred and one million, seven hundred and seventy 

thousand, eight hundred and eighty dollars be approximately two-twelfths of the amount of each of 

the several sums to be 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1928 

voted as set forth in the estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1980, laid before the 

Assembly at the present session to be granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending 

March 31, 1980. 

 

Resolution agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION 2 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman I move the following resolution: 

 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 

expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1980 the sum of three hundred 

and one million, seven hundred and seventy thousand, eight hundred and eighty dollars be granted 

out of the consolidated fund. 

 

Resolution agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION 3 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman I move the following resolution: 

 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding eighty-one million nine hundred eighty-five thousand, eight 

hundred and forty dollars being approximately two twelfths of the amount of each of the several 

sums to be voted as set forth in the estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1980, laid before 

the Assembly at the present session, be granted to Her Majesty on account for the twelve months 

ending March 31, 1980. 

 

Resolution agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION 4 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I move the following resolution: 

 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1980, the sum of eighty-one million nine 

hundred and eighty-five thousand, eight hundred and forty dollars be granted out of the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. 

 

Resolution agreed to. 

 

The Committee reported progress. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

BILL NO. 102 - APPROPRIATION BILL (NO. 1) 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 102 — 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1929 

An Act for the granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the Public Service for the fiscal year 

ending the 31 day of March 1980 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed and bill read a first, second and third time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No 15 — An Act to 

amend The Western Development Museum Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I should point out to the Assembly that although this is under the name of the hon. 

member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), it is in fact under The Executive Council Act, assigned to 

myself and, therefore, I’m the minister in charge. 

 

This bill should properly have gone to the Non-controversial Bills Committee. Regrettably, I was not in 

the House when it was given first reading and, therefore, it went on to second reading. It makes two 

relatively routine changes, one of them rather important for the operation of the board. 

 

The first change is that the members of the board cannot now be paid and, as the work is time 

consuming, we have had the greatest difficulty getting members to serve on this board. This, and the 

next bill, which is the arts board — the same provision is in the next bill. They are two of the very few 

boards left in government which we do not pay a per diem allowance to. It’s got then to be extremely 

difficult to get people to serve. We don’t always get the best people and we have therefore decided to 

follow the route which almost all boards have followed and provide a per diem allowance. The exact 

amount of the per diem allowance is left to the discretion of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council as it is 

with all boards, because we increase them all periodically. 

 

The second provision is important to the administration of the board. Now the act provides that contracts 

and agreements are signed by the chairman as the head of the Western Development Museum. In fact, 

the chairman is not a full-time staff member. The chairman, as a matter of interest, is Don Leir from 

Saskatoon. He is not a full-time staff member. He is frequently not there and many of these contracts and 

agreements are very routine, Mr. Speaker, in nature. Almost all heads of this sort have the power to 

delegate in their discretion the signing of contracts and agreements to others of their staff. This, again, 

this routine principle is being extended to the Western Development Museum Board. 

 

I am sure that major agreements and contracts will be continued to be signed by the chairman, but much 

of the minor routine sort of work will be signed by the executive director. 

 

So, with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move that Bill No. 15 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time, on division. 

 

HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 32 — An Act to 

amend The Arts Board Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, again the same explanation applies. This bill is under The Executive Council Act 

assigned to the Minister of Culture and Youth, but I wasn’t in the 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1930 

House the date the bill was given first reading and, therefore, stands in Mr. Romanow’s name. 

 

The bill does two fairly minor things. One of them the same as the Western Development Museum 

Board, it gives the chairman the power to delegate to the executive director the signing of contracts. All 

that I said before applies to this. The chairman, who in this case is Ray Marcotte, will no doubt continue 

to sign major agreements and contracts, but much of the minor work can and should be delegated to the 

executive director. 

 

In this bill, as well, we are changing the fiscal year to coincide with the government’s fiscal year and that 

is simply to make it easy to administer the board and easier to administer the handling of payments and 

the transfer of funds from the consolidated revenue. 

 

So, with that rather brief explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32 be now read a second time. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I intend to put the motion on the question before the House right away. I wish to 

raise a point of order with regard to the previous bill. 

 

I don’t intend to have it recorded on division, because I heard no objection to the bill. If members are 

opposed to the bill, then they should make their objection known so that it can be recognized. I would 

expect members who are opposed to the bill, make their views in opposition known in committee, and 

on third reading, if that be the case. If members wish to have it recorded on division, then there should 

be some nays along with the agreement. On the motion by the Minister of Culture and Youth for second 

reading of Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Arts Board Act — is the Assembly ready for the 

question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation), moved second reading of Bill No. 62 

— An Act to amend The Engineering Profession Act. 

 

He said: I move second reading, Mr. Speaker, of An Act to amend The Engineering Profession Act, 

which, very simply deals with granting the same privileges to the University of Regina engineering 

branch as has the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. The amendment provides the University of 

Regina graduates with the same rights of recognition in the profession as graduates from the University 

of Saskatchewan at Saskatoon. Otherwise graduates from the University of Regina are placed in a 

secondary and subordinate position to those graduating from Saskatoon. It is unlikely that this was the 

intent when the University of Regina engineering program was approved. Now it also further continues 

to grant the authority to the senior university at Saskatoon for the granting of certificates from outside 

the province, engineers and graduates from other universities, both inside and outside of Canada. Mr. 

Chairman in order to clear up what has amounted to just a slight misunderstanding, I am pleased to move 

second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 88 — An Act respecting 

Labor Relations in the Construction Industry in Saskatchewan. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1931 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I rise today to propose that The Construction Industry Labor Relations Act be read 

a second time. This legislation, Mr. Minister, is the result of one of the most intensive processes of study 

and consultation that I have ever experienced in some eight years since becoming the Minister of 

Labour. The concepts underlying the bill have been considered and studied by the department for at least 

four years. Discussion with people in the industry about these concepts have been going on for about two 

years and consultations with respect to the form and the content of the legislation have been extremely 

intensive over the past six months. This bill, Mr. Speaker, has seen many drafts which were circulated to 

an ever widening group of people for comments and discussion. The concept contained in the bill has 

been changed, modified and altered countless times in an attempt to reach a legislative framework which 

could, on the one hand, meet some of the fundamental problems confronting collective bargaining in the 

construction industry while, on the other hand, take into account the legitimate arguments, concerns and 

even fears of some of the groups that will be affected by the legislation. The result of this long and 

arduous process in the legislation is the legislation that is before you. While it doesn’t meet the fondest 

hopes of many on the employer side of the industry, it also contains provisions and puts in place a 

scheme with which a number of people in the trade union community are also somewhat uncomfortable. 

You might say, Mr. Speaker, that we have produced a piece of legislation in which neither side is 

completely happy but which both sides appear to accept as an important and necessary step towards 

achieving sound and stable collective bargaining in the construction industry. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to commend both the employers and their representatives and the trade 

union representatives with whom we have consulted, for their efforts and their attitude with respect to 

this legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — The employer side, while clinging tenaciously to certain fundamentals, has shown a 

good deal of flexibility in the interest of arriving at a scheme which will work. 

 

On the trade union side, we have witnessed a transition from what I believe to have been total opposition 

to the concept to a position where, I believe, the preponderance of trade unionists are not opposed to it. 

 

There are exceptions on both sides. Some employers oppose the idea of bargaining through an 

employers’ organization even though they will be bargaining with other employers in the same trade 

division of the industry. 

 

On the trade union side, some people for whom I have a great respect are unable to accept the concept at 

all. Others are concerned about certain features of the legislation. However, on the whole, I think you 

have before you a bill which represents a broad consensus of opinion in the industry. 

 

Another point I want to make before I get into the principles contained in the bill is that this legislation is 

not a panacea. It will not of itself suddenly transform the construction industry into a calm, orderly and 

logical showpiece of collective bargaining. All it does, Mr. Speaker, is create a framework for the 

establishment of a more stable structure for collective bargaining in the industry. Whether or not it will 

work in a positive way depends entirely upon the parties and their desire that it should lead to this result. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1932 

There are enormous personality conflicts and deep distrusts which poison the atmosphere of collective 

bargaining in the construction industry in the province of Saskatchewan. No legislation could be devised 

that would remove these clashes and settle all of these feuds. All we can do as a government is try to 

create conditions and the legal framework within which collective bargaining can work in a more 

satisfactory way and in which industrial relations will have an opportunity to improve. I think this bill 

will move us a considerable distance in that direction. 

 

There has been a debate going on for some time in Canada as to the future course and structure of 

collective bargaining in the construction industry. The debate is between proponents of multi-trade 

bargaining and the proponents of trade-by-trade bargaining within the industry. 

 

The multi-trade bargaining envisages one organization representing all unionized employers in the 

industry and one council representing all trade unions in the industry, sitting down around one table and 

negotiating a collective agreement. 

 

Trade-by-trade bargaining is a system where an employers’ organization representing unionized 

employers in a particular trade division of the industry, sits down with the trade union representing 

employees in that trade and they bargain a collective agreement that applies to unionized employers and 

employees in that trade division. 

 

You will appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that there is a world of difference between these approaches. The 

debate has resulted in different approaches to accreditation legislation in various provinces. The 

province of Quebec, for example, has opted for a full scale multi-trade bargaining system by which the 

bargaining parties are set up by legislation and all issues in the industry are ultimately dealt with at one 

table in negotiations between these parties. British Columbia has arrived at a similar system but by a 

different route. An employers’ association has been accredited as the bargaining agent for unionized 

contractors for many years. Prior to the last round of bargaining in 1978, the trade unions worked out an 

arrangement whereby a council of trade unions was formed to bargain on behalf of all the unions. 

 

Ontario and the Maritime Provinces have opted for a system of trade bargaining. Alberta began with a 

system of trade bargaining. What they have probably still could properly be described as such, although 

there have been recent suggestions that it is moving towards a multi-trade model. 

 

Manitoba and Saskatchewan then, Mr. Speaker, are the two provinces which have not yet enacted this 

type of legislation. One of the first things we had to do in the preparation of the present legislation was 

to come to grips with the difficult question about which approach would be most appropriate in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have concluded that a system of trade bargaining is the most appropriate one for the industry in our 

province. There are a number of reasons why we have reached that conclusion. Firstly, trade-by-trade 

bargaining is consistent with the structure of the construction industry and particularly, the structure of 

the craft unions that represent construction employees. Attempts to force the industry to bargain on a 

multi-trade basis are attempts to force collective bargaining of the industry into an industrial model. 

Such an attempt, in my opinion, is doomed to failure and cannot lead to stable and productive 

relationships within the industry. 

 

Secondly, the history and traditions of collective bargaining in the industry are such as 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1933 

to be consistent with trade bargaining and completely inconsistent with bargaining on a multi-trade 

basis. 

 

Thirdly, and directly related to the first two points, the essential nature of craft unionism is such as to 

require that craft issues, issues that are important to tradesmen in the exercise of their craft, be addressed 

in the collective bargaining process and be resolved in that context. This can best be done when the 

individual craft union is responsible for the bargaining. It will not be done on any consistent or timely 

basis, if all of the trade unions in the industry are forced to bargain together through one council at one 

table. 

 

Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, the imposition of a new regime of collective bargaining requires a broad 

consensus that the new arrangements are practical and workable. Even the building trades 

representatives who are opposed to this legislation have no objection to bargaining with all of their own 

contractors. However, if we were to attempt to force all of the trade unions to bargain through some 

central organization with all of the unionized employers in the industry, who would in turn bargain 

through one central organization, I think we would be left with a situation that would be unacceptable to 

everyone involved. None of the trade unions would support such a scheme. Further, during the 

development of this legislation there has not been one employer or employer’s representative who has 

suggested that a scheme of multi-trade bargaining was necessary or desirable. 

 

The idea of creating a legal way by statute to designate employer organizations as the bargaining agent 

for unionized employers was first put forward in the study done by the Canadian Construction 

Association by Goldenberg and Crispo in 1968. The idea roughly parallels the certification of trade 

unions as bargaining agents for groups of employees. The legal framework which have evolved as a 

result of this study are usually referred to as accreditation legislation. The controversy surrounding some 

of the schemes which have been introduced, the accreditation has taken on somewhat emotional 

overtones and, therefore, the term is in some disfavor. In the legislation which is before you, Mr. 

Speaker, the term accreditation does not appear. However that may be, it is important for members to 

know that some form of accreditation legislation has been in place in all of the provinces of Canada, 

except Saskatchewan and Manitoba since the early 1970s. 

 

We in Saskatchewan have been rather more cautious in our approach to this question. We have watched 

the experience in other provinces very carefully and have tried to assess which ideas are workable and 

which are not. At the same time we saw the formation in Saskatchewan of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Labour Relations Council. This council was incorporated under The Societies Act in 

January of 1971, and took over most of the collective bargaining in the construction industry in 1972. 

With some significant successes and other significant failures the council has been the main employer 

agency for collective bargaining in the construction industry up this present time. 

 

However, there are serious problems with the present situation, Mr. Speaker. The main one is that the 

present arrangements are entirely voluntary. Unionized employers are free to join or not to join. If they 

do join they are free to leave the council whenever they wish. As a result, many important employers are 

not members of the labour relations council in the industry. Others, secure in the knowledge that they 

can leave when they wish, have not paid sufficient attention to the activities of the council. They have 

not been fully involved in the development of council policy, the hiring and training of 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1934 

competent staff and the conduct of collective bargaining. 

 

Under the proposed legislation which is before you, Mr. Speaker, unionized employers in a trade 

division will be represented by an employers’ organization who will no longer be able to opt in or out of 

the organization as suits their fancy. One of the expected results is that the employers (and particularly 

the larger and more experienced employers), will take the affairs of their employer’s organization more 

seriously and will contribute more towards the development of policy, bargaining stances and the 

strategies and tactics of collective bargaining. As a result, we expect to see a considerable improvement 

in the collective bargaining process from the employers’ side. We expect to see a much more responsible 

and stable approach which should, in time, vastly improve collective bargaining in the industry. 

 

If this legislation were not to pass, Mr. Speaker, I have some genuine fear that the existing arrangement 

for employer bargaining in the industry would be in danger of collapse. There are too many employers 

who, for their own reasons, have remained aloof from organized bargaining and have remained in the 

position where they can play games with the system to their own competitive advantage and to the 

considerable disadvantage of collective bargaining in the industry. 

 

What this legislation basically says is that from now on collective bargaining in the industry will be 

conducted through employers’ organizations. After the original designations have been made, employers 

will be free to change their bargaining agent beginning in 1981. However, they will not be free to elect 

not to have a bargaining agent. We will not, Mr. Speaker, return to the jungle where each employer is 

left to his own devices and in which contractors and trade unions can play games with each other to the 

considerable detriment of the construction industry and collective bargaining in the industry. 

 

One of the unusual features of this bill is the way in which this scheme will get started, Mr. Speaker. 

This was a very difficult problem which we had to grapple with because obviously, if the scheme started 

from a strong and relatively stable point, it would have a much better chance of succeeding than if it 

started from an atmosphere of uncertainty and weakness. 

 

We considered other options for setting up a starting point. We considered an outright designation of the 

labor relations council as the representative employers’ organization in respect to each trade division. 

The trade unions had very serious objections to this option on the basis that the outright designation of a 

central employers’ organization was the first giant step down the slippery slope towards multitrade 

bargaining. I must admit I have some difficulty in understanding this objection, but it was a very serious 

position and any trade union support for the legislation depended on that idea being dropped. 

 

The other alternative considered was to simply set up a framework in which employers’ organizations 

could form themselves in which and by making application to the Labour Relations Board be so 

designated. This is the kind of approach which was taken in Alberta and in the Atlantic provinces. It has 

a great deal of appeal to me because it is somewhat the same approach that is taken for certification of 

trade unions under The Trade Union Act. However, there are particular problems with that option. It is 

important to note that when the Alberta and Atlantic province schemes were introduced, there was very 

little in either of those provinces in the way of a formal 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1935 

structure for bargaining on the employer’s side. Employer organizations were formed slowly and only 

gradually came into place as bargaining agents. In those circumstances, it is only logical that an 

employers’ organization should have to prove in a formal way that it is in fact, representative of 

employers. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the circumstances are much different. Collective bargaining in the construction 

industry has become accustomed to the presence of an employers’ organization in each of the trade 

divisions that are active in the province and it would be, I think, a considerable step backwards if there 

were suddenly no employers’ organization to bargain with respect to a particular trade. 

 

As a hypothetical example, take the case of the iron workers’ union. It has been bargaining for years with 

the iron workers’ trade division in the labour relations council. If the legislation required this trade 

division to make an application to the board and prove that it represented a majority of iron worker 

contractors, it’s possible that this attempt could fail. As a result, there would be no employers’ 

organization in existence for the purpose of bargaining with the iron workers’ union. This is a step 

backwards which I refer to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If this possibility actually occurred in any trade division, the result would be blank spots in the collective 

bargaining system which could prove to be very dangerous for the rest of the system. For this reason, 

both the trade unions and the employers objected to the second option. They preferred a system which 

would enable the scheme to start from a stronger and a more stable position. This led to the development 

of the idea expressed in sections 9 and 10 of the bill. For our precedent, Mr. Speaker, we went to Bill 

No. 22 which was enacted in the province of Ontario. Under that bill, the Minister of Labour had the 

power to designate the employers’ organization which would bargain on behalf of all unionized 

employers in a trade. My information is that this approach worked very well in Ontario and got the 

scheme envisaged by Bill No. 22 off to a very strong start. 

 

My conclusion is that if this method of launching the scheme of a province-wide bargaining basis by 

trade is a good and workable idea in Conservative Ontario, it should similarly provide an acceptable 

starting point for a strong and stable scheme in Saskatchewan. While I’m reluctant to see myself put in 

the position of making some of the judgments that may have to be made under the sections, I accept the 

argument that it’s the most important matter to have the scheme start from a strong position and 

accordingly, I’m prepared to accept those responsibilities and discharge them in good faith and in 

accordance with the spirit and letter of the legislation. 

 

I can say that I intend to make full use of the inquiry provisions of section 9 and 10 before making any 

determination or designations which will include full and intensive consultation with the parties who 

will be affected. One thing I will not undertake in advance of these inquiries and consultations is to 

commit myself as to what I will or will not do. I am not prepared to say at this stage whether any 

particular employers’ organization will be designated. The bill clearly places on me the responsibility to 

approach these matters with an open mind and proceed only after taking certain steps and considering 

certain factors. I intend to keep an open mind in order that I may discharge this responsibility in what I 

regard to be a proper way. 

 

There’s a provision in the bill which, I think, will be somewhat surprising to the uninitiated. I was 

somewhat surprised when the proposal was first made to me. 

 

Section 18 of the bill provides that where a trade union wishes to cause a strike it must 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1936 

strike all unionized employers in the trade division concerned with respect to all of the work being 

performed by those employers. Further, all unionized employees of those employers must participate in 

the strike. There’s a complimentary provision that, in the event of a lockout, all unionized employers in 

the trade division must participate in the lockout and must lock out all unionized employees. 

 

Now at first blush, Mr. Speaker, it would almost appear that the purpose of this section is only to 

guarantee that, in the future, strikes and lockouts in a trade division will be bigger than they have been in 

the past; but I can assure you that this is not the purpose of the provision, nor will it be the result. 

 

I should first point out that this provision has the support of the employers and I believe also a 

preponderance of the trade unions in the industry. 

 

Simply put, both sides have agreed that some of the nasty games that have taken place in strikes and 

lockouts must cease to be played, and there have been many such games. Selective strikes and rotating 

strikes, I suppose, are good examples. By this tactic, some employers are brought down while others are 

allowed to operate. This creates terrible strains on both sides. Similarly, a decision to lock out employees 

can be the subject of a great deal of abuse. 

 

Without going into any detail, Mr. Speaker, we saw evidence of that during the lockout of the laborer’s 

union during the 17-week strike last summer. As a consequence, both sides of the industry have now 

understood and accepted that this type of activity cannot go on in the future. 

 

A strike or lockout in the construction industry is a very serious matter. It has a large impact on the 

economy as a province, and it imposes great hardship on some employers and on union members who 

are unemployed as a result. Because it is so serious, it should not be engaged in lightly. If there is to be a 

strike or a lockout, it should be total with respect to that trade division. By removing some of the 

opportunities to play games, and relieve pressures, I think we can create a situation where strikes or 

lockouts will be resolved more quickly than has been the case in the past. 

 

There’s one idea I think should have been incorporated into this bill which was removed because I 

thought that the employers and the trade unions involved should have an opportunity to work out the 

solution themselves. 

 

The legislation sets up province-wide collective bargaining in the sense that there will be only one set of 

negotiations in the province with respect to each trade division. A trade division will sit down to bargain 

with an employer’s organization representing all of its unionized employers. If there is more than one 

local in the trade union in the province, the locals must form a council and bargain together. The 

problem that will arise with respect to some trade unions is the obligation of some employers to bargain 

is for a geographical area which is small than the geographical jurisdiction of the local concerned. For 

example, a certification order may cover only the city of Regina in a 25-mile radius, while the 

jurisdiction of the local may extend through the southern half of the province. If collective bargaining 

should result in a strike lockout situation, the drawbacks of small area certification under this legislation 

will become very plain. A union wishing to strike would have to strike each employer with respect to all 

of the work covered by the collective agreement and withdraw the services of all of its members. The 

employer having a small area certification, on the other hand, will only have to lockout within the limits 

of the certification area then will be free to operate on a 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1937 

non-union basis outside of this area. This, Mr. Speaker, is an unfair situation and ought to be corrected 

for this scheme to work properly. 

 

You should understand, Mr. Speaker, that these small area certifications are outdated and anomalous. 

The Labour Relations Board ceased granting such orders many years ago, however, a number are still in 

existence. The practice has developed for the board to certify on the basis of geographical jurisdiction of 

the applicant local. None of the options was to resolve this problem in the legislation by simply 

providing that the geographical area certification order would automatically extend to the geographical 

jurisdiction of the local union involved. 

 

This would amount to amendment to the certification orders by legislation rather than by the usual 

method of parties applying to the board for an amendment. 

 

On such an application the ward would have to be satisfied that the majority of employees in that 

situation supported the amendment. It would also give the employer a full opportunity to raise any 

arguments he may have against the amendment. Neither of these points would have been met if we had 

followed the simple option of legislating the solution. For that reason the question is not dealt with in 

this bill. 

 

However, I want to suggest that the employers and trade unions should not get the impression that this is 

in any way the last word on this question. For bargaining under this legislation to work properly. I think 

it will be necessary for the problem of these small area certifications to be resolved. There are two 

possible remedies. A trade union having a small area certification can apply to the Labour Relations’ 

Board for an amendment to the certification order. Alternatively, the matter can be resolved during 

negotiations in the next round of bargaining in 1980. 

 

In either event, Mr. Speaker, I will be watching the developments in this area very closely. If the 

problem turns out to be as serious as I believe it is, and if the parties involved are unable to resolve the 

problems themselves then I think we may be required, in the future, to consider dealing with the problem 

by legislation. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the essence of Bill No. 88. I think it represents a highly significant milestone in the 

history of labor relations legislation in this province. It is particularly important because the construction 

industry itself is a particularly important component of the Saskatchewan economy. The individual 

characteristics of our province have presented builders with especially complex challenges over many 

years. 

 

Here the value of construction work performed per capita and the percentage of non-agricultural working 

people who earn their living in construction, are both considerably higher than the national average. 

Granted that this is the case and that construction makes an essential contribution to the prosperity of 

Saskatchewan, some may still ask why it is necessary to single out the industry for special legislative 

treatment. In this context, Mr. Speaker, it is important to fully understand the peculiar nature of the 

construction industry. This bears directly on the shape of labor-management relations in construction. 

Construction expenditures fluctuate with changes in the level of general economic activity. The industry 

is highly seasonal. Weather conditions can disrupt work schedules even in the middle of the normal 

building period. Construction is unique in that the product is permanent and cannot be transferred from 

one place to another, while the labor force, comprising both employees and employers, is mobile. Of 

necessity, product pricing is done on an individual project basis. These factors impose additional 

pressures on the parties to 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1938 

collective bargaining and in this setting the importance of harmonious industrial relations can hardly be 

exaggerated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the primary purpose of labor relations legislation generally is to channel collective 

bargaining along stable, rational and orderly paths in order to achieve industrial peace. That is the 

primary purpose of the legislation which is before you. On the basis of its innovative, operative 

mechanisms, I am convinced that we will enter a new era of effective and productive labor-management 

relations in the construction industry, adapted to the new demands of the industrial society of the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 88, an Act respecting Labour Relations in the Construction Industry in 

Saskatchewan, be now read a second time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I believe the Minister of Labour has clearly 

identified one of the problem areas in labor relations in the province of Saskatchewan over the last few 

years anyway. It is a difficult problem. As an effective opposition, the thing which we are concerned 

about is that for this type of legislation to work clearly you must have a consensus (or close to a 

consensus) of both sides of this particular issue. 

 

Prior to this session starting the press releases were to the effect that the accreditation legislation was one 

type of legislation that we were going to see in this session. It strikes me as somewhat odd that now into 

our fortieth day of this session, in a time when we are perhaps looking towards winding down the 

session, this is one of the first major pieces of legislation advanced by the government in question and, I 

think, perhaps a piece of legislation that we all must take a very serious look at to see just which 

direction we are going to go in it. 

 

Our information (in fact I do have a meeting with some of the parties involved this evening following 

the session,) as I understand, some of the employer groups at this point in time are meeting right now 

discussing the legislation in question. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn debate 

on this issue at this point in time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 66 — An 

Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of satisfaction that I take note of a very important 

development in municipal affairs. The development to which I refer is to the great increase in the 

co-operation that is taking place among municipalities, both rural and urban. Municipalities are 

recognizing that in many areas of their endeavors it makes organizational and economic sense for a 

group of municipalities to work together rather than each municipality working separately, individually, 

and without reference to its neighbors. Co-operation among municipalities is not new, Mr. Speaker, but 

the number of functions for which municipalities are co-operating seems to be increasing. I think one of 

the reasons why municipalities are working together to a greater degree arises from the encouragement 

which is provided for such co-operation in provincial government programs. I give you two prime 

examples of this 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1939 

initiative right within the revenue sharing program which was just implemented in 1978. I refer to the 

municipal road ambulance program and the intermunicipal fire protection program. At last count, Mr. 

Speaker, we did 68 ambulance districts formed and 30 were in the process of being formed. Now I have 

no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that over the next number of months we will see virtually the entire province 

organized into ambulance districts, and we will see improved ambulance services and an assurance that 

existing good services will continue as a result of the co-operation which is taking place with regard to 

this program. A great number of intermunicipal arrangements also exist with regard to fire protection, 

and I will be making announcements shortly about a new program of grants providing an incentive for 

co-operation in the area of recreation. 

 

The amendments to The Urban Municipality Act contained within this bill are designed to facilitate the 

co-operative efforts that are now taking place. One amendment will make it possible for villages and 

towns to have the same powers that cities now have to appoint a board to manage, control and operate 

transportation systems. The hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) knows we have a number of 

pilot projects underway in which municipalities are co-operating to provide transportation services to 

their citizens. Another current statutory provision, although current rather statutory provisions do not 

permit municipalities to co-operate with one another in the provision of ambulance services, another set 

of amendments clarifies these powers and elaborates upon them. A new section will provide for an 

ambulance district board to become a body corporate. With regard to the ambulance district board itself, 

one section sets out its powers including powers to enter into agreements. 

 

Another very important amendment permits intermunicipal co-operation in virtually every undertaking 

that each municipality could be lawfully involved in with its own territorial limits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are now in a new era of intermunicipal co-operation. I am pleased to lend my support to 

that co-operation and the amendments provided in the said bill are a positive trend towards that. I 

therefore, move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 74 — An 

Act to amend The Community Capital Fund Act 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak to this act to amend The Community Capital Fund Act. This 

amendment, essentially extends the effective deadline for the operation of the fund from March 31, 1979 

to December 31, 1979. 

 

Even though the program has been available to municipalities over the last five years, we have found 

that some municipalities have not utilized the funds available. Mr. Speaker, at last count, approximately 

$5 million remained in the fund and had not been claimed by municipalities. Of this $5 million, 

approximately $1 million had not been allocated at all to any particular project by the municipality in 

question. 

 

In view of these facts, Mr. Speaker, we believe the deadline for the submission of claims under the act 

should be extended to the end of this year so as to assure that municipalities have further opportunities to 

utilize their funds. This relates, Mr. Speaker, particularly to those municipalities who simply had not 

allocated their funds to any particular project. In this connection, Mr. Speaker, I should point out I have 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1940 

appointed a committee to look into the successor to the community capital fund. Representatives of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the Department of Finance, and the Department of 

Municipal Affairs, are on the committee and have already had their first meeting. 

 

I look forward to obtaining a report and a set of recommendations from that committee in order that the 

new capital program for urban municipalities can be announced before the end of this year. 

 

It is my pleasure to move second reading of the said bill. 

 

MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — I’m not opposing this particular bill, but I am pleased to hear 

the minister is now looking at a new capital fund for the urban municipalities. I’m hoping that he is also 

looking at a new capital fund for the rurals. The amount of funding that’s left here is very minimal. 

Though there were $5 million in the fund and $1 million not allocated, there are very, very few 

municipalities that can take advantage of that $1 million that’s not allocated because they have already 

used their complete portion. So we are going to see most of the municipalities this year at a standstill 

with regard to capital projects. I think it’s a shame in this day and age to have the complete capital 

spending of many rural and urban municipalities at a standstill. I hope that the government can bring in a 

bill that will satisfy the municipalities and get this thing on the way in the near future. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 82 — An 

Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the only item of major importance in this act to amend The Property Improvement 

Grant Act is to clarify that senior citizens are no longer eligible under The Senior Citizens School Tax 

Rebate Act which provides for much more generous treatment. This will in no way disadvantage a senior 

citizen because under the new act which we dealt with last week, they will be eligible for everything that 

they would have received under the old act plus (rather than say and, I will say plus) a minimum of $50 

more or a maximum of $230 more depending upon the level of school tax on their residential property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of basically housekeeping amendments are included in the bill. The definition of 

applicant or who is able to apply under The Property Improvement Grant Act has been clarified. 

 

An important one, Mr. Speaker, is that conservation and development taxes which have been levied 

under The Conservation and Development Act will now be able to be counted as taxes for the purpose of 

computing a property improvement grant. This corresponds to the local improvement levy which many 

urban residents are able to claim when calculating their grants. 

 

Another section clarifies the maximum grant entitlement when a person receives a grant under The 

Renters Property Tax Rebate Act with regard to his principal residence and then is able to apply under 

The Property Improvement Grant Act with regard to property other than his principal residence. In such 

cases, the maximum grant under the combination of both acts is not to exceed $375. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1941 

Another section clarifies the amount of time which may pass after the end of the year in respect of which 

taxes are paid until an application will still be accepted and processed for payment. Basically, the act 

now acknowledges the fact that someone may inadvertently neglect to apply for a Property Improvement 

Grant Act for which they are eligible, even though they may have paid their taxes within the current year, 

as required by the law. It would not be fair to deny a person a grant simply because they forgot to apply, 

or because they may not have been aware of the existence of the programs. On the other hand, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a reasonable limit to which the books may be kept open and still allow for reasonable 

costs of administration. The books are to be kept open with regard to a particular year. This means that 

an entire set of records must be kept close at hand and accessible so that the usual administrative 

procedures can be followed. We believe that keeping the books open for three years after the end of the 

year in respect of which an application is made is a reasonable compromise between the objective of not 

denying an applicant a grant on one hand and a reasonable administrative requirement on the other hand. 

We are confident that this will be a fair and equitable solution. 

 

Other housekeeping amendments are rather minor in nature to be spoken to at this particular stage and 

will be better dealt with, Mr. Speaker, in clause by clause during Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of the said bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 87 — An Act respecting 

the Independence of Members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I move today second reading of The Members of the Legislative Assembly 

Conflicts-of-Interest Act. In 1973, I tabled a white paper and a draft bill on members of the Legislative 

Assembly and conflicts-of-interest. Then in 1975, this matter was referred to the Law Reform 

Commission and two years later, in 1977, the commission submitted its report to me and the House. 

 

The area of conflict-of-interest for legislators has received a great deal of public attention lately. People 

are asking for assurances that those involved in government should not benefit unduly by virtue of their 

associations and positions. I am sure that all members of the House are very much aware about how 

important it is that members of the public be reassured about the integrity of those who sit in this House. 

However, Mr. Speaker, in determining the rules for the conduct of members, it is also important to 

ensure that they do not become so stringent that they will deter qualified people from becoming 

candidates. Careful consideration has been given to ensure that only those matters which have the 

potential to involve members in a conflict are covered. 

 

I would now like to return to a discussion of some of the provisions of the act as the act appears before 

you with the assurance of the House that I may be proposing House amendments as House Leader and as 

the sponsor of this bill in due course. We want to have some time to have members of the public give 

some reaction to the bill. Members, perhaps, of the opposition would like to give some reaction to the 

bill before we move the legislation in Committee of the Whole. But to deal with it in second reading in 

principle, in the broad meaning of the words ‘in principle’, today. So the provisions of 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1942 

the bill as drafted before you; firstly there’s the basic scheme. The act sets out rules for the conduct of 

members of the Assembly in three main areas: employment, participation in government contracts and 

disclosure of assets and interests. 

 

First of all let’s look at the part dealing with prohibited offices, commissions and employment. No 

person who holds any office or employment with the government, according to this proposed bill, shall 

be eligible as a member of the Assembly. There is, of course, the obvious exceptions for the Speaker, the 

deputy speakers, the whips, Leader of the opposition, cabinet ministers and certain other offices, such as 

commissioners for oath. Any person who becomes a federally appointed judge or a judge of the 

provincial court is not eligible to be a member of the Assembly. 

 

Participation in government contracts: Generally participation by a member in a government contract is 

prohibited. There is nothing new about this aspect of the law; that exists now in The Legislative 

Assembly Act. Exceptions to this general prohibition include the following: (a) a long list of agreements 

or instances where a member may contract with the Crown or receive payment from the Crown in 

circumstances provided in the present section 14 of the Legislative Assembly Act, as is currently the 

law. This list covers such things as participating in a teachers’ superannuating plan, holding a fishing 

licence, accepting fees under the legal aid plan, etc.; (b) goods and services supplied to a member 

pursuant to a statute where the goods and services are supplied on terms and conditions common to all 

persons and where no basic discretion is exercised by any minister or member of the public service 

directly responsible to a minister. An example would be property improvement grants and the like; (c) 

where the value of the contract does not exceed $1,000; (d) compensation from the Crown for land as a 

result of an award under The Expropriation Procedure Act; and (e) compensation for land purchased 

from or sold to the Crown or land damaged by the Crown as long as the amount is determined by the 

courts in a procedure set out in the act basically designed to confirm or validate that the situation was at 

an arms length and above-board fashion. 

 

The major change in this area will be the new restrictions created for members participating in 

government contracts through corporations. No person who participates in a government contract as a 

share holder, director, manager or other officer of a corporation shall be eligible as a member of the 

Assembly. But to this general rule there are also exceptions. The exceptions are as follows: 

 

(a) when the contractor contracts do not exceed $5,000 in any one year; 

 

(b) there are more than five directors, managers or officers who control the corporation or whether 

remuneration received by a member as director-manager or officer does not exceed $10,000; 

 

(c) the member does not hold more than 5 per cent of the issued voting shares of the corporation; 

 

(d) the value of the shares the member owns does not exceed $15,000. 

 

A spouse or dependent child of a member may participate in government contracts so long as the 

contract is not for or on behalf of the member. Where the member would receive benefit from such a 

contract by spouse or family, the member would be considered to be participating in a contract. When 

members find they are participating in a government contract as a result of marriage or inheritance say, 

things of that nature 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1943 

as the bill spells out, they must get out as soon as possible. 

 

The next part of the bill deals with disclosure of assets and interests. As proposed, members will be 

required when the bill comes into force to file a statement with the Clerk setting out as follows: 

 

(a) the particulars of participation by a member, the spouse of a member, or a dependent child of a 

member in certain types of government contracts; 

 

(b) the name of any corporation in which the member, the spouse of the member or any dependent child 

is a shareholder, director or other officer of the corporation and any instances in which that corporation 

participates in a government contract; 

 

(c) any interest in land the member, the spouse of the member or any dependent child of the member has 

whether that land is located within or outside the province of Saskatchewan; 

 

(d) the location of the head office of any business or enterprise in which the member is an officer, 

partner or employee; and 

 

(e) the particulars of any grant or subsidy paid to the member, the spouse of a member or any dependent 

child or a member or a corporation where the member, spouse or dependent child is a shareholder, 

director, etc. when discretion is exercised in determining if the grant or subsidy is to be paid. 

 

Subsequent to the first statement filed after the coming into force of the act, a yearly statement will be 

required from each member updating the information previously filed and setting out any new 

information of the kind required by the first statement. A statement of course filed by the public will be 

open to public inspection. 

 

Offences and Penalties: members convicted of offences shall cease or remedy the act which brought 

about the conviction within 60 days. Conviction for failing to cease or remedy the above act results in 

the loss of seat in the Assembly, a stiff penalty indeed. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe that what we have here is a reasonable bill. What we have been 

able to do is to provide strong conflict of interest rules without making them so stringent that qualified 

people will be deterred from running for public office. As I say, I will not be moving this bill in 

Committee of the Whole immediately. I will be standing it for a few days to get inputs from concerned 

people with possible House amendments (I alert the members of the House) depending upon the 

suggestions and the merit of the suggestions. 

 

With those few brief words, I move second reading of Bill No. 87. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in commenting on the brief words 

of the Attorney General, let me say, first of all, that they had a great deal of generality. His remarks had a 

great deal of generality without anything specific. 

 

Unfortunately, the bill that is presented here today, does not answer the assurances that the people of 

Saskatchewan are asking for. 

 

There are (and the Attorney General will be aware as a lawyer) loopholes in this bill wide 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1944 

enough to drive a Mac truck through and still have room to get into Switzerland, absolutely. The fact 

remains, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan, the people who we represent, do want assurance 

regarding members, both of the Assembly, but most specifically, of the cabinet ministers and members 

of the Treasury Bench, who have access to public funds and who have access to prior information on 

government action. They mostly want assurances that they cannot, without penalty, utilize their position 

as a means by which they would further their own ends. In order to accomplish that one has to bring 

about a bill that is true for all members of the legislature. I don’t think it would be reasonable to assume 

that members could bring forward a bill that applied only to the cabinet, or only to the senior cabinet 

ministers. We would have to have a bill that applies to all of us. We accept that. 

 

Now, the Attorney General is right in his concerns that individual members of the legislature and also 

cabinet ministers must have protection against two things, I think. They must have protection against 

unwarranted fishing expeditions into their private affairs, which have absolutely no basis in terms of the 

work they do in this legislature. A prime example of that was stated in this legislature by the Premier of 

Saskatchewan some time ago. And that is, that federated co-ops, for example, does business with the 

Government of Saskatchewan. An individual co-op in Saskatoon or Regina is a member of Federated 

Co-ops. If you happen to have a share in that co-op, it would not be in conflict surely if it does business 

with the Government of Saskatchewan. And furthermore, I think it is important to point out in the initial 

stages of trying to accept a bill in principle what the purpose of the legislation should be; then point out 

whether this bill in fact attempts to achieve the purpose of that legislation. The purpose is two-fold, or 

should be. First of all it should be to protect the public from any member of the legislature using his 

position to further his own personal ends. But secondly, it should protect the individual MLA from 

unwarranted and unreasonable speculation on the part of the press and others, as to that individual’s 

personal business which has no bearing whatsoever on his actions in this Assembly or on his actions as a 

member of cabinet or on the actions of the Speaker of this Assembly. That’s the purpose of a bill or what 

it should be, to protect both the public and the member. 

 

So the question that we have to ask ourselves, in reality, is, does this bill accomplish those ends? I don’t 

think anyone in this Legislative Chamber could doubt that I have some experience with speculation on 

personal affairs in terms of the Saskatchewan press corps and others in this Assembly. I don't think 

anyone here could doubt that I speak with some experience in that area. I think it is important that that 

kind of speculation be ended; that the ground rules, if you want, for all of us, be set forward clearly, 

succinctly and without any question that we agree on these ground rules. Then when someone 

approaches an individual member, whether that individual member be on this side of the House or that 

side of the House, as long as he or she has complied with the ground rules (as they are laid out) further 

speculation is unwarranted and will be looked upon by the press, the media and others as unwarranted, if 

we agree on these rules. So, therefore it is important to develop a set of rules which we can agree on. It is 

important to develop a set of rules which do not unwarrantedly interfere with your right as a private 

citizen but at the same time, protect the people of the province. 

 

Unfortunately, I believe what this bill does — I don’t know why and I’m not going to try to place blame 

— is merely grab out of other legislation already on the books in Saskatchewan and attempt to doctor it 

without really coming up with some new basic principles. In other words, what this bill attempts to do is 

to prohibit and then except. I don’t think you are going to get a bill that works in this legislature. If you 

try to prohibit and then except because the exceptions are always going to leave the door open to the 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1945 

kinds of potential loopholes that we won’t be in agreement on, that the press and others and the public 

will continue to speculate upon, and therefore, won’t protect the member and won’t protect the public. 

One example, I know the Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) is aware of this particular example, but one 

example of a major kind of loophole is a company is set up with share capital of $15,000. As the 

Attorney General said today, there isn’t a private sector corporation in the province of Saskatchewan that 

has issued share capital amounting to $15,000, or if they are, they are so few and far between it’s beyond 

comprehension. The vast majority of private sector corporations issue share capital of $100 — the vast 

majority. And usually the founding partner gets 60 per cent and 20 per cent goes to one employee and 10 

per cent goes . . . (inaudible). But the total issued shared capital, the total, is usually $100 worth, or at the 

most $1,000 worth. Now that exempts just about every private sector corporation in Saskatchewan. How 

can you agree on those rules? I think there are rules that we can all agree upon, that do not attack each 

member’s right to be a private citizen, but at the same time protects the public from any member using 

his individual position to further his own personal ends. But I think we’re going to have to do so by 

creating a bill, and I think this bill can be doctored if you like or amended as the Attorney General has 

suggested, to bring about this situation. I think we’ll have to create a bill that does not prohibit and then 

except. So all I can say is that first of all I think that we can agree as a legislature that the public has the 

right to be assured that members are not going to use their positions to their own ends. Secondly we can 

agree that we must protect ourselves as well as individual members from unwarranted attacks by others 

on our personal affairs. If we can agree on that and I think the Attorney General certainly in his opening 

remarks appeared to leave the door open to suggestions, and I certainly congratulate him for that. I think 

it’s the right approach to a bill like this. I think we can agree on a bill that will make this possible and 

will accomplish those two goals. 

 

So, in order not to embarrass the Attorney General of having to stand this bill time after time over the 

next few days, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 92 — An Act respecting 

the Establishment of the Meewasin Valley Authority. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we have before us today a bill to establish the Meewasin Valley Authority, thanks 

to the considerable assistance of the Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek). I have been associated, together 

with other members of the cabinet including the Minister of Finance, Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. 

MacMurchy). Saskatoon MLAs and others, for over one year with this project and it gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to see the work of a number of committed people from the R.M. of Corman Park, 

Saskatoon City, University of Saskatchewan and the provincial government, culminate by the 

introduction of this legislation in the House today. 

 

I am confident that most members know what the Meewasin Valley Authority project is since a number 

of you attended the special briefing which was organized last month. However, I would like to briefly 

outline the history of the project before I describe in general terms some of the legal aspects of the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Saskatoon and Corman Park have been aware for many years that an unusual 

community enhancement opportunity exists for this and future generations along the South 

Saskatchewan River. Local interest groups and councils have proposed many times that the preservation 

and development of this area should 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1946 

be the subject of long-range planning and appropriate development. This concern for the protection of 

the natural environment associated with the river has its origins from the original settlers. The 

Temperance Colonization Society, which founded Saskatoon and settled the region in the 1880s in an act 

of unusual foresight, reserved the river bank as a public park, thus forestalling its acquisition for 

residential or commercial purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same concern was reflected by those individuals who, a few years later, established the 

University of Saskatchewan. Its campus is recognized as one of the most beautiful settings of any 

university in Canada. 

 

Saskatoon is not a city whose areas of natural beauty have been lost to residential sprawl and commercial 

industrial development. Over the past 20 or 25 years there has been an unofficial policy that 

development in the vicinity of the river must be strictly controlled. nevertheless, in recent years, there 

has been concern that some of these unofficial policies are not good enough to prevent the deterioration 

of the river edge environment. These shared concerns led city council, in September of 1974, to pass a 

resolution requesting the province to enter into an agreement for the development of the river within, and 

adjacent to, the city of Saskatoon. Within a few months this request resulted in a joint project funded by 

the provincial and federal governments to undertake a preliminary study of the potential. The consulting 

firm of Long, Maille and Associates was commissioned. They completed their work in May, 1976 and it 

was a valuable beginning to process. Included in the report was a recommendation that a river edge 

authority be established, similar to the Wascana Centre Authority in Regina, to exercise stewardship 

over the river edge land. This report led to further discussions among the province, the city, the 

university and the R.M., and in December of 1977 it was agreed to explore the possibility of setting up 

such an authority. The result was the allocation of $20,.000 in last year’s budget to develop a 100 year 

master conceptual plan and to draft legislation as you see it before you, to create an authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in March of 1978, the distinguished Canadian architect, Mr. Raymond Moriyama, was 

contracted to prepare the master plan. It has been completed and accepted by all four parties and has 

been well received by the public. 

 

The legislation we have before us today will create a body-corporate which will take the master plan 

prepared by Mr. Moriyama and over a period of years develop the project along the lines envisaged by 

him. 

 

This act has, in many ways, been patterned after The Wascana Centre Act, a piece of legislation that has 

operated well for over 17 years, to the satisfaction of the government, the city of Regina, and the 

University of Regina. Differences do exist from time to time, one such being the existence of a 

considerable amount of privately-owned property within the area of the new Lawson Valley Project. 

 

While the owners of this property will not be affected in most respects, with respect to their property, 

some consequences might follow. Further, the existence of the South Saskatchewan River flowing 

within the area of the project . . . (inaudible interjection). . . and I’m pleased to see that I have the strong 

support of my colleagues behind me in this rousing speech! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1947 

MR. ROMANOW: — Further, the existence of the South Saskatchewan River flowing within the area 

of the project requires co-operation from the federal government to carry out the administration of the 

project. Constitutionally the control of motor vessels on the river is a matter of federal jurisdiction. In 

this respect, co-operation has been discussed and regulations are expected to facilitate and control the 

regulation of boating and other water sports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Meewasin Valley Authority will be a body corporate comprised of 10 individuals, three 

each appointed by the province, city and university, and one appointed by the rural municipality. The 

common cost of the authority will be shared as follows: 40 per cent from the province, 30 per cent from 

the city, 29 per cent from the university, and 1 per cent from the rural municipality. 

 

The total annual levy on the participants collectively will be a sum equal to five mills on the assessments 

of land and buildings in the city, which in 1978 was equal to approximately $1.75 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the boundaries of the project extend from Beaver Creek in the South to the Clarkspur 

crossing in the North, a distance of roughly 80 kilometres as the river flows. The total area encompassed 

by the new authority is about 416 square kilometres divided into two zones: the so-called control and the 

so-called buffer zone. Within the control zone the authority will decide permissible land use and its 

approval will be required for all improvements. Within the buffer zone the authority’s advice must be 

sought before changes in land use or improvements can be authorized by the governing jurisdiction. The 

authority is empowered to construct improvements on its lands and public lands; that is lands owned by 

any of the participating parties. 

 

These developments, over the course of time, will include such things as parks, sanctuaries, conservation 

areas, scenic drives, recreation complexes, educational and interpretive centres. 

 

The authority will also be empowered to regulate traffic, provide policing and firefighting services, to 

protect animal, aquatic and bird life, to protect public health and prevent pollution, to prohibit excessive 

noise and other nuisances, and generally to protect persons and property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps it would be helpful to members if I outlined, very briefly, some of the aspects of 

the bill. In many respects, these powers of the bill are similar to those exerciseable by council and rural 

municipalities. The similarity ends, however, in that the jurisdiction of Saskatoon, the University of 

Saskatchewan and the rural municipalities make laws with respect to the areas within the jurisdiction, 

which would be inconsistent with the actions of the authority. As an example, the traffic controls of the 

city of Saskatoon would remain in force in that area of the city which is included in the project. The 

authority however, has power to pass by-laws controlling traffic, and if it did so, making more restrictive 

traffic control within the project, then the by-laws of the city in this respect would be modified to the 

extent of the terms of the by-law made by the authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the authority will have power to provide police services like the Wascana Centre Authority, 

and fire protection. With respect to law enforcement, the police department in Saskatoon will have 

jurisdiction throughout the entire project and the bill will provide that the authority may appoint special 

constables to supplement these services. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1948 

The authority is empowered to secure fire fighting equipment and engage the necessary staff for that 

purpose, which will complement the responsibility of the fire fighting force of the city, which will be 

responsibility for fire prevention measures within the city, of the project situated within the city. 

However, all powers of the authority must be exercised and all activities undertaken according to the 

master plan. To ensure that this occurs and to assist the project, the legislation provides for one or more 

committees on which architects and community planners will act. In this way, professional and technical 

advice will be given to the authority to assist them in determining whether improvements proposed 

within the project will be in accordance with the master plan. 

 

In order to guarantee adherence to the master plan insofar as activities carried on, or to be carried on in 

an area of the project which are authorized under certain other acts, the approval of the authority will be 

required, in addition to any formal type of approval contemplated by any area of the other acts. As an 

example, a proposal to take water from the river under The Water Rights Act requires an approval under 

that act, if the proposal to take water relates to an undertaking situation within the area of the project and 

the right to the waters to be exercised at that place. 

 

The authority would be required to be approached for its approval before the right of the water could be 

granted. It should be repeated that these measures are necessary for the activities and the use of lands and 

the river flowing in the project to follow within the overall scheme and outline of the long-term master 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the act contains a number of other detailed provisions which I think, really can be dealt 

with best in Committee of the Whole. I have attempted to give only a general overview of the history 

and the major provisions of the bill. 

 

In closing, I would like to say that this act is a result of lengthy and detailed negotiations and discussions 

with the city of Saskatoon, and may I say, people within the city of Saskatoon, interested groups who 

have participated, the University of Saskatchewan, and the Rural Municipality of Corman Park. It is 

patterned after a success story, the Wascana Centre Authority, but modified to the specific situation of 

the Saskatoon and Corman Park area. All three local parties have, by official resolution, endorsed this 

legislation and join with the government in anticipation of its becoming law so that the Meewasin Valley 

Authority will be a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 92, the Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Attorney General, what, under this legislation, happens to the property taxes 

for privately owned land within the authority? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, there is no change in the mechanism of levying or payment of 

taxes, but I would like to take further notice of that and have a specific response in Committee of the 

Whole for the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — If the Attorney General doesn’t mine, when he is taking cognizance of that fact, 

the minister will be aware that many of the private rights of ownership for private land within this 

authority are being withdrawn, and it would seem a little strange to require private owners of property 

within the area to pay the same kind of taxation 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1949 

level. Would you check to see what the effect of the bill would be on that and provide it to us in 

committee? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Yes. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, the bill is lengthy. First of all, I would thank the 

Attorney General (Mr. Romanow) for a year ago allowing me to be part of the planning of this authority 

by having some input. I thank him for being allowed to talk with the consultants about some of my 

concerns and taking some of the ideas which I recommended which I now see coming within the 

program. 

 

I’ll send this over to the Attorney General. It’s a list of the parks within the city zone and a list of parks 

outside the city that are owned by the city of Saskatoon. Could you tell me if these are located in 

schedule A in the back of this bill? I would also ask if your people, before they come to the Committee 

of the Whole, could give us a map indicating everything under schedule A and where it’s located? That’s 

all legal definitions of property and land locations and I would like to be able to run it down following 

the south to the north plan of the water. 

 

Let me first of all indicate that as far as our caucus is concerned with the Meewasin authority, we are 

very pleased with the idea, the project and its far-ranging ideas (as you indicate, 100 years). I think that 

there are key people who should be recommended a keen vote of thanks and they are those on the A 

committee who did all the hard work to plan this study, as well as some individuals who are not 

mentioned within the study who have predicted rare finds that will be indicated later as they study goes 

on. I refer to the Medicine Rock area and other areas, I think, the Attorney General will be aware of. But 

within the plan, several things concern me. 

 

First of all, there is an indication that the SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) will be shutting down 

the hot water that it pumps into the river which keeps the river in Saskatoon open year round. I would 

like the Attorney General to comment on whether SPC has agreed to shut that water off sot he river will 

be used as the plan indicates? 

 

Second of all, is it the Department of Highways or who that is going to pay for the bridge that is going to 

be coming across the city of Saskatoon? I assume by the plan that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

basically going to be picking up approximately 70 per cent of the 42nd Street Bridge because it indicates 

29 per cent of U of S, 40 per cent from the province, which will mean that the city will only have to pay 

30 per cent. Now, I’m not sure if that is the intent, but I would question the Attorney General to let me 

know if it is still 50:50 or if there has been a change of heart on the financing of the 42nd Street Bridge. 

 

As I go through the map and the concerns of the local people, and I go, of course, to the obvious 

statement (and I wish I could find another place to make this statement, Mr. Attorney General), but I 

would request that the Attorney General, once again . . . When the authority was announced and I made 

my one comment there was a quick denial from many members of the cabinet benches and yet in the 

next day or two the Attorney General admitted that I was correct. I would suggest to the Attorney 

General, when we are talking about a project that we all agree on, that he doesn’t get politics too far in as 

he did with my comment when I referred to the lake area on the northern portion. It will be flooding part 

of the land that the government under SEDCO is trying to option on behalf of a third party. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1950 

The Attorney General and I could get into a lengthy debate on that issue but I will leave that alone for 

today. Let me suggest to the Attorney General that during Committee of the Whole there are many areas 

on the schedule A that I am concerned about. It is interesting, as I hear the chat between our leader and 

the Attorney General, where they talk about the Bessborough Hotel. You know that is a good point, 

because this bill seems to indicate that the Bessborough Hotel is no more part of the city of Saskatoon. It 

now seems to be in the Meewasin Authority area. I am questioning what is going to happen if the 

Attorney General would ever check that particular park that surrounds the Bessborough, who owns it and 

what the title says to it, he will discover he is into some interesting situations. Because it one of the few 

titles that says that the property goes right out to water, which is totally different . . . (inaudible 

interjection). . . middle of the river. Well the taxation, Mr. Attorney General, which you do not seem to 

have an answer on yet . . . (inaudible interjection). . . the controls are all within this body. 

 

As I wrap up the debate on this, I suggest we should do most of the discussions in Committee of the 

Whole. I would ask the Attorney General, on that list, to give me an idea on the responsibility of that are. 

The other portions that concern me are what happens to all the employees when you form this Meewasin 

Authority, to all the employees of the city of Saskatoon, the Corman Park people, the city police? Do 

they have their own police force as with the Wascana? What are the answers to those kinds of questions? 

Over how many years are you going to be taking over within the authority any of the facilities, like for 

example, the rinks, the swimming pools, that will fall within this boundary? And if they are rented back 

and the city of Saskatoon runs them, what’s the financial obligation of the other partners to supply the 

benefits they need, for example, the parking areas and so forth at Riversdale Pool area which is 

protected? How does the federal law that says the RCMP are responsible for all water treatment 

protection areas affect this bill because that falls within the designated area? I repeat, the employees and 

the facilities, and I refer to the swimming pools and the hockey rinks and so forth. I would suggest that 

when the Attorney General knows, I spend many years in the city of Saskatoon in the parks division and 

the recreation side. I am concerned about some of the problems I see here in the Wascana Authority. 

There were arguments of who is responsible for this and who is responsible for that, who makes this 

decision. We don’t want those kind of problems with this upcoming set up and hopefully we can cure 

those in advance and have some suggestion of how it’s going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, like all the Saskatoon MLAs (I would assume) on the government side and Mr. Cowley, 

who are the MLAs affected by this, welcome this project. I’m certain they will. It will be a betterment 

for the people of the area and the community. I think it might even get rid of Eldorado for me. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be supporting this bill. 

 

MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words in regard 

to this bill. But before I go on I just want to say that I certainly wasn’t aware that the hon. member for 

Rosthern Mr. Katzman was a member of the planning committee because any time I had anything to do 

with it, as an outsider looking in, I certainly didn’t come across you. You probably were in the back 

room working on papers, drawing up blue prints and plans, etc. So I certainly commend you for anything 

that you have done that I’m probably not aware of. 

 

I just wanted to say that having been brought up in Saskatoon and having played on the 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1951 

river bank, I think this is a marvellous idea. I just want to say that this was a campaign promise on behalf 

of the Saskatoon NDP MLAs and candidates a few years ago. At that time there were six Saskatoon 

NDP MLAs. We made this a campaign promise. We now went and Saskatoon voted a full slate of NDP 

MLAs and now we have action. It shows you that Saskatoon NDP MLAs do come through with their 

promises. Mr. Attorney General you should be commended. You don’t get too many commendations in 

this House and you certainly are entitled to them so here’s one. I commend you for it and I know that 

everyone will be backing this one up including the opposition who have said that they would be 

supporting your good bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 94 — An Act respecting 

the Saskatchewan Code of Human Rights and its Administration. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move today second reading of the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code 1979. 

 

Seven years ago, Mr. Speaker, this government brought forward legislation to establish the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission to administer the human rights legislation in this province. 

Since that time, much has happened in the field of human rights. Commissions have been established in 

nearly every province and now by the federal government. 

 

The federal government, with the approval of every province, is now a party to the International 

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Social, Economic and Cultural 

Rights. Both these covenants require the signing parties, over a period of time, to amend their own 

legislation to meet the international standards set out in those covenants. A number of other provinces 

have already broadened the number of prohibited, discriminatory practices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time has certainly come to revise and codify our own human rights legislation here in 

Saskatchewan. In drafting the new human rights code, we have been guided by a number of factors. 

 

Human rights laws in other provinces. In recent years, other Canadian provinces have codified their 

human rights laws and added new grounds of prohibited, discriminatory practices — B.C. in 1973; 

Alberta, 1972; Manitoba in 1974. Wherever possible, considering the number of people who come from 

province to province, it is desirable to have close, if not uniform, legislation. 

 

We’ve been guided by representations made by groups in Saskatchewan. Here we have consulted widely 

about the content of the new human rights code. Many groups and individuals have come forward to 

present their views to myself and to the Human Rights Commission. We have not been able to 

accommodate all points of view but we have given careful consideration to all opinions presented to us. 

 

Thirdly, we have taken into account our own experience in the field of human rights. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud of Saskatchewan’s record in the field of human rights. The past chairperson, Her Honour Judge 

Taylor and the present chairperson, Professor Ken Norman, have both carried out their duties vigorously 

and skillfully. This experience 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1952 

has enabled us to determine where our laws need improvement. 

 

For all these reasons, therefore, we are moving to strengthen the human rights laws of this province as 

proposed by this bill, something which I’m sure will be welcomed by all members of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to have a very brief discussion of the provisions of the bill, first of all, the basic 

scheme. This bill brings together into one act all the legislation administered by the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission. This includes The Fair Employment Practices Act, The Fair 

Accommodation Practices Act, the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, The Blind Persons Act and The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission Act. There are major changes in two areas; the functions of 

the Human Rights Commission and the Heads of Prohibited Discriminatory Practices. The Human 

Rights Code will have primacy over other legislation, subject only to specific statutory exemptions. The 

new act also incorporates the section in existing legislation binding the Crown by its provisions. What 

are the prohibited grounds of discrimination? Under present legislation, subject to qualifications in 

certain areas, discrimination is prohibited on the basis of race, creed, religion, color, sex, nationality, 

ancestry or place of origin. The prohibited heads of discrimination under this bill will be broadened to 

now add and include, marital status, age, and physical disability. Age will be a prohibited ground of 

discrimination as it applies to the purchase of property, the use of public facilities, employment, the use 

of employment application forms, and professional associations, trade associations, and trade unions. 

Age is defined as being 18 or over and less than 65. There is a special statutory exemption dealing with, 

for example, the present discrimination of age on drinking. That remains unchanged. 

 

Discrimination on the basis of physical disability will be prohibited with respect to the right to engage in 

occupations, the right to purchase property, the right to lease commercial space and housing 

accommodation, the use of public facilities, the right to education, the right to employment, and the right 

to membership in professional associations, trade associations and trade unions. Marital status has been 

added without qualification. The definition of sex has been broadened to include pregnancy and 

pregnancy related illnesses. This will not affect maternity leave as provided for in The Labour Standards 

Act. There are certain exemptions to the prohibited discriminatory practices set out in the act. For 

example, discrimination on the basis of age and the use of public facilities is subject to statutory 

exemptions such as legal drinking — I’ve mentioned that already. Similarly, discrimination in 

employment situation on the basis of sex, physical disability and age is exempted where there is a 

reasonable occupational requirement or qualification which would permit of, or demand of, that 

discriminatory practice. 

 

I know that the member for Wilkie (Mr. Garner) will be particularly interested in my comments 

respecting The Human Rights Commission and Boards of Inquiry as proposed in this bill. Under present 

law, the Human Rights Commission performs both investigative and judicial functions. The commission 

will continue to investigate and conciliate complaints of discriminatory enactment, but if conciliation 

efforts are not successful, an entirely independent board of inquiry will be appointed by the Attorney 

General. I must say, Mr. Speaker, I’m gratified by the tremendous support I am receiving by my 

colleagues on this side of the House today on my speeches. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1953 

MR. ROMANOW: — The commission will have the carriage of the complaint before the Board of 

Inquiry. This procedural change will make Saskatchewan law identical to that now in force in many 

other provinces in Canada. 

 

Affirmative Action Programs; both boards of inquiry and the Human Rights Commission will be able to 

order affirmative action programs to help prevent discrimination respecting any group of individuals and 

to improve opportunities for groups of people in the areas of services, facilities, employment or 

education. 

 

Remedies and enforcement — an order of a board of inquiry can be registered in the Court of Queen’s 

Bench and becomes enforceable as a court order. The act provides for fines of up to $2,000 for 

individuals and $3,000 for corporations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say that I am confident that we will have with the passage of this 

bill not only a vastly improved human rights bill and laws for the province but a commission and a 

system better able and set up to administer these very important and sensitive areas of law. I therefore 

move second reading of Bill No. 94. 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I thought the Attorney General’s remarks today, Mr. Speaker, were interesting for 

what they said. I would, first of all, like to say that we on this side of the House support this bill very 

much. It does take a step forward in terms of human rights legislation, certainly from the standpoint of 

the handicapped in our province. It does much for a great many handicapped citizens of our province and 

to a lesser extent those senior citizens who feel that they still have a great deal to contribute and whose 

companies feel they have a great deal to contribute and who, due to mandatory retirement legislation 

which has been in place before, were no longer to make those contributions. I think this bill certainly 

takes significant strides forward in this area. 

 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, that the Attorney General’s remarks were particularly significant for what they 

did not say. It is not often in this House when a member of the opposition can say that he influenced the 

thinking of the government members. So you will pardon me, Mr. Speaker, if just briefly I say to the 

members and especially the members opposite that for the first time since I have been in this Legislative 

Assembly, the government has reacted to something which I have said at the start of a session. Mr. 

Speaker, it is interesting to note that the NDP itself called for the inclusion of, if you like, gay rights in 

this legislation. The NDP resolution passed. Mr. Norman, himself, called for the inclusion in this 

legislation of that section. The way things were going here a couple or three months ago, the way the 

Attorney General was talking in speeches that he gave in Saskatoon, in speeches that he gave here in 

Regina, it seemed that the government was going to listen to its party and was going to listen to Mr. 

Norman and they were going to include a very onerous section in the human rights legislation, a section 

that just didn’t belong in the human rights legislation of our province. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, because of the remarks . . . As a matter of fact, the Attorney General himself said 

on CBC television Friday evening that one of the major reasons they didn’t proceed with the NDP 

resolution on gay rights, and they didn’t proceed on Mr. Norman’s recommendations on gay rights, was 

the fact I had raised at the start of this session, a question that had been raised outside this Assembly by a 

leading gay rights spokesman pertaining to the government. 

 

So, I must say that because of that remark and because of the subsequent actions of the gentleman in 

Saskatoon, I cam under a considerable amount of flak for raising it, not the least of which came from 

within my own party. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that for one 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1954 

time in my political life I am proud to have done something and had a contribution to make to the 

government because the inclusion of that kind of legislation in the human rights legislation in the 

province of Saskatchewan would, in fact, call into question the whole area of human rights legislation in 

the minds of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It would, if you like, remove the good work that has been done by a great many organizations in the 

province of Saskatchewan, a great many organizations over the last number of years, not just NDP years, 

but the last number of years, to make certain that discrimination did not exist in our province, 

discrimination against a person because of their sex or their race or their creed or their color and to work 

hard to enforce that legislation. But had you included this resolution in this legislation, quote: 

 

A call for the Saskatchewan government to enact a law prohibiting discrimination on the basis of 

sexual orientation, highlighted the final day of the three-day provincial NDP convention Sunday. 

(This is from the Leader Post, November 20, 1978). On a counted show of hands vote, the 

approximately 750 registered delegates approved the resolution asking for amendments to human 

rights legislation forbidding discrimination on the basis of age, marital status, sexual orientation or 

handicap. 

 

That, of course, was left out. The point is, Mr. Speaker, that had that been included in this legislation all 

of the human rights legislation in the province would have been called into question, and I’m quoting the 

Attorney General in his remarks on TV the other night, it would all have been called into question. 

Thank goodness, it was raised at the start of the session and raised enough of a furor at the start of the 

session that the Attorney General and the cabinet and the whole caucus of members opposite had to 

listen to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. They had to listen to the people of the province 

who refused to accept that kind of lowering of the moral standards and the moral fibre of our province. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. COLLVER: — I’m glad that the member has raised that. I to point out earlier the entire spectrum 

of thought which was coming up — the passage of this legislation, the recommendation at the NDP 

convention and the Attorney General’s remarks. It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Attorney 

General still doesn’t rule it out. He just says, at this time the people aren’t ready for it. There are more 

press clippings here, ‘Battle call at Convention” and “Battle call in human rights legislation’, ‘Sexual 

Orientation.’ 

 

The member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) has asked me to read this into the record and I quote: 

 

The convention decided that human rights legislation should prohibit discrimination on the basis of 

sexual orientation. Despite comments that such laws would spell trouble for school boards trying 

to deal with homosexual teachers, the delegates ruled that a person’s private sex life is irrelevant to 

his rights as a human being. (That’s what the delegates ruled, but the government overruled. Why? 

Because they started to listen to the real thoughts of the people and that that’s not human rights at 

all.) 

 

Blakeney said he wanted to see what protection already exists for 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1955 

homosexuals. (Now they themselves called for the inclusion in this human rights legislation, but 

Blakeney said he wanted to see what already existed.) 

 

The problem in dealing with human rights, he told reporters, was in deciding the balance between 

the rights of one group against another. Enshrining rights for one usually means restricting rights 

for another. 

 

Well that’s true and that’s true for all human rights legislation and I am glad to see, quite frankly, that 

the members opposite in their discussions overruled their own convention and overruled their own 

appointee to the Human Rights Commission and excluded that legislation even though the Attorney 

General was attempting to back it for the last three or four months. Even though he was attempting to 

play both sides against the middle, even though he is still trying to pick up support from this side and 

that side and say, well gosh, we just left it out because it is the wrong time. 

 

Maybe the Attorney General would listen to the individuals in Saskatchewan who say that there are other 

rights, there are rights of children to be free from this kind of moral degradation. There are rights of 

schools to determine whether or not that kind of degradation is to be taught to their children. There are 

other rights, and those rights of those individuals are just as paramount as these so-called rights. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Anyone want to disagree with that over there? 

 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that for the first time in my political life, something that 

I have done has made them listen. Something that I’ve done has made them leave it out. The issue, by 

the way, was raised by a leading spokesman for gay rights in Saskatchewan, on the air, on CKOM radio, 

with no answer from members opposite — none whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. It was raised, and in the 

meantime, the Attorney General is talking about these rights and how it’s important to include them, and 

the convention is bringing the rights forward, and so on and so forth. This man suddenly says, well, 

heavens, there’s one in the cabinet as well, which is designed to bring about a feeling in the people. 

Well, it’s just automatic, we might as well include it. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that I 

brought this to the attention of the House. I’m proud that the Attorney General, as a result, heard from 

the people. I’m proud that the other members heard from the people to include it. 

 

I have some more to say on this entire matter and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 76 — An act respecting 

Non-profit Corporations. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in 1977, The Business Corporations Act was passed to provide a comprehensive 

and modern law of governing corporations with share capital, whose object was the making of profit for 

the benefit of its members. This year, it is my pleasure to bring forward a bill to provide a 

comprehensive and modern law of governing corporations without share capital, whose purpose 

excludes pecuniary gain for its members. 

 

Non-profit corporations are engaged in a wide range of activities. Such corporations promote art, 

science, research, culture, religion, charity and many other useful functions. They provide housing, 

nursing homes, hospitals, transportation, fire 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1956 

protection, legal aid, health clinics, amateur and professional sports (an example would be the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders), recreational facilities such as buildings, parks and swimming pools. Some 

also provide cemeteries and funeral services (for example, the Kindersley Funeral Home). Others 

provide funds such as our United Appeal organizations. There area over 3,000 non-profit corporations in 

Saskatchewan at the present time, and about 500 are being incorporated each year. Some of these carry 

on extensive programs with a very substantial budget. The trend in Saskatchewan and throughout 

Canada indicates the non-profit corporation is a vehicle with increasing practical importance and impact 

upon society. Nevertheless, Saskatchewan has never had an act to adequately accommodate non-profit 

corporations or the type of concern such organizations may experience. As a result of limitations and 

restrictions in its laws, some 230 found it necessary to incorporate under The Companies Act. Others 

found it necessary to proceed by way of a special act of the legislature. In some cases, provision has been 

made for incorporation under another act such as, for example, The Agricultural Societies Act. 

 

The aim of the bill is to provide sufficient flexibility so that any type of non-profit corporation may 

operate under it. A non-profit corporation is clearly empowered under this bill to carry on business and 

to earn profits subject to the condition that none of the profits flow through to its members but instead 

are applied only to furtherance of its activities. The bill recognizes two basic kinds of non-profit 

corporations; a charitable corporation and a membership corporation. In general, a charitable corporation 

and a membership corporation. In general, a charitable corporation is one that carries on activities 

primarily for the benefit of the public. It is therefore treated, particularly in respect of financial 

disclosure, as a public corporation which distributes its shares to the public. Whereas, a membership 

corporation is one that carries on activities primarily for the benefit of its members and is treated much 

like a closely held or private corporation. 

 

The bill before you, like The Business Corporation Act which it parallels, sets out a legal system 

designed to be clear comprehensive and practical for all corporations. The bill parallels closely the 

corresponding provisions of The Business Corporations Act because the principles applicable to both 

types of corporations are basically the same: to establish a reasonable balance of interest between 

corporation’s management and its membership. 

 

The interest of a member in a membership corporation may be as important as the interest of a 

shareholder in a business corporation. Similarly, the public have or may have a vested interest in the 

proper functioning of a charitable corporation. The bill, though comprehensive, seeks to eliminate empty 

formalities and to provide a law that is workable. Its principal features are as follows: 

 

1. A corporation may, subject to some qualifications, be formed with only one incorporator instead of 

five, as now required; 

 

2. Incorporation has been simplified. The Societies Act, which is being replaced by this bill, is brief but 

because it is brief incorporators must, in effect, write a statutory code into their by-laws. Under this bill, 

by-laws rake on a lesser function and therefore, need not be filed. Also, the objects or purposes for 

which a corporation is being formed need not be listed; 

 

3. A corporation is given the capacity of a natural person subject only to any restrictions that may, in its 

articles, impose upon itself; 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1957 

4. Where a non-profit corporation is liquidated or dissolved, if it is a charitable corporation, its 

remaining assets must be distributed to one or more corporations which have similar purposes. If it is a 

membership corporation, its remaining property must be distributed pursuant to its articles or, if there are 

no express provisions in its articles, then rateably to the existing members at the time of liquidation or 

dissolution; 

 

5. A corporation may, in its articles, impose restrictions on the activities it may carry on or the powers it 

may exercise. In the case of a charitable corporation that solicits money or property from the public, 

court approval is required to alter these restrictions; 

 

6. A membership corporation need have only one member and one director, but a charitable corporation 

must have not less than three directors. A majority of the directors must be resident Canadians and at 

least one director must reside in Saskatchewan; 

 

7. Like The Business Corporations Act which it parallels, the bill establishes a reasonable balance of 

interest between a corporation’s management and its members and, if sufficiently comprehensive, the 

by-laws need not be sent to the director. The filing of by-laws under present laws are a statutory 

requirement that is necessary because, as already stated, the statute lacks an adequate framework within 

which a corporation may operate; 

 

8. The bill contains other provisions which parallel The Business Corporations Act such as provisions 

respecting directors, auditors, remedies for dissenting members of interjurisdictional transfer; 

 

9. The bill introduces for the first time provision for registration of extra-provincial non-profit 

corporations under an act that governs non-profit corporations. At present such corporations may register 

only under The Business Corporations Act. 

 

At the passing of this bill Saskatchewan will have a comprehensive and modern law governing not only 

business corporations but non-profit corporations as well. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of this bill. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, the member that was going to respond is unable to be back in time 

to respond and, therefore, he wishes to make his comments at a later time in reply, so I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend 

The Liquor Act 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Liquor Act really concern two particular areas as members 

will see by reading through it. 

 

First of all, it’s changing from the present system to the metric system with respect to the measures hat 

are found in the act. Secondly, in the case of returning officers being appointed for liquor votes, they 

have always in the past been municipal clerks and in the very odd circumstance we’ve found there has 

been a conflict of interest here where a municipal clerk will have an interest in the outcome of a 

particular vote. So, it will no longer be required although I would think in the vast majority of cases, we 

would use the municipal clerk, but in the event that the municipal clerk had an interest in the 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1958 

outcome of the vote, for example, if his wife owned the hotel which the vote was about, then we would 

use someone else as the returning officer. I think it’s a very small point. I don’t see anything particularly 

controversial in this act and, therefore, I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. E. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 86 — An Act to amend 

The Constituency Boundaries Commission Act 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments are necessary because the present act provides for a commission 

to be established as soon as possible after the main census is taken every 10 years. The next main census 

will be in 1981. That will mean that a commission could not be set up until 1982 and there would not be 

sufficient time to establish new constituencies prior to the next general election. 

 

The purpose of this bill is to provide for the setting up of a commission in 1979 and every eighth year 

thereafter. We believe that it’s important for new constituencies to be established as soon as possible 

before the next election. 

 

Under the present act the commission to report on constituency boundaries must be established for the 

main census taken every 10 years, 1971, 1981, etc. If the Lieutenant-Governor in Council considers it to 

be in the public interest, it may establish a commission every fifth year for the less exhaustive census, 

i.e. 1976 or 1986. These amendments provide that a commission must be established in 1979 and every 

eighth year thereafter. 

 

If the Lieutenant-Governor in Council considers it to be in the public interest, a commission may be set 

up in every fourth year, i.e., the first opportunity for this to appear would be 1983. The commission will 

base its determination on voter enumeration. The clerk of the Executive Council will be required to 

obtain (a) for each provincial election, copies of the voters’ lists sent to the chief electoral officer, and 

(b) for each federal election, a copy of the report of the chief electoral officer, since there is no 

requirement that voters’ lists be sent to the federal chief electoral officer, which contains enumeration 

figures. 

 

The commission will be required to determine population by referring to the most recent voters’ list in 

the year in which it is established. For the commission established in 1979, this will be the list prepared 

for the last provincial general election. However, the commission may refer to the federal voters’ lists 

available at the time of its deliberations. In this way we believe that the commission will have the best 

possible information before it in order to determine the population for the constituencies. 

 

There are also some minor housekeeping amendments necessary to fix up some inconsistencies in the 

act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members will agree that it is important to complete the job of 

redistribution as soon as possible so that people will know which constituency they will be living in for 

the next provincial election. The voters list prepared for the provincial election last year, together with 

the lists currently being prepared for the federal election this year, will provide the commission with 

accurate current information on Saskatchewan’s population. 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1959 

It is our intention to establish a commission as soon as possible after this act is passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to Amend The Constituency Boundaries Commission Act 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, if the member for Regina Rosemont (Mr. Allen) feels that way, I 

invite the member for Regina Rosemont to come out and tackle me in Thunder Creek, and I invite you to 

borrow the $100 for a deposit because I guarantee that I will take it. But feel free to come, nonetheless. 

Don’t let me scare you off. Come and find out for yourself, or anybody else for that matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is there some reason that members must put up with this sort of abuse? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I think members are getting one step ahead of the legislation. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, we have some comments that we would wish to make in this 

regard. One of our concerns which we wish to express is to discuss the possibility of preserving 

Saskatchewan’s character in its representation. 

 

One of the problems (and this is certainly not unique to Saskatchewan, I believe it is unique to all parts 

of Canada) is that rural Canada is slowly but surely losing more of its representation in legislatures and 

the House of Commons as the years go on. Now certainly there is the argument of representation by 

population and it has a great deal of validity. No one will dispute that. At the same time I do not believe 

that members, regardless of your political stripe, will dispute the fact that rural Canada, rural 

Saskatchewan and rural Alberta also have their rights in the legislatures and the House of Commons. It 

may very well be time that we in Saskatchewan borrow something from the province of Quebec; perhaps 

the rights of the rural area in this legislature must be protected by statute. Now this raises some 

ramifications. We believe that it does not do this Assembly any harm to look at it in a non-partisan 

fashion. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, we have more to say in this area. We have some proposals which 

we wish to discuss with the government. Therefore, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of Environment) moved second reading of Bill No. 85 — An Act 

to amend The Water Supply Board Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased with the responses that I am getting to this very important bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the moving of An Act to amend The Water Supply Board Act is really just a matter of 

housekeeping in terms of the areas of responsibility and jurisdiction of the Water Supply Board. 

Members of the House will know that there have been other pieces of legislation in the Assembly this 

year and in previous years dealing with bringing many of the Crown corporations into line with the 

general provisions of the Crown Investments Corporation, bringing them into one of the areas of 

jurisdiction of responsibility more related to that body than they have operated in the past. 

 

The bill really provides for the establishment of executive committees, which is not 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1960 

new. The Crown Investments Corporation legislation a year ago made that provision so that executive 

committees rather than full board meetings would be required. 

 

The second amendment provides for the flexibility in superannuation benefits which can accrue to 

members of the Water Supply Board. The provisions have been that they receive their superannuation 

facilities through the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association benefits. Now if the 

employees so opt these can be provided through the benefits of the Crown Investments Corporation 

package. 

 

The third amendment, section 5 of the bill, repeals the existing sections in The Water Supply Board Act 

relating to the financing and the operation of the corporation and replaces them with provisions similar 

to those found in most legislation creating the Crown corporations. 

 

The introduction of a new section 12 (2) will also allow the legislature to review the overall funding of 

the corporation in a more meaningful way than currently exists, as the funding arrangements between the 

Department of Finance and the Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the bill removes some sections in the existing act which have been made 

superfluous by the adoption of The Crown Corporations Act itself. 

 

In summary, I don’t think that there are any provisions in the bill which would not solicit the support of 

the members of the opposition with respect to the changes being made. As I indicated at the outset, they 

are really just amendments of a housekeeping nature and I am sure that they are non-controversial in the 

sense that they would require a great deal of attention by the members of the opposition. I would, 

therefore, move second reading of the bill. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — I can’t resist to get up and say, we join with the minister in 

agreement on this bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

HON. E. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 97 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have an opportunity to explain briefly amendments which are 

being proposed to The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. As members sill be aware, last 

summer the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission, agreed to establish a joint professional review committee. This 

committee, as I explained previously in this House, would review claims submitted by physicians to the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission when there are unresolved questions about their accuracy. It was 

agreed that the committee’s work was essential to insure the public accountability of the medical 

insurance plan and I’m pleased to inform the House that arrangements are already being made between 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the Medical Care Insurance Commission to establish an 

initial meeting. 

 

The proposed amendment is intended to provide legal protection to members of the 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1961 

joint Professional Review Committee against possible libel charges from individual physicians. This 

protection is required because two of the joint Professional Review Committee members will be from 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association and two others from the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 

These non-government members will have access to classified Medical Care Insurance commission 

information on physician billings to the commission. 

 

Further, the conclusions of the joint Professional Review Committee, along with the evidence in support 

of the conclusions and recommendations, will be shared by the board of the SMA (Saskatchewan 

Medical Association) and the council of the College of Physicians and Surgeons as well as with the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission. 

 

While the Medical Care Insurance Commission and its officials are protected in law while performing 

their duties and responsibilities, similar protection is not given to the Saskatchewan Medical Association 

and the College of Physicians and Surgeons’ officials. This amendment will correct that omission. 

 

The second amendment relates, Mr. Speaker, to the direct billing of patients by physicians. In these 

instances the patient receives a bill from the physician and then submits the bill to the commission. The 

commission then reimburses the patient according to the Medical Care Insurance Commission’s payment 

schedule. The physician’s charge to the patient is a matter of contract between themselves and does not 

directly involve the commission. 

 

In Saskatchewan this type of billing is commonly referred to as mode 3 billing, as members know. Under 

the present act the physician’s only obligation in these cases is to furnish the patient with sufficient 

information to enable him to receive payment from the commission. The patient is not required to 

submit the information to the commission in any particular format. Any form of written statement will 

suffice so long as it contains the information required by the Medical Care Insurance Commission to pay 

the account. 

 

The proposed amendment, Mr. Speaker, which is aimed at minimizing administrative costs, (and I have 

discussed this with the Saskatchewan Medical Association), will require physicians to furnish patients 

with the necessary information on a form approved by the commission for that purpose and which will 

be discussed with the SMA prior to that. 

 

As I said previously, Mr. Speaker, physicians who directly bill their patients at present already provide 

this sort of information. The amendment will simply require that the information be provided in a 

standard form. 

 

The third and last amendment concerns section 20 of the current act, which provides the commission 

with the authority to act as agent for a minister or a government agency in making payments to 

physicians for services rendered whether or not the services are insured. No provision, however, exists 

whereby a minister or a government agency can appoint the commission to act as its agent. In other 

words, the commission has the authority to act as an agent but a person or agency may not have the 

authority to appoint a commission to act as agent. Moreover, the act does not define the expression 

‘government agency’. 

 

At present the commission acts as agent only for the Minister of Health in making payment to private 

physicians for services provided to cancer patients. In view 



 

April 23, 1979 

 

 

1962 

of the plans for a new cancer foundation, the bill of which has been introduced in this House, it was 

thought advisable to make the necessary amendments now to avoid future difficulties in this area. The 

proposed amendment will specifically authorize a minister of the Crown or an agency of the government 

to appoint the commission to act as its agent. Moreover, the term ‘agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan’ will be specifically defined. 

 

With that brief explanation of the three amendments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 

 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, our critic for this area had to be away, unfortunately, 

and has asked me to stand the bill so that he can make his comments. 

 

I ask permission to adjourn debate on the bill so that he can speak on it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION 

 

NIGHT SITTINGS 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before we proceed to call it 5 o’clock, I 

move, by leave of the Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Labour, the Hon. G.T. Snyder, that on 

Wednesday, April 25, 1979 and on each Wednesday until the end of the session, Rule No. 3, subsection 

3 be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7 o’clock p.m. until 10 

o’clock p.m. 

 

I think it is self-explanatory. I have done this as a result of some discussions. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5 until 7 p.m. 


