


























































Hansard: April 25, 1979


2065 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
April 25, 1979 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon Westmount): — I would like to introduce to the Legislative 
Assembly a group of 45 Grade 8 students from Westmount public school in Saskatoon. As you may have 
guessed, they are in the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount which I have the honor to represent. 
 
They are accompanied today by 3 people — Mr. Toles, Mr. Gallagher and Miss Street. I am looking forward 
to the opportunity to meet with the students and their teachers later on to discuss any questions that might 
arise with regard to the question period today. 
 
I know that all members will join with me in welcoming these students from Saskatoon to the Legislative 
Assembly, and wishing them a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce to 
you and to the members of the Assembly 18 students seated in the west gallery. The 18 students are here 
from the Kinistino High School. They are Grade 12 students and they are accompanied here by two people, 
their teachers, Richard Friesen and Guy Gratias. I am sure that all hon. members will join with me in wishing 
that they have a very good day in the legislature, a very educational day in the legislature. I as well as 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, will be meeting with the students a little later on for questions. I hope that after they 
have witnessed the proceedings of the House they will have a great time in the city of Regina and have a 
good journey back to Kinistino. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I introduce to the 
Assembly 27 Grade 8 students from Stewart Russell School in the Glencairn subdivision of Regina. They are 
accompanied by Alice Henderson. I would like to advise the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that they have one of 
the finer, I believe, debating programs of the schools led by Alice Henderson. I had the honor to be invited to 
participate last year and I understand it's being proceeded with again this year. They are a very active and 
interested group, Mr. Speaker. They are seated in the east gallery. I know we wish them all an interesting 
afternoon and we thank them for coming. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and through you 
to this Assembly 19 members of the Grade 12 class from the Broadview High School seated in the east 
gallery, and their teacher, Mr. Mike Pitzel. I'd like to point out at this time that Broadview was the one high 
school in the Indian Head-Wolseley constituency under the guidance of Mr. Pitzel that invited all three 
candidates to speak to his students. I think you should be congratulated for taking this stand, Mr. Pitzel. I 
hope you have an enjoyable day here today, enjoy the proceedings of the House. I'll be 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2066 

meeting with you after the oral questions for pictures and some refreshments. Of course, I hope you have a 
safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
QUESTIONS 
 

SALE OF GOLDEN ACRES MOTEL 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, question to the minister in charge of SEDCO. 
Mr. Minister, from time to time the subject of the Golden Acres Motel in Moose Jaw has come up in this 
Assembly. Mr. Minister is it true that a gentleman by the name of Marshall Eliuk of Peace River, Alberta has 
taken an option with SEDCO to purchase Golden Acres Motel for the price of $450,000 and has presented 
SEDCO with a cheque for $45,000? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is partially 
correct. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, perhaps in the supplementary you could elaborate on what portion is 
not correct. However, Mr. Minister, since the court records of January 17, 1977 indicate that the principal 
and interest charges against Golden Acres at the time they went into receivership were $509,363 and since 
the interest meter has since been running approximately 27 months, it is now obvious that the people of 
Saskatchewan and SEDCO will take a loss of at least $175,000. Since this is now clearly established, would 
the minister tell this Assembly whether or not, in light of this loss, that the personal guarantees which are on 
record in this Assembly and in Crown corporations as indicating do exist, will now be caused to cover this 
loss? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member is making an awful lot of assumptions. I have said 
before and I will repeat again that nothing will be disclosed until such time as Golden Acres is completely 
disposed of. At that time, everything will be disclosed in Crown corporations. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, (and I would direct this 
supplementary to the Minister of Highways (Mr. Kramer) if he were present, is it true that in this deal and 
the package to Mr. Marshall Eliuk of Peace River, Alberta, that Mr. Eliuk has been granted by the 
Department of Highways in conjunction with SEDCO, direct access from the Golden Acres property directly 
onto the Trans-Canada Highway, something which was previously denied to the initial owners. Would the 
minister tell us, in this arrangement which has been made (which I believe Mr. Eliuk will stand behind), 
precisely who will pay for this access? Will it be the Department of Highways? Will it be Mr. Eliuk and 
what will be the costs since this has already been worked out? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, assuming that the hon. member is partially correct in this instance, I can't 
speak for the Department of Highways nor do I like the hon. member's type of questioning. It might interfere 
at the end with the sale of the Golden Acres property. I would like to recommend to the hon. member, if he 
would, please refrain from using that completely negative approach with the sale of that property. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I'll take a new question. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2067 

GOLDEN ACRES 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, on the occasions in this Assembly since Golden Acres has been 
brought up in the question periods, isn't it true when you announced the sale of Golden Acres on March 28 
that you were not in fact announcing the sale; you were announcing an option? Isn't it true that you did not 
tell the truth on that occasion when you indicated that it would be sold and the details announced on April 
19? Again, isn't it true that you were not telling the truth yesterday in this Assembly when you changed it, 
saying that the sale would be announced on May 30? Again, that was inaccurate. Mr. Minister, how many 
inaccuracies must we have before we can expect some sort of action on your part? Mr. Minister, you have 
said in this Assembly today that I am partially incorrect. Would the minister finally have enough nerve to 
stand on his feet and tell me where I am on this? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MEDICAL AGE OF CONSENT 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — This morning I phoned MCIC (Medical Care Insurance 
Commission) inquiries and asked for a breakdown of my annual MCIC statement to which they replied we 
can provide that, but anyone in your family over the age of 13 will get their breakdown under a separate 
cover. Can you indicate to this House under what legislative authority MCIC can withhold information about 
my 14-year-old daughter as it relates to health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I don't know who the member spoke 
to in the Medical Care Insurance Commission, but it has been my experience that indeed, that kind of 
information is provided. There are numbers of people . , . (inaudible interjection) . , . if the Leader of the 
Opposition (Mr. Collver) will wait a minute, I will finish the answer and he might be informed. There are 
quite a large number of people who write to the Medical Care Insurance Commission and indeed, to my 
office as a result of the statements which we have sent out last year and this year indicating the amount of 
expenditures made on their behalf because of certain health care services. Those people, some of them have 
inquired about the breakdown of the kind of services they have received and that has been provided. If the 
member wants to speak to me about his particular case at any time today, I certainly will check into the 
situation which he raises because I'm sure it's available. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The fact is that MCIC has indicated to many who have 
called that anyone over the age of 13 will get the breakdown under a separate cover. Bearing in mind that in 
recent days, you, in this House, have said you do not intend to bring in any legislation to reduce the medical 
age of consent, would you not agree the reason you've been able to say that is the medical age of consent 
under MCIC policy is now effectively 13 years of age? What legislative authority have you got? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all say the member in his question is doing 
nothing less than trying to deliberately mislead the public with that kind of statement. Mr. Speaker, that is 
not the policy of the Medical Care Insurance Commission. That has got nothing to do with the inquiry he 
made and in light of the kind of questioning he is pursuing, I doubt very much whether he made the call. But 
nevertheless, I shall check that. I will give him, Mr. Speaker, the benefit of the doubt because you have to 
give the Conservatives an awful lot of doubt. If he would be so good as to, as I said earlier, indicate to me 
what is precisely the information he wanted, I 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2068 

will talk to the Medical Care Insurance Commission and I will see that information is provided to him. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on a personal point of privilege, I would ask that the minister withdraw 
the remarks as it relates to whether or not . , . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, you'll not accept the point of privilege? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I want to keep order in this committee. If the member wishes to ask me about a point of 
order later on, he can. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Since Mr. Speaker won't entertain a point of privilege at this time, I will accept the 
source and just take it from there. 
 
By way of supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister of Health (Mr. Tchorzewski) would instruct 
MCIC (Medical Care Insurance Commission) to provide information, as it relates to the breakdown of the 
annual statement of MCIC, to the parents of all those covered on their card and not just those under 13 years 
of age? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, if it will make the member feel better I will accept the fact at his 
word that he indeed made the call. I don't want to start a debate on that particular question, and it's not really 
a matter of whether anybody was out of order, but if it will satisfy him I'll do that. 
 
I will also undertake to take the suggestion he has made and the question he has asked to the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission and make an inquiry, and later this week or early next week I will get back to him 
personally and give him all the information he requests. 
 

DISBANDING OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RENEWABLE RESOURCES 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — I'd like to direct a question to the last Minister of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources in the province of Saskatchewan. Can you, in light of the press announcements of 
yesterday that a proposal is before Cabinet to disband and do away with the Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources, advise this Assembly when the tentative date is for that particular practice and would 
you also advise the Assembly whether or not your resignation from that portfolio, previously announced, in 
fact had something to do with the desires of the government to do away with this department? 
 
HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Chairman, in reply to 
the hon. member's question, I want to first of all state that the matter of government reorganization is always 
being discussed at one time or another with the government, particularly from the standpoint of providing 
better delivery of services to the Saskatchewan people. 
 
For the hon. member to accept the announcement as gospel truth is far from accurate. I want to say that I 
indicated earlier that discussions with respect to government reorganizations are an ongoing thing and will 
continue with any government that is being progressive. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2069 

MR. LANE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In light of the minister’s pointed refusal to deny the charge, 
would the minister indicate why the people of Saskatchewan should have confidence in your talk about 
government reorganization when this department is only five years old? And it indicates there was some 
pretty poor planning if you have a department, highly touted, only five years old, you're now deciding to do 
away with; so why should we have confidence in that type of planning and reorganization? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think it's a question of poor planning at all. I think it's planning 
with the thought in mind of providing better services to the people of Saskatchewan. Again I say, 
reorganization in government should be an ongoing thing and this government which is broad-minded and 
open to the idea, will always accept the fact that reorganization is something that should always be kept in 
mind with a government that is going to provide the best kind of services to Saskatchewan people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — With answers like that I would hope he would stay in the cabinet, Mr. Premier. But I think 
the minister will admit that the practice of this particular study under Mr. Mitchell, is highly irregular to say 
the least. First of all you say you have ongoing discussions and now all of a sudden the exception is that a 
deputy minister of a department (one of the worst ones), the department . , . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think the member is getting into debate. I wonder if he could just get to 
the question? 
 
MR. LANE: — My question is, you have had a deputy minister seconded for four months, you've by-passed 
the department of management improvement or the Budget Bureau, so you followed a highly irregular 
practice on your study in this case. Would you not now admit that in fact the removal and the folding up or 
disbanding of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources was planned for some considerable 
months and you were just putting the stamp of approval on it by using Mr. Mitchell and that it was probably 
contingent on your resigning and tied to your resignation? 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member's assumption that the Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources is going to be disbanded, is premature and far from accurate. 
 

LAKESIDE NURSING HOME - WOLSELEY 
 
MR. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Social 
Services (Mr. Rolfes). Have you changed your policies regarding the Lakeside Nursing Home in Wolseley? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Social Services): — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. As we have seen evidence of departments not 
informing their ministers of decisions being made, on the side opposite, is it possible, Mr. Minister, that 
someone in your department has changed this policy and has failed to inform you of it? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Are you not aware, Mr. Minister, that there is a directive from your 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2070 

department which is reducing Lakeside Home from a 70-bed nursing home (which you assured me in 
February that it would remain) to a 65-bed nursing home? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I always tell the truth. It's synonymous with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — But, Mr. Speaker, that's more than the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) can 
say about himself or his seatmate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't know what the member is basing his facts on. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure him 
that there is no policy change as it relates to the nursing home which he is referring to. I am not sure if the 
number of beds is 65 or 70 — if it was 65, they remain at 65. If they are 70, they will remain at 70. There is 
no change. 
 

RICHES REPORT 
 
MRS. J. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. In 
response to my question yesterday on the Riches Report you stated you were, 'not aware' that that is correct. 
Mr. Minister seeing that you commented on this report last Thursday in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, were 
you deliberately misleading me or trying to evade the question? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, I don't mislead people. Mr. Speaker, that practice is foreign to me 
. , . (inaudible interjection) . , . Since I can't put up with the rivalry over there, my voice won't permit it 
today, I'll have to wait until there is some silence on the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said to the . , . (inaudible interjection) . , . at least I had them at one time which is more than I 
can say for you . , . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, this is the report the hon. member is referring to. When I was asked by the 
press in Saskatoon to make a comment on the report, I indicated to them that I had not gotten beyond page 5. 
Therefore, I didn't want to comment but if they had some general questions to ask pertaining to restraint 
policies as far as the federal and provincial governments were concerned I would be willing to answer some 
questions and that is what I did. 
 
Yesterday the member also asked me a question as to whether or not a questionnaire was sent to the people 
of my department and whether or not they had answered those questionnaires. If she had gone through the 
back part of the report I think she could have gotten her answer. Yes, a questionnaire was sent out. Yes, 
some people did answer the questionnaire. I didn't get that far yesterday but I managed to look through it last 
night very quickly and I found the answers there. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary. One of the findings was the lowering of staff morale, yet you stated in 
the paper this was likely incorrect and you haven't found that. Mr. Minister, if the responses came from 
within your own department, how can you deny it? 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2071 

MR. ROLFES: — It's not very difficult to deny, Mr. Speaker. The evidence shows otherwise. I think I have 
a high morale in the department and out in the field and I proud of the people who work for social services. 
What is indicated, Mr. Speaker, also in the report — as I skimmed it rather quickly and again I did not read 
the report in detail, I am not going to comment on the report in detail — what I will say in general terms (and 
I have said to the press in general terms), when you work in the area of social services or health or education 
and you directly work with people, you constantly are working under pressure and there is a burnt-out factor. 
I think the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) indicated the other day in the House that if you 
are directly working with people, there is a burnt-out factor and I think we must be aware of and guard 
against that. In that regard, Mr. Speaker, yes, I agree that there could be some people who would want to get 
out of social services and move into some area where maybe the pressures aren't quite as direct and where 
they could preserve some of their energies in other fields. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. As the report is critical of your department 
and points to serious problems in it, would you not agree then, Mr. Minister, that you as the minister, cannot 
handle or cope with the criticism and that in fact, you are unable to show any semblance of control over your 
own department? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I really like those kinds of questions. I will let the people of the province 
decide as to whether or not I am a capable minister. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I will let the Premier of this province decide whether or not I am 
a capable minister of the Crown. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the report does not say, as she had indicated, that . , . (inaudible interjection) . , . well, 
his is about 155. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, the report does not bear out what she has indicated and I 
don't think the member has read the report. If she had read the report she knows that her accusations are not 
correct and therefore, I do not agree with her statement. 
 

UNFUNDED LIABILITY - TEACHERS' SUPERANNUATION FUND 
 
MR. H. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — The other day I asked a question to the Minister of Education (Mr. 
Shillington) and before we got the answer the question period came to an end. I hope that isn't going to 
happen again. 
 
During estimates you gave me a figure of $675 million that was an unfunded liability in the teachers' 
superannuation fund. In a letter signed by you to the teachers in Martin Collegiate, you stated that the 
unfunded liability was $725 million. It is a difference of $50 million and I would like to know which one of 
the answers is closest. It seems that we are having some trouble with figures. 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Education): — The letter to Martin Collegiate was written 
before we had our last actuarial study done. Previous to this March, the last actuarial study we had done, I 
would think, Mr. Speaker, would have been about 18 months ago. And so our figure of $800 million which I 
was using in that letter to the staff of Martin Collegiate was an estimate. 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2072 

In March of this year and after that letter was written, we had a further actuarial study done by Thomas 
Alexander Associates, and they came up with the figure of $675 million, so that is the current figure. The 
figure of $800 million is a figure which is out of date and in fact, was out of date when the letter was written. 
But it is the estimate we had. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The letter states $725 million. It was a letter which you sent 
in April, dated April 4 and signed by you. It must have come out and should have come out with the same 
figure that you gave me in the House but doesn't. I am still wondering whether the figure should be $725 
million. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I am not sure what the date of the letter was. The figure being used there was a 
figure which we had been using during the fall and winter and during the spring in our discussion with the 
teachers. I think that figure has now become out of date and the proper figure now is $675 million. That 
figure is out of date. 
 

INTERIM FINANCING FOR SASK POWER 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, on Monday last the member for Thunder 
Creek (Mr. Thatcher) asked why the line of credit by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation from the 
Chemical Bank has increased in 1978 from $44.5 million to $48.5 million in 1979. Mr. Speaker, under the 
original agreement of April 4, 1977, SPC arranged for a line of credit up to $65 million (U.S.). 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation subsequently reduced the commitment by $16.5 million (U.S.) Leaving a 
ceiling balance of $48.5 million (U.S.), which is outstanding at this date. The amount has increased from 
$44.5 million to $48.5 million (U.S.) because of additional capital needs. 
 
The increase has not occurred due to the currency difference as the hon. member tried to imply. Currency 
differentials only occur when you convert from one currency to a foreign currency. As this loan was initiated 
in U.S. currency and is outstanding in U.S. currency, there has been no conversion of U.S. currency to 
Canadian currency. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question. Mr. Minister in answer to that question in a previous 
session of this Assembly you indicated that that original $44.5 million was to purchase, I believe, a drag line 
or a machine similar to it. Have you not paid for this? Exactly what capital requirement has SPC done in the 
United States in the past year for only $4 million. In other words, if it's capital what exactly have you 
purchased there for $4 million? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, now what we arranged for here was for a line of credit. In terms of 
permanent financing, in terms of paying off the $48.5 million as I indicated to the hon. member, that amount 
is due by September 29, and permanent financing will be arranged. It is part of our capital requirements for 
the current year. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question . , . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 
 

STATEMENT BY SPEAKER 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day I have a statement which I would like to make. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2073 

Yesterday a point of order was raised to the effect that a member cannot rise in the Assembly before orders 
of the day in order to correct an article about him in the newspaper. The hon. member for Nipawin referred 
to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, page 117, paragraph 332(1). That citation 
prohibits the quoting of a newspaper during debate which reflects upon a debate before the House. It should 
be noted that this citation refers to debate and is, thus, not applicable to the situation of yesterday. I, instead, 
refer all hon. members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, page 117, paragraphs 
332(3), which states: 
 

When a complaint is made of a newspaper, it is the practice in the House of Commons for the member 
to rise on a question of privilege and point out that he has been libelled or misrepresented. He may 
read as much of the article as is necessary to prove his case but he cannot go further. He is bound to 
confine himself strictly to the question of privilege. 

 
This is from debates, April 5, 1933, page 3729. While this practice has not been widely used recently in this 
Assembly, it is a common practice in many other legislatures. The complaint raised yesterday by the hon. 
member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Snyder) was in order. I do want to caution members, though, that a 
complaint can be raised only by the member who has been libelled or misrepresented by the media. The 
member must confine his comments to the specific correction to be made and must not enter into a debate on 
the point. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order arising out of 
today's question period. In so doing I just want to comment that it is a pity, Mr. Speaker, that that same 
ruling has been applied to us on our side of the House . , . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! It is sometimes, very seldom allowed members to comment on the 
Speaker's statements. There is nothing that really puts a Speaker in a position that allows a member to 
comment because we get into interminable discussion from each side of the House about the Speaker's 
ruling. Why should the Speaker bother making a ruling? When he takes the time to bring in a citation, citing 
the rule I think that closes the matter. 
 
Now, if the member for Nipawin has a new point of order I would be glad to listen to it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I certainly do have a new point of order, Mr. Speaker. You have ruled in this 
Assembly before, on many occasions, that you must immediately, if you rise on a matter of privilege, you 
must immediately rise when the statement is made. You may not do so after question period; you may not do 
so later; you may not do so the next day. You must rise immediately. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is the member’s point of privilege or point of order? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — My point of order is simply this. Today, the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson) rose on a matter of personal privilege. He said twice, on a matter of privilege. You pointedly 
called that a point of order which is not allowed during question period. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is that not 
the rule . , . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I have had enough of the member for Nipawin misrepresenting what I 
said in this Chamber. 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2074 

I think the member for Nipawin should just listen for one moment. Perhaps he can grasp the situation as it 
occurred earlier today. 
 
Now, in this Chamber, I have to weigh the comments that are made by members and decide whether there is 
enough evidence to proceed on a point of privilege. If there is an obvious point of privilege there I will 
interrupt the question period or at any other time and so does any other member. But I weighed what the 
member had said and I felt, in my view, and I think the record will show it that there was not enough 
substance there to proceed with the point of privilege in the question period. Now, it happened that earlier in 
the day it was going the other way across the House. The member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher) was 
saying that the member for Melfort (Mr. Vickar) did not tell the truth and he said that at least three times. At 
that point, I decided there was not enough evidence there to interrupt the question period and bring the 
member for Thunder Creek to order because he was using unparliamentary language or language that should 
not be used in this Chamber. I think I applied the same rules to the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson) as I did to the member for Melfort. I don't think any harm was done. If it's a serious point of 
privilege, I'll deal with it in the question period. But, I'm not going to allow the question period to be 
disturbed by what I consider to be frivolous points of privilege. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to advise 
the House of the death this morning of a former member of the House, Samuel Norville Horner, who was a 
member of this House from 1929 to 1934, representing the Francis constituency and was a member of the 
Conservative Party. I simply advise the House of this and we have not had an opportunity to frame a proper 
motion of condolence. I do not expect to be in the House tomorrow or for a few days. I will ask my 
colleague, the House Leader, to have framed an appropriate motion of condolence and we can express our 
sympathy to the bereaved family. All members will know that the Horner family is a large family, they have 
been very active in the political life of western Canada and I know members would like to express 
condolences to the Horner family on the passing of Samuel Norville Horner. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, if I might, just before the orders of the 
day, since I also will be away for a few days, express my deepest sympathy to the Horner family for this loss. 
As the Premier has already mentioned, the Horner family has made a wonderful contribution to the political 
life not only of Saskatchewan, but of Canada. We may not agree with all of the Horners all of the time, but I 
know that everyone in this Assembly will want to pass along to the Horner family the deepest condolences, 
certainly of our caucus and of the entire Chamber. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 99 — An Act to provide for 
Compensation to Workers for Injuries sustained in the Course of their Employment. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, we have before us today a new Workers' Compensation Act. This legislation shifts the 
emphasis in permanent impairment as a result of work injuries from a pension based on medical rating of 
disability to a system of income maintenance. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2075 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I believe, has always been regarded as a leader in the field of labor legislation 
and this legislation means that Saskatchewan I believe will achieve another first in Canada. 
 
When the royal commission on worker's compensation was established in 1928, it found both workers and 
employers alike were dissatisfied with the common law system of compensation for work injuries. Workers 
found the common law system to be expensive and slow especially in the case of temporary disability. On 
the infrequent occasion when a worker was able to prove fault on the employers part settlements were 
usually small and the settlement was belated. The employers found that uncertainty as to liability, the 
financial strain, the embarrassment of a large settlement and the ill will and the distress that the common law 
system engendered between employee and employer made them dissatisfied with the system as well. 
 
The unanimous recommendation of that 1928 royal commission established then the basic principles of 
workers' compensation that have endured until this day. Mr. Speaker, I want to take the opportunity to restate 
these principles at this time because they represent the core around which our compensation for work 
injuries is built. The royal commission concluded that workers' compensation should be a system of 
collective liability, administered by an independent board and funded by employer assessments. The decision 
to the board was to be on the real merits and the justice of the case and should not be bound to follow strict 
legal precedent. It was at this time the concept of collective liability was firmly established in workers' 
compensation. From these principles then our first system of compensation was built. It was in effect a social 
contract between the employers and their workers. Each gained the security they had both desired. These are 
also the principles around which our present compensation system is built. Our basic system is sound. It's 
one of the bet in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Our income ceiling in Saskatchewan is $20,000 a year — one of the 
highest in Canada — reflecting the prosperity of the people of Saskatchewan, the prosperity they have 
enjoyed over the past few years. Benefits to disabled workers and their families have been regularly 
increased to keep up with the rising living costs. The compensation board has been a national leader in its 
approach to industrial disease. 
 
The changes made to compensation in 1974 have given us the most secure workers' compensation system in 
the entire Dominion of Canada. It is fully funded in a time when other costs are rising. There has been a 
lowering of assessment rates for several industry groups this year. Our system today is still based on the 
original premise of a no-fault system with collective liability among industry groups. As I stated previously 
our basic system of compensation is one of the best in Canada but we still feel there are further 
improvements that need to be made to the system. The year 1978 then saw the establishment of the workers' 
compensation review committee chaired by Judge Alastair Muir, which conducted a statutory review of 
compensation in Saskatchewan. The Muir committee have very thoroughly reviewed the workers' 
compensation system and suggested changes that, I believe, will bring our system into line with the present 
day realities while retaining the original principles that remain relevant today. 
 
The committee found that the vast majority of people who are injured each year recover completely and are 
not left with any residual disability as a result of their work injury. However, some 600 or 700 people each 
year suffer work injuries which result in a permanent disability and these people are assessed by the 
compensation board for pensions. At present, Mr. Speaker, these pensions are based on a medical rating of 
disability. This means that for a particular injury the percentage of disability is the same 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2076 

for everyone. For example, the loss of a leg at the knee results in a disability of between 35 per cent and 45 
per cent regardless of whether the injured worker is an iron worker or a filing clerk. If the worker returns to 
his previous job then, although the individual suffers the trauma of losing a leg, he experiences no financial 
hardship. Such a worker may, in effect, even be better off financially because of the additional monthly 
compensation pension. If, however, because of the injury the worker has to seek alternate employment at a 
lower wage, then the person may suffer a very substantial financial hardship in spite of the monthly pension 
which he receives from the compensation board. In both of these cases the pension is based on a medical 
rating of disability and the percentage of disability will be the same for both workers. 
 
The compensation board has some flexibility in these situations but the fact remains that for some injured 
workers our compensation does not provide adequate protection at the time when it is needed most. The 
Muir Committee then, Mr. Speaker, has recommended an alternative to our present system, that of a two-part 
system for compensation. This two-part system would protect an injured worker against income loss as a 
result of an injury and would also provide a recognition of permanent impairment as a result of injury. I am 
pleased to say that this concept had the support of both the labor representatives and the employer 
representatives on the Muir Committee. It's a concept with which my colleagues and I also agree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation which is before us today proposes then to shift the emphasis for work injury 
from the present medical rating of disability to a system of income maintenance. This shift in emphasis will 
result in our compensation giving more adequate income protection to an injured worker during the time he 
is disabled and needs that protection the most. This legislation then ensures that a worker who experiences a 
loss of earning capacity, as a result of a work injury, shall be entitled to 75 per cent of his gross wage at the 
time of the injury. These benefits are bound by the maximum and minimum of compensation and will 
continue as long as the earning capacity continues or until age 65, whichever comes first. 
 
These benefits will take into account any Canada Pension Plan, disability benefits and any earned income. 
There will also be an automatic adjustment annually, Mr. Speaker, to the pre-accident wage base in order to 
ensure that the standard of living is maintained and not eroded by inflation. 
 
Let me give you an example to help illustrate this concept. Take the example of the general laborer who 
earns $1,000 a month. We'll say he loses a leg in an industrial accident. He eventually returns to work but at 
a lower paying job of $800 a month. His loss of wages then is $200 a month. This man would receive 75 per 
cent of the difference in his loss of wages or 75 per cent of $200 which equals, of course, $150 per month in 
income maintenance from the compensation board. As his salary increase, his compensation benefits 
decrease. As inflation increases, his pre-accident wage base is increased. 
 
In our society today, most people are eligible for a variety of retirement pension schemes at age 65. This 
legislation recognizes this fact and provides that at age 65, the income maintenance benefits cease and are 
replaced by pension maintenance. This provision reflects our belief that no individual should suffer a 
pension loss as a result of a work injury. To provide for this change, the board will set aside moneys which 
will be used to pay retirement pensions for those workers over 65 years of age who have been on income 
maintenance for a period of more than two years. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2077 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, the compensation board will set aside 10 per cent of the compensation benefits 
being paid for those receiving benefits for more than 24 consecutive months. This money will be used to 
provide an annuity for the workers at age 65. Where it would be more beneficial, the board may pay such an 
amount to an already established superannuation fund. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, this legislation also 
recognizes that even though an injured worker may suffer no income loss as a result of a permanent 
disability, that worker has the right to have his permanent impairment recognized by the compensation 
board. To this end, this legislation directs the board to award a lump sum payment for recognition of a 
permanent, physical impairment which would be the same dollar amount for the same impairment. This 
lump sum would range from between $500 to $10,000 and would be in addition to any income maintenance 
benefits received. 
 
To illustrate this point, let me take two workers, A and B. Both workers received the same work injury that 
results in a physical impairment. Worker A suffers no income loss while worker B has some income loss. 
Both workers receive the same lump sum payment for recognition of physical impairment. For worker A 
with no income loss, that's all he receives. For worker B with income loss, he receives both income 
maintenance benefits as well as the lump sum payment. 
 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, sets up a new minimum for compensation at $505 a month for those totally 
unable to work because of their industrial injury. This amount is approximately 95 per cent or 90 per cent of 
the present minimum wage and we feel this represents a standard below which no injured worker in 
Saskatchewan should fall, in the event that the injured worker is totally disabled. 
 
A maximum for compensation with a ceiling for 1979 is $20,000 per year, one of the highest in Canada. 
Presently the ceiling is calculated by a regulatory formula. The members will know that this formula states 
that in any one year, if over 10 per cent of the workers who received compensation benefits that year earned 
over the maximum, the maximum must be increased by $1,000 steps. This process continues until less than 
10 per cent of the workers earned more than the maximum. This formula will be continued in the new 
legislation. It will continue to be used to calculate the maximum rate upon which compensation will be 
based. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Muir Committee had suggested that there be a review of all the pensions presently being 
paid to workers, in order that appropriate supplementary benefits will be provided. This legislation, while it 
follows the spirit of the Muir Committee report, goes one step further. 
 
When these workers were injured and their pension was established in years gone by, they were given to 
understand that their pensions would continue for life. We naturally intend to honor that commitment. We 
also intend that these workers be integrated into the income maintenance system. To do this, we assume that 
the pensions the insured workers are receiving are based on the pre-accident income with some adjustment 
for inflation. After determining this pre-accident income the worker's case is reviewed and if there is an 
income loss he is eligible for supplementary income maintenance benefits. If there has been no loss the 
worker continues to receive his regular compensation pension. The worker receives whichever benefit is 
greater. 
 
In this way, Mr. Speaker, we hope to apply the same concepts of income maintenance to our workers who 
have received permanent disabilities in the past. The benefits to the present, surviving, dependent spouse 
will also be increased, keeping in mind again the 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2078 

principles of income maintenance. Here again, Mr. Speaker, we recognize and honor our commitment that 
these surviving spouses will receive no less than their present spouse’s benefit level for the remainder of 
their lives. 
 
In addition, spouses benefits will be supplemented by $75 per month to age 65 or remarriage and by $5 per 
month per child. Orphan children will receive $135 per month. 
 
Where it is more advantageous, the board may supplement the benefit to a surviving spouse, but to the 
proposed minimum compensation of $505 a month, taking into account any Canada Pension Plan benefits 
and any compensation child allowances. 
 
Occasionally, Mr. Speaker, situations arise where a worker has been severely disabled, and the worker's 
spouse is needed to care for him or her on a full time basis. As a result this House foregoes opportunities for 
employment in the work force during this period of time. If the disabled worker then dies from another 
non-compensable cause the spouse is then not eligible for survivor's benefits from the board and may also 
have a very great deal of difficulty because of age of returning to the work force at that time of life. This is 
inequitable and we have recognized it as being such. We therefore have included in this legislation the 
assurance that the spouse be afforded all available rehabilitation measures and the injured worker's pension 
be continued for one year after the worker's death for an adjustment period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say the most important recommendations made by the Muir committee have 
been included in this legislation. In some cases we have even gone one step further than the 
recommendation. However, there are some recommendations we are not implementing at this time. The 
Muir committee recommended that farm labor and teachers be covered under this act but both have been 
excluded by section 8 of the legislation. These groups have been historically excluded from compensation 
because of special problems involved in coverage for them, and of course, farmers will continue to be able to 
make application to be covered in a voluntary way. The board will continue to encourage this. The Muir 
committee also recommended that a vice-chairperson be added to the compensation board. I think it has to 
be said the three member board has worked quite well in the past and the government would like to take 
some time to review further this course of action before making any changes that might change the balance 
in a board that seems to be operating quite well at the present. So we would like to take some further time to 
consider this recommendation. 
 
To assist workers in their recovery from injuries, the Muir report recommended a new rehabilitation facility 
to be built. Again, Mr. Speaker, this recommendation is under what I believe to be intentive review by the 
government, and we intend to consult all the parties that would be involved before making this decision. 
Under the Workers' Compensation Act 1974 all injuries covered by the act were specified when an appended 
schedule was attached to the act. The legislation instead, Mr. Speaker, specifies which industries are not 
covered. This change has been made for the sake of simplicity and so the public would find it easier to make 
use of the legislation. This does not change the industries which are covered or not covered by this 
legislation. 
 
There's one further change we’ve made to the recommendation to the Muir committee. It was recommended 
that all future surviving dependent spouses receive benefits as if the deceased spouse had lived but had been 
totally disabled. Under the new system this 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2079 

would mean the surviving spouse would receive 75 per cent of the gross income of the deceased spouse up 
to the maximum until the spouse reached 65 years of age. In most cases, surviving spouses are women. We 
did not feel this recommendation fully recognized the financial independence of many women today. 
Therefore, we've made some changes for dependent spouses. The shift in emphasis to income maintenance is 
continued for surviving spouses. The new legislation proposes that surviving spouses receive the full income 
maintenance benefits that the worker would have received for five years or until remarriage. This ensures 
that there is no drastic change in the family income at the time of a fatal accident and also allows the 
adjustment period for the family. After five years, these benefits may be reviewed annually. If there are still 
children under 16 years of age or if the spouse is unable to work, the benefits will continue. Thus, the board 
will be able to extend surviving spouse benefits as long as necessary to avoid any undue hardship resulting 
from the industrial fatality. 
 
Here again, Mr. Speaker, there is a regular adjustment so the real level of benefits is not eroded by inflation. 
The spouse's benefits are again integrated with Canada Pension Plan survivor benefits and if there are no 
dependent children and if benefits are continued beyond five years, these will also be integrated with the 
spouse's own earning capacity. The compensation board will extend its complete counselling and vocational 
assistance programs to surviving spouses to help them become independent members of the labor force. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think this system then combines the best principles so that those spouses who cannot 
work or who have small children are adequately protected. Those spouses who are financially independent, 
however, will have an adjustment period, but no longer receive benefits when they no longer need them. The 
cost of the new income maintenance system has been carefully analysed, Mr. Speaker, and we are generally 
very confident that the new system will not be more costly than our present one. It will not result in any 
undue burden on employers and should not require any increase in assessment rates. Our board will continue 
to be fully funded and will maintain its present stable financial state. 
 
In summary then, Mr. Speaker, this legislation places the emphasis on income maintenance for our 
compensation system. For presently disabled workers, their pensions will be reviewed and upgraded 
according to the loss in earning capacity that they have experienced. For present surviving dependent 
spouses, the benefits will be increased by $75 a month or in some cases to the proposed minimum of $505 a 
month. For future workers, they will receive a lump sum payment for permanent physical impairment and 
where there is also a loss of earning capacity, income maintenance benefits as long as necessary. For future 
dependent spouses, they will receive benefits equal to 75 per cent of the gross wage of the deceased worker 
up to the maximum for five years or until the youngest child is 16 years old or until the youngest child is 21 
if the child is still in school. All income maintenance benefits will be integrated with Canada Pension Plan 
benefits and any earned income will be adjusted regularly to stop the erosion by inflation. 
 
It is, therefore Mr. Speaker, with a great deal of personal pride and satisfaction that I have the opportunity to 
place this legislation before the Assembly. The innovative income maintenance system it provides will keep 
our workers' compensation system at the head of the list in the whole of Canada, I believe. Saskatchewan 
will continue to be a leader in labor legislation. 
 
I am extremely pleased, Mr. Speaker, then to move that Bill No. 99 be now read a second time. 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2080 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Before the member takes his seat can I ask a question? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Will the member permit a question before assuming his seat? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Yes, but I think the appropriate time would be in Committee of the Whole. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — You just didn't make one thing clear in your presentation. Will this be back dated for 
those on compensation or not? Will those that are presently on compensation — will these new rules affect 
them or are they on the old system? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I tried to indicate during my second reading remarks, Mr. Speaker, that there would be a 
case by case review and in each instance there will be a formula which will be applied in order to take into 
consideration earning benefits or income protection loss during the intervening period of time. So past 
pensioners, past injuries will be acknowledged and will be integrated into the income maintenance system 
envisaged in the legislation. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, the critic for labor in our caucus has had a death in the family and 
therefore, the minister was aware that he wouldn't be here to respond. The minister won't be here another day 
to bring it on so the agreement was that he would do it today and I would adjourn it. 
 
I would like to make one or two comments before I adjourn. I am glad to see the minister is looking 
backwards to people who have been on compensation in the past and will review them on a case by case 
basis. There are many individuals — where a clerk may lost a left hand and he is a right handed person and 
yet a workman who works with his hands, out in construction if he loses his left hand is really in trouble to 
lose his income . , . This bill will consider that type of problem. 
 
I am pleased to note that the minister indicates, if a person is making a certain income and because of his 
injury is able to go back to work but at a lower income and a different style of living which he will be forced 
into because of the permanent injury, that the workers' compensation will fund him approximately 75 per 
cent of the difference of what he is losing because of the injury which he has received. 
 
As we all know, with workers' compensation to a workman who has been injured, it is very, very important 
that he is totally dealt with fairly and given a good hearing. 
 
I would suggest to the minister that he suggest to the people in the workers' compensation department that 
they make sure they make literature available to both the unions and the employers when this bill comes into 
effect so that everybody will understand it and there will be as little as possible misunderstanding of what the 
real benefits of the bill are. Mr. Speaker, because Mr. Andrew wishes to reply in length, I would beg leave to 
adjourn debate on this motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The 
Ombudsman Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Ombudsman Act which correlates the ombudsman's 
salary to be that consistent with the judge of the provincial 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2081 

court of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I would like to indicate to the member moving the second reading that we agree 
totally with the concept you are using for the ombudsman's wages. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 98 — An Act to amend The 
Expropriation Procedure Act. 
 
He said: In 1968 The Expropriation Procedure Act provided for a unique situation in expropriation law that 
was a requirement that before any step could be taken to expropriate land, the expropriating authority must 
first make a reasonable endeavor to acquire the land by purchase from the registered owner. That was made a 
condition precedent to a valid expropriation. This did differ from the 14-day notice suggested by the special 
committee in its report of December of 1967. 
 
In expropriation matters it is always most difficult to protect the individual's interests and rights while at the 
same time recognizing the needs of an expropriating authority to acquire property at a price which is in 
accord with the market and at a price which is not duly affected by the speculation which may arise due to 
the project giving rise to the expropriations. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, which we are attempting to solve in these amendments arises from the 
uncertainty existing in determining what is a reasonable endeavor. We do not wish to alter that concept of 
reasonable endeavor but where the finding is that that element is lacking, the current legislation results in a 
substantial escalation, or at least could result in a substantial escalation of value placing, thereby putting an 
undue burden on the public purse and perhaps giving an undeserved windfall to the owner. Mr. Speaker, to 
solve the problem it is considered more just and equitable not to void the expropriation with its resulting 
uncertainties and potential windfalls but to penalize the authority doing the expropriating, where, in a court's 
view of the facts and circumstances, that authority fails to meet the statutory prerequisite. That penalty is 
listed in this amendment to be 10 per cent of the value of the land expropriated, together with such actual 
expenses, costs and disbursements that the court feels to be reasonable. 
 
In my judgment that appears much more equitable in the current situation which would allow substantial 
increases in value where an expropriation is voided and also does not require the whole process of 
expropriation to be re-instituted on some subsequent date. 
 
There are some other amendments, Mr. Speaker, but I think they can be summarized as follows. The 
amendments are necessary to avoid the uncertainty that any particular expropriation maybe upset months or 
maybe even years later, to avoid the problem of inflated costs to a project because of a new expropriation 
date, to avoid time delays on a public project, and to ensure that all owners receive equitable treatment by 
ensuring the same valuation date. 
 
The purpose of the proposed amendment to section 49 is to ensure that lands expropriated are valued on the 
basis of fair market value without regard to the purpose 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2082 

for which the property was expropriated. The amendment provides that the value of lands expropriated will 
not be affected by the expectation of the project, where such expectation has increased or decreased the value 
of the land. This could also occur where the proposed location of deleterious public work is presumed or 
announced sometime in advance of expropriation and the value of the land is adversely affected by the 
inquiry. Similar provisions are found in expropriation statutes right across Canada. 
 
Two other amendments must be mentioned. I think they are basically routine. Section 41 currently only 
allows the payment of money into court where the money has been awarded in an action under the act. Often 
the total amount to obtain a settlement can be agreed upon but the division by the owners cannot. The 
amendment will allow payment into court and a determination of the value of respective interests, even 
where there is no need to have a court determine the amount of the compensation to be paid by the 
expropriating authority. 
 
The addition of new section 49, subsection 1, is strictly to allow all persons involved in expropriation to 
ascertain the date on which notices have been served for the assistance in the calculation of time periods 
running under the act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 98/ 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to reply to the Hon. Attorney General and indicate why we are opposing this 
particular piece of legislation. I indicate as well at the outset that my knowledge of the fact stems from my 
involvement on behalf of a client. I would like to keep it on a general matter and advise hon. members of the 
Assembly exactly what is happening with the particular bill. 
 
We were somewhat unique in our expropriation procedures in that we required the expropriating authority 
to, 'make reasonable endeavor to acquire by purchase before they, in fact, expropriated.' I would like to say 
that in this province many of those representing particularly rural areas know the lengths to which Sask 
Power goes when it attempts to get easements for power lines. We all know the lengths to which Sask Tel 
goes in dealing with farmers and rural people when they attempt to get easements for telephone lines. They 
go out of their way to try and solve the problem and come to some amicable settlement. They take 
sometimes years in dealing with the farmers. The reason is that it is in the government's interest as well as 
the public's interest to have the expropriating authority go out and deal with the individual who is having a 
very basic right (the right to own land) taken away from him. That obligation was put there seriously and it 
was put there for a reason. That was to avoid and to prohibit government agencies from merely going up to 
an individual and taking away his right to own land. It was there fairly and it was there, as I say, to protect 
the very basic right. 
 
What happened? Because of the urgency and because of the rush and I suggest because of undue haste, in 
Sask Tel's procedures and the Cornwall development, it went out very rapidly, acquired land and served 
notices of expropriation on a substantial part of downtown Regina within one month of the decision being 
made by cabinet to proceed with downtown development. Now that was completely contrary to the practice 
being followed by government service, by Sask Tel itself, when dealing with Sask Tel easements. It's 
certainly contrary to the practice followed, as most of you know, by Saskatchewan Power, and certainly 
contrary to the practice followed by the Department of Highways. 
 
I say to the Attorney General when he talks about windfall profits or windfall benefits 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2083 

accruing to the landholder because the expropriating authority didn't follow the proper procedure or didn't 
make a reasonable endeavor, it is, I think, a very unfortunate term being chosen by the Attorney General. It's 
not a windfall benefit to the owner. It's a penalty to the expropriating authority for improperly dealing with 
the very basic right to own your own land. That's a penalty worth, I think, and I think all members will agree, 
its weight in gold, to use the phrase, so that right is in fact protected and is invaluable. 
 
I say that taking away that right and putting a limit on it is going to make it easier, I warn all members, for 
anybody, Saskatchewan Power, the Department of Highways, Sask Tel or anybody, to deal with the farmers 
in your area in taking away their land. I don't think that's a wise practice and I don't think it's a good practice. 
I think the government opposite, if Sask Tel, the Department of Highways and SPC decide to modify their 
policy now because of the changes in this act, will rue the day when this change is being made. I suggest to 
you that it's not a good practice. It's a dangerous policy. I don't think it's necessary. I suggest to the Attorney 
General that to use the unfortunate phrase 'windfall benefits' is deflecting from the very issue and that is, it's 
up to the courts to decide what is a reasonable endeavor to acquire by purchase. It's up to the courts to decide 
what is a reasonable endeavor to acquire by purchase. It has been a long-standing protection for the public, a 
protection which I think is being taken away. What we are seeing is the government moving to protect either 
a hastily implemented policy or a poorly implemented direction to expropriate land. I say to you that this is 
inherently dangerous. We are opposing this particular piece of legislation. We say it is very unwise. We are 
not intending, however, to prolong debate on this bill. We say to you, you will rue the day you brought these 
changes in. 
 
Motion agreed to on division and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 
100 — An Act respecting the Protection of Wildlife. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the 1970s has produced changing demands and changing emphasis in the field of 
wildlife management. Up to now, the legislative base for wildlife management and conservation in 
Saskatchewan has rested in The Game Act and in The Fur Act. These acts date back to 1930 when 
jurisdiction over natural resources was transferred from Canada to the provinces. They have become 
antiquated. There are several provisions which are completely outdated and extremely cumbersome and, in 
fact, are contrary to modern wildlife management principles. 
 
Let me give the House some examples. The Game Act provides for the protection from poison, traps and 
snares for game animals only. All other animals, not classified as game, are not afforded protection from the 
sometimes inhumane and unnecessary practices. In fact, Mr. Speaker, under The Game Act my department is 
able to extend very limited protection to the non-game wildlife species of any kind. This is particularly 
difficult for us when we are confronted with the need to protect rare or endangered non-game animals such 
as the peregrine falcon, the black footed ferret, or the kit fox. 
 
Under The Game Act, only the nests and eggs of game birds are protected. The nests of other birds such as 
hawks, owls and pelicans and the eagle, are afforded no protection whatsoever. I believe that it is critically 
important that the nests and eggs of these rare and beautiful birds must be protected if coming generations 
are to have the opportunity to enjoy them. 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2084 

The Game Act provides for control over the sale of game meat, but not over other valuable parts of the game 
animal, such as the hide, claws and antlers. I believe that in an age where wildlife resources and wildlife 
habitat are rapidly depleting, the disposition of all parts of legally-taken game animals should be closely 
monitored. 
 
The present game act has no provision to protect people from careless hunters. Under The Game Act, we can 
take no legal action against someone carelessly using a firearm until that person has actually caused injury to 
himself or to another person. I think we should have some legal authority to act to prevent firearm accidents, 
rather than to act only after the tragedy of injury or death has occurred. 
 
Perhaps the area of the existing game act where the provisions are the most antiquated is that of 
hunter-landowner relations, and the liability of hunters and landowners when an accident or injury occurs to 
a person who is hunting on private land. Under the provision of The Game Act, in such a situation, the 
landowner could be held responsible for injury to anyone hunting on his land. I am convinced that this is 
somewhat unfair to the landowner, since the hunter uses the land of his own free will, and often without the 
knowledge of the landowner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are some of the areas where the existing legislation is inadequate, where it is antiquated, 
or where it is cumbersome to work with or enforce. In my opening remarks I mentioned also that in some 
areas the game and the fur acts were inconsistent or were contradictory. 
 
Let me give some examples: 
 
The Fur Act restricts the hunting of foxes and coyotes in the northern fur conservation area, except by 
registered trappers in that area. The Game Act makes no such restriction. Taxidermists are required to have a 
permit under The Fur Act, but no permit is required under The Game Act. 
 
The Game Act states that to be classed as a resident, a person must hold Canadian citizenship and have 
resided in Saskatchewan for at least two months. The Fur Act requires a residency period of at least two 
years. 
 
Persons convicted of a violation under The Game Act are automatically restricted from hunting for a period 
of one year — three years where the conviction is for night hunting. Persons convicted of similar violations 
under The Fur Act lose their current licence only. 
 
I am sure the House will agree that there is a strong need to update the legislation and to bring it into line 
with the wildlife management and conservation practices of the 1980s, and that the need is just as strong to 
consolidate it, modernize it and make certain that it is consistent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill, in my view, does an excellent job of responding to these needs on both counts. 
 
Let me give the House some of the highlights of the bill — those which address the issues I have just raised 
and others which break new ground in wildlife management and conservation. 
 
The meaning of wildlife, as it is defined in section 2, subsection (aa), has been 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2085 

broadened to include all wildlife species, not just game animals. This broadening of the term will enable us 
to protect rare and endangered species, a problem I mentioned earlier. It is also expanded to include imported 
and exotic wildlife. While my department has up to now not been required to exercise any control over the 
sale of imported animals such as monkeys and parrots for pets, those animals are becoming increasingly rare 
in their own habitat and it is likely that we may be called upon in the near future to ban the sale of certain 
rare species as part of an international conservation measure. 
 
The House, Mr. Speaker, should also note that authority to protect wildlife species rests in the regulations 
under the act. This will enable my department to act quickly and effectively if it becomes evident that 
measures must be taken to protect an endangered or rare species. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 21 addresses the problem of careless hunting practices which I mentioned earlier. It 
should be noted that the bill clearly states that while hunting, 
 

A person who discharges or causes to be discharged or handles a firearm without reasonable 
consideration for persons or property or without due care and attention is guilty of an offence. 

 
I believe that this provision will afford the people of Saskatchewan excellent protection from careless 
hunters and it gives us the authority to act before the tragedy of a firearm accident occurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we are on the subject of careless hunting, I want to take a few moments to discuss my 
department's record and some of my views on firearm safety and on careless hunting. We recognize that 
careless hunting and handling of firearms can be extremely dangerous and that the deaths and injuries those 
careless practices cause are tragic and could be totally avoidable. It is with this belief in mind that this new 
provision, designed to stop careless hunting practices before the tragedy occurs, was included in this bill; but 
we have taken other initiatives, Mr. Speaker. We have extensively publicized the necessity for responsible 
and careful hunting practices and handling of firearms and we have strongly encouraged hunters and firearm 
users to take advantage of our firearm safety program. In fact, last year we increased funding to the firearm 
safety program substantially. We increased the grant per graduating student from $1 to $3. We increased the 
annual grant to the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation for administration and promotion of the program from 
$1,000 to $4,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this increased funding has yielded immediate, positive results. During 1978, a total of 6,415 
Saskatchewan residents graduated from the program. This is an increase of 2,269 students or 54.73 per cent 
over 1977. 
 
Let me give the House some figures on firearm accidents. In 1960, there were 106 firearm accidents 
reported. Fourteen of these were fatal. In 1977 there were 67 firearm accidents reports; 8 of them were fatal. 
In 1978, 59 accidents were reported and only 4 were fatal. Since 1960 the firearms safety program has 
graduated 65,630 students. Only 88 of these graduates have been involved in firearm accidents. Mr. Speaker, 
these figures are solid proof that the voluntary firearms safety program is working and it is working well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill provides for greater penalties for offenders, specifically, the maximum penalty under 
the bill stands at $1,000. This is doubled from $500 in the 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2086 

existing Game Act and Fur Act. The minimum penalty is removed. This brings the proposed legislation in 
line with other legislation and permits magistrates to use discretion when imposing penalties. The only 
exception to this rule is that of night hunting. I think we all agree that this is a particularly dangerous offence 
and worthy of higher penalties. The minimum fine for night hunting is $500 and the maximum is $2,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most important provision in this bill is section 38. This section deals with the often 
controversial issue of hunting on private land. My department and I have considered very carefully the 
varying points of view in this issue and I am convinced that section 38 is a fair compromise. Under The 
Game Act and The Fur Act land owners were required to post signs of a specific size at specified locations 
on posted land. This was often cumbersome, expensive and time consuming for the landowner. While 
section 38 still sets guidelines for posting land, no hunting and no shooting, it also sets out a procedure 
where landowners, by providing reasonable notice, can set out instructions to hunters wishing access to the 
property. Such instructions might cover hunting methods, use of vehicles, and so on. The term 'reasonable 
notice' means that signs are not required to be placed at specific locations and in locations where they will be 
clearly legible and visible by hunters, taking into account such factors as the type of terrain, number of 
access roads, and so on. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, I believe that section 38 is a fair compromise. We recognize that some landowners 
would be satisfied only if we introduced legislation which flatly prohibited hunting on all private lands 
except by permission. While legislation of this type must have some benefits it must be remembered that it is 
often very difficult for a hunter to locate landowners particularly those whose holdings may not be near their 
farm homes or those who do not reside permanently upon their farms. Legislation of this sort would restrict 
hunting activity to the point where the future of the sport might be in serious jeopardy. 
 
I believe a combination of the new provisions in this bill and promotion of good hunter ethics and 
hunter-landowner relations will foster the development of a healthy respectful and co-operative relationship 
between hunters and farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area I mentioned earlier was the question of liability should an accident, injury or death 
occur to a person while hunting on private land. This whole area is subject to some uncertainty as to liability 
on the part of the hunter and the landowner. 
 
While it has never been tested thoroughly in the courts, there is a possibility that under the existing 
legislation the landowner could be found responsible should a hunter meet with an accident while hunting on 
unposted land. 
 
To settle this issue we incorporated section 39 into the bill. Under section 39 the responsibility rests fully 
with the hunter in such a situation. The only obligation upon the landowner is not to deliberately create a 
danger which could harm a hunter. I believe this provision is fair and equitable to hunters and to landowners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my opening remarks I noted there were inconsistencies between the game act and the fur act. 
This bill will remove those inconsistencies either through the provisions in the bill itself or in the 
regulations. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2087 

I want to discuss another area which the bill covers and which might come under questioning by the 
members opposite. Section 65 calls for the repeal of the wolf and coyote bounty act. 
 
In the past, wolves and coyotes have caused problems, particularly to farmers, but now, Mr. Speaker, the 
numbers of these animals and their natural habitat have been reduced so greatly that the damage they cause is 
no longer a widespread problem. I think the House will agree the bounty incentive on these animals, 
particularly for wolves, which are now quite rare in Saskatchewan, is outdated and is viewed unfavorably by 
the general public, particularly from the standpoint of inhuman hunting practices and the high value of the 
animal's pelts. However, Mr. Speaker, should wolves, coyotes or any other species of wildlife ever cause 
serious problems, the bill includes provisions whereby control measures can be implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in drafting this legislation my department and I were ever mindful of what I consider to be the 
biggest challenge that will face wildlife and wildlife managers in the 1980s. That challenge, Mr. Speaker, is 
maintaining adequate wildlife populations on a continually decreasing wildlife habitat. With the increasing 
economic pressure upon farmers to expand their acreage and to farm more intensively, the destruction and 
clearing of natural wildlife habitat is inevitable. As that natural habitat is depleted the onus will be upon my 
department to maintain wildlife populations and to develop sufficient natural habitat areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are meeting this challenge in a number of ways. With the wildlife development fund we are 
purchasing land which is of marginal nature. The land is carefully evaluated and developed and managed to 
reach its maximum potential as wildlife habitat. The wildlife development fund is financed by a $1 impost 
placed upon hunting licences, so in fact, those who are paying the major portion of the cost of this 
acquisition are the prime users of the wildlife resource, the hunters. 
 
I want to inform the House that legislation covering the wildlife development fund is being dealt with under 
amendments to The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources Act. This bill includes provisions to 
enable us to further ensure a sufficient amount of habitat will be available in the future. By regulations this 
bill will enable my department to implement habitat development and management programs on 
Crown-owned land. 
 
It also contains provisions whereby landowners may enter into co-operative arrangements with the 
department to undertake habitat development and management on private land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by taking these initiatives I am confident we are ensuring a bright future for wildlife and for the 
people of Saskatchewan who use and enjoy our wildlife resources. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to move second 
reading of this bill. It is the product of years of research and evaluation and it is an excellent example of how 
the interests of several groups can be met fairly and equitably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the House should be informed that I have discussed the principle of the bill with the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and I have their approval. I 
feel this process of consultation is important in view of the growing controversy over treaty Indian hunting, 
fishing and trapping rights. I want to make it clear provincial jurisdiction does not cover these rights which 
are enshrined in a 1930 resources transfer agreement with the federal 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2088 

government. The bill respects their rights. The bill deals with this issue in section 32. It stipulates 
non-Indians may not possess wildlife taken by an Indian for food. It further states non-Indians may not aid or 
assist treaty Indians in hunting while treaty Indians are exercising their special rights. This section is 
essentially unchanged from The Game Act. 
 
While I recognize the entire area of treaty Indian rights could be the subject of considerable debate, I do not 
believe it is necessary to enter that debate in conjunction with this bill. The bill is a provincial one, 
concerned only with provincial jurisdiction. I sincerely believe any debate should reflect that fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said a few moments ago, the bill has the support of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 
an organization with a membership well in excess of $30,000. I am confident it has the support of 
environmentalists and conservationists and I believe it will be acceptable to the landowners. Mr. Speaker, I 
am confident this bill is one which has the approval of the Saskatchewan public in general. 
 
Finally, the bill looks forward to a new decade and it insures a healthy future for our vital wildlife resources. 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, the member who wishes to respond to this bill is absent this afternoon 
and he and the Premier are doing some government work today. He is showing the Premier how things are 
done so I will ask leave to adjourn debate so he can reply tomorrow on this motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. A.S. MATSALLA (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 
101 — An Act to amend The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill proposes amendments to two distinct provisions in The Department of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources Act. This first area where we are proposing changes is to the wildlife 
development fund. The bill moves the legislative base for the wildlife development fund out of The Game 
Act, where it currently exists, and places it in The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making this move for two reasons. Administrative responsibility for the wildlife 
development fund has been moved within my department from the Fisheries and Wildlife Branch to the 
Lands and Surveys Branch. I believe it is appropriate that the legislative base for the fund reflect this. 
Secondly, during this session we are repealing The Game Act and introducing a new wildlife act. The new 
act does not provide a legislative base for the wildlife development fund. The fund was deleted deliberately 
in developing the new act because of our intention to place it in The Department of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to moving the legislative base for the fund to The Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources Act the bill introduces several changes which will simplify administration. The bill 
specifies which revenues from wildlife development fund lands may be placed in the fund and which 
revenues will be placed in the consolidated fund. The bill specifies types of audits and accounting procedures 
to be used in administering the fund, and it specifies the financial reports and statements to 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2089 

be tabled annually in the legislature. Finally, Mr. Speaker, the bill includes a section which insures that 
wildlife development fund lands will be subject to the provisions of The Forest Act and The Provincial 
Lands Act. By having the provisions of these acts apply, officials in my department will have authority to 
monitor and regulate such activities as grazing and timber harvesting on wildlife development fund lands. 
This will insure that these lands are administered to provide optimum benefit for wildlife resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second provision which this bill addresses is section 23 of The Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources Act. Section 23 deals with administrative and accounting procedures related to the 
forest protection and development advance account and the commercial advance account. The first provides 
funds for forest fire prevention and suppression as well as certain construction projects, and the second 
provides working capital to operate our system of provincial parks and recreation sites. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under section 23 as it currently stands, a surplus or deficit accruing to either of these accounts 
is applied in the fiscal year in which it was incurred. A surplus or deficit is not known until the end of the 
fiscal year, at which time financial statements must be prepared and audited. This situation is exceedingly 
difficult to administer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment overcomes this difficulty by providing for any surplus to be paid into the 
consolidated fund and any deficit to be charged to the department's appropriation in the fiscal year following 
the one in which the surplus or deficit was incurred. This minor change will result in considerable efficiency 
and improvement in the administration of these two advance accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge this House to support this bill. It is not controversial in nature and seeks only to clarify 
and improve administration of several program areas which are important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — For the same reason I adjourned the last bill, I would ask to adjourn this bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
CO-OPERATION AND CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT 

VOTE 6 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — Mr. Chairman, immediately to 
my left is Jack Reed who is the Deputy Minister of the department; behind me is Mr. Warkentin, the 
Director of Operations; to his left, Mr. Munholland, the Director of Administration; and to my right, Mr. Art 
Nobe(?) The Director of Communications and Development. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Minister, just some very brief comments that I think likely 
would please the government House later, and possibly some of the ministers. We have had some extensive 
delays in the estimates and I think this time, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, you're going to see that the 
estimates roll quite nicely. I'm going to be making some fair comments which I feel you will concur with and 
I will have 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2090 

a limited number of questions. The member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) has three or four brief 
questions and I'm hopeful that if we have the answers to those questions from the Regina South member, we 
will be able to expediate the estimates on co-operation and co-operative development within a matter of 
maybe 15 or 20 minutes. 
 
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I think firstly what I want to make very clear to this House, and quite 
frankly to the people of Saskatchewan (I was going to say to co-operative minded people, but quite frankly 
that is the people of Saskatchewan ) is that we should very much keep in mind that the co-op philosophy is a 
philosophy upon which this province was developed and is continuing to develop. It is a philosophy which 
the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan wholeheartedly concurs with and, Mr. Speaker, I would 
suspect likely all political parties concur with for one reason or another. I suppose, Mr. Chairman, some of 
the differences which we, in this Assembly, may have, are political differences. But in real terms we have 
none. In actuality we support co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there are indications from the government, many times, that they are the only 
supporters of co-operatives. Mr. Chairman, that is one of the problems which I see — the co-op movement 
as it continues to grow in this province. That is its problem. Its problem is that you are attempting to be in 
their hip pocket. They don't, quite frankly, want you there or us or any other political party. What we support 
is that they be non-political and that they maintain local autonomy. These are the things that we have said 
repeatedly from this side of the House, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now, I can understand a political party wanting to support the co-op movement for political reasons because 
of the fact that all Saskatchewan people, in one way or another, belong to a co-op. But the converse can be 
also taken note of, that being (and I think taken note of primarily by the government) that there were more 
people in this province who voted against you and for some other party than actually voted for you. In other 
words, if you want the support of the co-ops, the support of your policies, then you as well must maintain an 
independent position — you are not the founders of co-ops, they are. We are not the founders of co-ops. I 
think it is our job to listen to the recommendations they make to us from time to time and attempt to fulfil 
those recommendations. 
 
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, that, many times, does not seem to be the case. The one glowing example, I 
suppose, is CPN (Co-operative Programming Network), and I'm personally not going to touch on that matter 
as the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) is, and therefore I won't consume the time in this House 
discussing it. As I said before, the biggest concern I have is that you do all in your power to relieve these 
co-operative programs (no matter what they are — whether it's federated co-operatives or credit union) of 
any political support. That's what I want to say. 
 
Now, I know that I'm accurate in this. I've spoken with the people in the co-operative movement in this 
province, and that's what they're saying. We don't want you politicians hanging around us, so that you can 
have our support. And that's quite frankly, what appears to be the case many times . , . (inaudible 
interjection) . , . now, that's right. The member for Morse (Mr. Gross) says well, they don't want us hanging 
around them. They don't. They don't want us, they don't want you, and they don't want anybody politically. 
Mr. Chairman, we're adamantly in favor of allowing them to be non-political. For their continued growth, 
they must remain non-political, and I want to support that concept on behalf of this caucus. And I want to 
oppose this government or any political party that attempts to slide themselves in the hip pockets of co-ops 
in order to get the 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2091 

support of those massive numbers. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, those are some minor criticisms of not just this government's position, but, I suppose, 
many government's position, as it relates to co-ops. 
 
Now let me say a few words in praise of the co-ops. Firstly, and to outline just very briefly one or two areas 
in which I would like to see them make more proper explanations and suggestions to the people so that they 
better understand co-ops. The first thing I suggest the co-ops are doing, in particular Credit Union Central if I 
may use them as an example, is taking the lead (rightly or wrongly, I'm not here to discuss that) in internal 
employee-management relationship improvements. They are dealing with the problem of democratic 
attitudes prevailing within the employees of the credit union, like Credit Union Central right here in Regina 
as well as the various local credit unions. 
 
It might be interesting to note that the central here has built in a power rating, if I may refer to it as a power 
rating, of one to 20. One is the lowest range, 20 the highest. The employee pay is based upon numerical rank. 
Now, I don't know whether they're the only organization that does that. I'm sure there are maybe others. But 
this is one area in which they are proceeding. One to nine constitutes non-management; ten to twenty is 
management. Presently, all major decisions are primarily made by top management. Now, on the one hand, 
I'm saying this is good. They are building in a type of formula, a system by which to rate, but on the other 
hand, what it points out clearly is that they are having the pyramid effect. When the pyramid effect takes 
place in the co-operative system whether it is credit unions, federated co-operatives or whatever, then you 
lose local autonomy. When you lose local autonomy then that organization is not going to do justice and 
bring fair play to the membership which it represents or should represent. 
 
Now, the other thing they have gone into quite extensively is actually a determination of an attitude of the 
quality of work life. As we all know, we do have many problems in this country in particular, with 
productivity. We have to devise ways and means by which to make people more productive and at the same 
time, enjoy their job, whatever they do, and to have good surroundings. 
 
Again, Credit Union Central is spending time and money. They have a team of sociologists who were 
consulted to classify employee reaction to working conditions. The results will be revealed this June. The 
survey was to determine how people feel emotionally, mentally and physically about their jobs. 
 
I give Credit Union Central a lot of credit for initiating that type of program. I don't know what the results 
are going to be but since we have to deal with people as employees, then we have to look at what their 
concerns are, whether they are justified or not. Whatever those concerns are, that is what management, (in 
this particular situation), Credit Union Central is looking at — what the employees' problems are and what 
we can do after finding them out to correct those problems. 
 
It could be suggested they have gone too far in some instances. I think that the building at places of 
employment of gymnastic work out areas and games rooms and this type of thing may be going a little too 
far, in particular in the cities where those facilities are available at any rate. 
 
But nonetheless, it is a concept which a co-operative, Credit Union Central, is undertaking to determine. I 
think we should give them credit for that. I don't know 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2092 

whether it is a pioneering effort, whether I should go so far as to say that it is or not, but at least it's an effort 
in what I feel is a good direction to determine what it's going to take to derive productivity from its 
employees. They have also taken up a concern with women and their position as employees, something 
which governments of the day have been rather reluctant to undertake. We have raised that question in the 
House; I know I have when I was a critic for the women's division of the Department of Labour. Women's 
problems in the work force are many, not withstanding the fact that their wages in this country are only about 
40 per cent of what men make. Again, the credit union is looking at that specific problem, the women 
employees of credit unions. 
 
They've also considered the area of civil rights which at this point in time, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
seems to be something many people get off on quickly, saying am I losing a right in that respect? I know we 
on this side of the House have raised that question of maintenance of individual rights. Again, Credit Union 
Central is undertaking to ascertain what are proper or improper restrictions on the employee's individual civil 
rights. In other words, is it proper for employees of a corporation or a co-operative or any business for that 
matter, to be involved politically? Is that an infringement to say no you can't? I suppose that's questionable 
and I suppose that's why they're undertaking to determine just what is an infringement on those civil rights. 
 
There are many areas like that and as I said at the outset, I am not going to take a lot of the time of the House 
in getting into the details of it. But I would add that I do have the details on it. I have a work sheet I have 
prepared and it has a lot of very interesting information. But I think basically what I want to say is that the 
information I have indicates our support for co-ops because of what is evident in some of the information 
that I have and the initiatives they have taken. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if I might just outline one of the criticisms I receive from people who are not strong 
supporters of co-ops and ask the minister if he might advise this House, advise me as to how we might 
change that attitude. That attitude, very simply, is an attitude towards the taxation policies as it pertains to 
co-operatives. I have had discussions with people who have been involved with co-operatives for a long 
time. I understand, Mr. Minister, they do in fact, pay into taxation but it's not clearly defined; it's not 
something you can say, well they do pay taxes. It's not that easy just to put it in a nutshell so that that 
individual who is not a strong supporter of a co-op can understand. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, that is just a question that I put to the minister. Those are some of the comments that I 
have made. I suppose some of it may need repeating. I hope not. But, Mr. Chairman, it's just very simply put 
that the support of co-operatives in this province by our side of the House has always been there although at 
times, through one remark or another, it has been taken that we were not. I know we do have many 
discussions about it but we are very much in favor of the co-ops. We want to work with the government and 
with anyone else we can, to further their position in this province in recognition of the desire of the people of 
Saskatchewan to involve themselves and stand behind the philosophy and principles of co-ops which have 
founded the development of this entire province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, for now those are the only comments I would care to address to the minister. I will give him a 
few moments to reply and then we may move into a few questions on CPN. Thank you. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, it is very nice of the member to give me a few moments to reply. I 
appreciate that opportunity. He did start out and talk a little bit about the 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2093 

election and he did say that more people voted against this government than voted for it. I recall in the 
previous House people arguing that no one should sit in this House unless they got 50 per cent of the vote 
cast. On that basis there would be 29 here and 3 over there and the member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) 
wouldn't be in this House. 
 
I know that the members will be a little bit lax with me in this respect. I wrote out a little short verse while 
the member was speaking because it was related to elections and I hope you will bear with me for a minute: 
 

The election is over, the results have been given, 
Some are so happy you'd think this were heaven, 
And some are as blue as the blue of the sky 
And some have nothing but a big alibi, 
But whether you're happy or whether you're sad 
Co-ops are the answer to your problems me lad. 

 
I know that's just doggerel but . , . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I agree with the member that co-operatives as organizations are non-political and they 
have always stuck to that. I think, strictly so, I think that's true. They have done that. But you also have to 
face up to the fact that people within co-operatives must make their political choices on their own and I 
would think that the vast majority of them support this side of the House. It may be only coincidental but the 
fact of the matter is that's my observation. 
 
I note your raise of co-operatives with regard to Credit Union Central, related to the fact that they are looking 
after their employees and doing some studies in relation to making sure that their employees feel they are 
part of the movement, etc. I think that is also true in federated co-operatives on the consumer side, in the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool on the producer side, and it is also true on the financial side through Credit Union 
Central, the Co-op Trust and the Co-operators' Insurance. 
 
With regard to taxation policies as they pertain to co-operatives, I think all members are familiar with the 
fact that co-operatives' earnings are allocated back to the individual member and taxable in their hands. Any 
business a co-operative does with a non-member, of course, is taxable income in their hands in relation to 
the taxation acts and they do pay taxes on that basis. 
 
If you look at the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool report or Federated Co-operatives report (I have them in my 
desk), you will find they pay substantial amounts of tax. 
 
It is true the co-operative movement is very large in the province. Over half the total population of this 
province, about 517,000 members are members of credit unions; at the end of last year we had 
$2,081,000,000 in credit unions. And they do more than half of what we might term the banking business in 
this province. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool handles about two-thirds of the total grain production in this 
province. It is true that Federated Co-operatives is a very large wholesale, had $875 million in sales last year 
and $24 million in net earnings. That's at the wholesale level, which is later distributed out to the local 
co-operatives on the basis of patronage they have done with federated, and along with earnings realized at 
the local level, are allocated on to the membership on the basis of their patronage. 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2094 

So I think it is true to say that although the co-operative department is not a large department it is dealing 
with a very large economic sector in the province of Saskatchewan. What we want to be for the co-operative 
movement is simply their voice in government. They have complaints of things they want to bring to 
government. We hope they will come to the department of co-ops. That is the proper approach for them to 
make in relation to government. We will express their concerns and their needs to the various government 
departments as required. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think those are fair comments by the minister and I don't have 
any further questions in that regard. I think that he fairly answered the fair suggestions which I made. I would 
just conclude my remarks by saying that notwithstanding the fact that the hon. minister is considerably older 
than myself and has less time to make mistakes, I learned a long time ago from my parents that I should learn 
by my mistakes. Therefore, I would exchange with the hon. minister a poem as well. I suppose it would 
exemplify the difference between the government and this side of the House. We are maybe in many 
instances, a little more human and we do recognize that we are that human that we do make mistakes. 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, you might want to take note of this. 
 

My life is full of blunders and oh how I have yearned 
To have one life to practise and yet another when I have learned. 

 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Before I get into any comments about the CPN co-operatives could you answer a 
couple of questions, Mr. Minister? The first question I would ask is, there's an outstanding loan of, I believe 
the amount is $2.6 million to CPN. Is this guaranteed or made by the co-operatives or guaranteed by the 
co-operative department? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — It's guaranteed by the Co-operative Guarantee Board. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I assume under The Co-operative Guarantee Act as I'm looking at your report. Now 
before I get into that again I'd like some explanation on how this Co-operative Guarantee Act operates. 
Looking at your table 4 on page 15 it says: the aggregate loans outstanding 1978 is $7.8 million, which is the 
amount of page 16 of aggregate loans outstanding, but then only $6 million in loans made in 1978. Then 
again looking at the guaranteed portion of loan amount outstanding on page 15, the total of the other and the 
100 percent. First answer that question as well. What's the 100 per cent referring to? Totalling $6,560,000. 
Can you explain that to me — I don't follow the procedure there. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The loans are not necessarily 100 per cent guaranteed. They may be proportionately 
guaranteed. There may be a loan, 50 per cent of it guaranteed, 40 per cent of it guaranteed, 60 per cent, and 
they vary. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well that answers part of the question. The question I posed was a little more in 
depth than that. To reply to your answer, then, why do you refer to it as 100 percent if it's not 100 per cent 
guaranteed? The top of the page says 100 per cent, the top of that column. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The column under the 100 per cent — those loans are fully guaranteed or 100 per cent, 
but if you take the differential between that figure and the $6,560,000, which is approximately $1,400,000, 
the remaining portions of those loans are not fully guaranteed. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2095 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — So the other column is partially guaranteed? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The last column gives you the total number of loans which are guaranteed. But the 
other column gives you the 100 per cent guarantee which is $5,121,000. If you take that away from 
$6,560,000 then you've got $1,440,000 or $39,000 which is partially guaranteed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I understand that. The fourth column and the fifth column add up to the last 
column. Right. Then I would assume then that the $7,850,000, the difference between that and the total, is 
not guaranteed at all. Is that what that means? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, the difference between the $6,560,000 and the $7,850,000 are not guaranteed at 
all. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K., now I have it straight. 
 
To get back to the CPN, has there been any discussions, any meetings held with respect to the loss which 
could occur through the fact that your department has guaranteed $2.6 million? Have you with CPN 
co-operative had meetings with respect to the possible loss and the repayment of the guarantee which you are 
covering? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, because the guarantee is really through the Department of Finance. You must 
realize that CPN . , . Really your questions on CPN (other than the fact that we gave you the information that 
it is guaranteed) should be directed to the Attorney General who is responsible for the communications 
secretariat, related to CPN. We have no connection with it other than the fact that the guaranteed board 
guaranteed the loan. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I'm going to leave this area if I can be assured by the Attorney General 
that during his estimates I will be able to come back because he seems to lack the courage of his convictions 
when it comes to CPN. I recall back on March 20 when the discussion of CPN was brought up in this House, 
the Attorney General at that time assured us (and it's in Hansard) that he would come back the following 
week with an awful lot of information. I am still waiting for that information. If it's in another area other than 
co-operatives, if I can touch this subject up in the Attorney General's Department, I would be happy to just 
drop it today and let it go at that. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, there is a specific vote in the Department of the Attorney General 
dealing with the communications secretariat. I'm prepared to undertake the hon. member so that we can have 
a full discussion on CPN at that time, absolutely full. I will be prepared to deal with the questions of the loan 
guarantees and the questions of the receiver manager's report and the position of the Progressive 
Conservative Party over the several months respecting the CPN. I will be looking forward to discussing this 
matter in full detail with you and your colleagues. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am extremely happy that the Attorney General has given us 
that assurance. So, therefore, rather than get onto that subject I would just make this comment. It has already 
been noted by the member for Moosomin (Mr. Birkbeck) that contrary to the comments made by the 
Attorney General on March 20 with respect to co-operatives, it is the government members who seem to 
oppose 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2096 

and object to co-operative movements, I'll just confirm and tell you why I say that. 
 
The statement that was made by the Attorney General at the time, page 855; he says he doesn't like 
community controlled organizations. (He was referring to me, by the way) and he doesn't like co-op 
community controlled organization in particular. 
 
Well, not so, Mr. Attorney General. That fact is that if you had any respect for co-operatives yourself, you 
wouldn't be pitting co-ops against co-ops as in the CPN versus the Regina Cable. You would let the people 
of the province form co-operatives, which is the way it should be, formed by and founded by the people of 
the province not by your appointees as you did in CPN. You are the one that placed two individuals to form a 
co-operative for your benefit, not for the benefit of the people. The Regina Cable co-operative was a group 
that was formed by the people of the province. The CPN were people appointed and placed by the 
government. That is why I say to you that we, over here, are in accord and agree because co-operatives are 
probably the best example the free enterprise system. That is why we believe, that I personally believe in 
co-operatives. The rest of the members can speak for themselves. I am sure they all feel as I do. 
 
I am very happy that I can, again, have the opportunity to discuss this at a later date with the Attorney 
General when his department comes up in the estimates. 
 
To close, and I don't know whether the member for Moosomin has any other — just to comment on the 
comment that the minister of revenue (Mr. Robbins) made that a co-operative should be non-political. That's 
right, so then why did you appoint political appointees in CPN? I totally agree they should be non-political. 
 
Before I sit down, Mr. Minister, if you would provide me with the usual information that I have been asking 
in the House with respect to salaries and you don't have to give it to me now. You can give it to me in 
writing at your pleasure, today or tomorrow; you can give it to me now, whatever you like. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, while the minister is digging up the answer on the question, I 
welcome the debate. I want to make two points before I sit down and leave because I have another meeting 
outside momentarily. The two points I would like to make are that the CPN allegation that somehow CPN is 
government-appointed people, I think, indicates a tremendously ignorant knowledge or lack of knowledge 
respecting how co-operatives are structured, how they are registered, how they operate and who controls 
them. I think any of the members who are members of the co-ops opposite unlike the member for Regina 
South (Mr. Rousseau) would know that. 
 
Secondly, I find it absolutely incredible, Mr. Speaker, to hear the argument that the PCs support the co-ops 
because they are the highest form or the best form, or words to that effect of private enterprise, if you will. 
Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of crazy line that was advocated by the defeated candidate Mr. Al Wagar in the 
Regina Wascana election for the PC Party. I want to tell the House, Mr. Chairman, and the member for 
Regina South (Mr. Rousseau), then I'll sit down, that co-ops were structured as a defence against private 
enterprise, not as a compliment to private enterprise. And I want to say to the members opposite that if they 
think that the Saskatchewan . , . 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Are you saying that co-operatives are socialistic? Say it! Put it on the record! 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2097 

MR. ROMANOW: — I say the co-operatives were there as a defence against private enterprise. I say the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was set up . , . 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I want it on the record that they're socialistic! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think we could do with less assistance both ways here and I fail to see if this 
is any further relevant to what we're dealing with now. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Just let me close by saying that I believe the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, if one looks 
at the history of the wheat pool, will bear out the truth of what I say. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Could we get back to the Minister of Co-operatives (Mr. Robbins) and his estimates, 
please? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I would ask the Minister of Co-operatives if he has the answer to the . , . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, Mr. Chairman, I have the floor. I have the floor Mr. Chairman and I'm going to 
speak on the floor. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — If it is relevant to what we're dealing with, here, I will recognize you. But I think that 
you've both had your . , . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I'll be pleased to be ruled out of order by yourself. But I will not be 
ruled out of order by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) or by the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. 
Thatcher). I have the floor and the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) was not ruled out of order 
when he talked about private enterprise and co-ops and I am speaking to that point. Do I have the floor? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. State your point of order. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I believe the practice has been when the debate wanders too far away from the 
original estimates the chairman usually puts us back on the estimates. Would he do this? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — My ruling would be this. Order. My ruling is this. As long as they are talking about 
co-ops then I rule it in order. But I think if we stray from there then I have to call a halt to it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I want to close my remarks by saying that any 
suggestion such as the member for Regina South made, that co-ops are an example of private enterprise, I 
reject out of hand. I repeat my argument that they were raised as a defence against private enterprise and I 
very much reject that cock-eyed view that has been advocated by Mr. Wagar and others of the Progressive 
Conservative Party which I think perverts my understanding of what the co-op movement is about. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — If I understand your question correctly you want the estimates in 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2098 

aggregate for the executive people? Pardon? Individually? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I know time is getting on and I don't need it now and I don't want it 
now. Well it would take a little time. If you have it typed out or written out photocopy it and give me a copy 
of it. The estimate '78-'79, the actual paid and the '79-'80 estimate. The standard one that's been asked in 
every estimate for this year. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I'll give them to you immediately. Deputy minister's salary estimate for 1978-79, 
$37,370; '78-'79 actual, $37,934.93; estimate for 1979-80, $38,743; administration heads, administration and 
research estimate, $30,320; actual, $37,949; estimate for '79-'80, $33,189. Those are the correct figures. 
There's a reason for it, if you want to ask about it. Communications development, $29,010 was the estimate 
for '78-'79; actual was $17,340.90; estimate for '79-'80, $33,190. Operations, '78-'79 estimate, $30,310; 
actual, $23,720.80; estimate for '79-'80, $29,150. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, there are two (I didn't write down the first one but I'll get it out of 
Hansard). I'm assuming there's a reason for the drop in the '79-'80 estimate from the actual and there's a 
reason for the $12,000 drop in the actual over estimate in the third one you listed, from $29,000 estimated to 
$17,000 actual. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — There was a vacancy for a good portion of the year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What was the reason on the second one you gave out? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Sorry, again there was a vacancy in the operations on two for a time. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, as I suggested at the outset of my remarks, that being we had a 
responsible minister, and being that I was going to be responsible in my questioning and my comments and 
be as fair as possible, it should be noted, Mr. Chairman, that it is unfortunate, very unfortunate that anyone 
should be answering to this side of the House other than the minister responsible for the department, 
although I accept your ruling that others can speak on it. But I must say, Mr. Chairman, that it is unfortunate 
the Attorney General had to take his place in this Assembly and get overly concerned because the member 
for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) made his views known that the co-operatives are free enterprise. 
 
It should be noted that because they are free enterprise does not mean to say that they are supporters of the 
party or that because of that, we support them. It's not because of that particular thing that we support them. 
It's not because of that particular thing that they support us. 
 
That is not what's in question here, Mr. Chairman, and I suppose the Attorney General should be listening 
because, Mr. Minister, we're attempting to clear away the estimates which have been allotted for the 
Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development. But, Mr. Chairman, surely the remarks by the 
Attorney General are a terrible affront to the co-operatives of this province. To suggest that they are 
socialistic and to suggest that they are there to oppose free enterprise is deplorable, Mr. Chairman. Knowing 
full well that this Attorney General is too proud or whatever, I will make the appropriate apologies, Mr. 
Chairman, on behalf of this Assembly to the co-operatives of this province that that's not why they are there. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Tell Al Wagar that I'm sorry I hurt his feelings. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2099 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Al Wagar isn't in this House, Mr. Chairman, I am. The member for Regina South is. 
Those are the comments to which the Attorney General would have to address his remarks. Those are the 
areas that should have your concern, Mr. Attorney General. Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General is yapping a 
lot off the mouth because he knows he's made a big mistake in this House and he's made an awful affront on 
the co-operatives of this province and that's the very thing that the member for Regina South was saying, that 
it is you and not with the support of your party who is creating division within not just co-operatives but 
every sector in this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, those are my comments and I suggest that we allow the hon. minister to do the answering 
from this side of the House because, in my opinion, he's doing quite a nice job and we can get along quite 
nicely without any further interruptions and delays by the Attorney General. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 4 agreed. 
 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 6 agreed. 
 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development Vote 64 agreed. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Before the minister and his staff leave the Assembly, I would like to take the 
opportunity to thank the minister and his staff for the work they have done in preparation of the report for the 
estimates, and for the work they have done throughout the year. We wish them well in the course of the next 
year. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Perhaps I should have the last word. I don't want to get in an argument over semantics 
or anything but I can say, in my view, co-operatives are a form of public enterprise because a segment of the 
public voluntarily chooses to go together and form an enterprise. 
 

REVENUE, SUPPLY AND SERVICES 
VOTE 18 

 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — Mr. Chairman, one person has 
not arrived yet. He was up in the gallery and I see that he is on his way down. He should be here shortly. To 
my left is Mr. Harold Jones, the deputy minister of the department. Immediately behind me is Gary Brandt, 
the Director of Operations, and next to him is Dan Cunningham, administration under the Operations 
Division. Immediately to the left of Mr. Jones is Mike Barry, Director of Revenue. 
 
ITEM 1 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Chairman, could the minister tell the Assembly the role 
the Department of Revenue plays in setting up the budget? I assume that your job is to get the money in. 
Would you basically tell us how you work in conjunction with the Department of Finance in the preparation 
of the numbers? 
 
Mr. Minister, while you are answering me and by way of giving your staff something to do for a moment, 
could you give me the actual figures for the fiscal year just completed, 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2100 

like revenues or the budgetary inflows. Will you list them out in a budget and by now, I believe, your fiscal 
year closed on March 30, 1979 for 1978. I would like the actual figures, if I may, while you are answering 
me. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, of course, we are involved in the budgetary process in relation to revenue 
forecasting and this is related to the direct taxes — the E & H tax, gasoline tax, tobacco tax, that sort of 
thing. The insurance taxes, like the 2 per cent insurance tax which applies to all insurance premiums, the 1 
per cent motor vehicle insurance tax and the fire prevention tax. Those three together bring in about $10 
million worth of revenue in total. We haven't our final figures, of course, for the last year. Those figures 
won't be available for some two or three months yet but I can give you approximations of them: E & H tax, 
$198 million; gasoline tax, $82 million; tobacco tax, $21 million. Remember that the liquor consumption tax 
is listed separately, it's separate from the E & H tax, $20.5 million; insurance premium tax, $6.8 million; 
motor vehicles insurance premium tax, $1,250,000; fire prevention tax $900,000. Those are the major ones. 
There are still some minor ones; public health levy; hospital revenue tax and there is still some money 
flowing in from succession duties and gift tax, although it's minor. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — So, Mr. Minister, your department or your people, you have nothing whatsoever to 
do with the taxation arrangements with Ottawa? Your department is not involved? You do not administer the 
funds from the heritage fund? 
MR. ROBBINS: — No. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — What about receipt from government enterprises such as the Liquor Board and 
Crown investments? Do they not come in to you? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm having difficulty finding your function. Your department 
was set up about a year ago and the term 'revenue' usually means that you are going to look after getting the 
money in there to pay the Minister of Finance's bills. It doesn't really look like you do a great deal. Are you 
even in charge of shall we say, putting the money into the consolidated fund? For instance, the heritage fund 
is putting $328 million into general revenue. Does that come through you or does it go directly to finance? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Directly to finance. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Minister, tell me what the revenue part does because they don't seem to do 
a great deal. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Besides central vehicles! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Yes, I guess there is central vehicles — I didn't care to really get into that aspect, 
although perhaps there is someone who may. 
 
Mr. Minister, let's talk a bit about the E & H tax (education and health tax). You indicated that you are 
estimating that $198 million will have flown into the provincial treasury from the E & H tax when the fiscal 
year is closed off; when final audit figures are in you will have about $198 million. I note that last year you 
budgeted for $204 million and that was with a 5 per cent sales tax. Of course, events led to the lowering of 
that sales tax from 5 per cent to 3 per cent. One of the reasons (particularly last fall) that the 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2101 

Minister of Finance (Mr. Smishek) and the Premier went to great lengths to cry about as far as the large 
deficit which they were probably going to be facing, was that they had been duped or tricked or whatever you 
care to term it, into lowering their sales tax from 5 per cent to 3 per cent. If I am not mistaken, (I am going 
off the top of my head), I think the Minister of Finance (and he may want to correct me here), indicated in 
one press release that it was going to cost the province about $32 million. I am subject to correction if you 
wish, Mr. Minister, but I think you used that figure of $32 million. Now it seems to me that if your figure is 
correct, at the end of March, the $198 million will have been realized and you are in fact only $6 million 
short of what was budgeted last year. Why have we got this large, large deficit which psychologically the 
government had been preparing the people of Saskatchewan for for about six months? I am quite certain, Mr. 
Minister of Finance, (and again, I am subject to your correction) — that if I go into my files I will find that 
number of $32 million which you used. So I will ask you, Mr. Minister, why the big deficit? You budgeted 
from 5 per cent down to 3 per cent for the biggest portion of the year and yet you came within $6 million. 
 
Now I will ask you two questions. You came pretty close, why? Did you drastically under budget? You 
thought at 5 per cent that you could bring in $204 million; at 3 per cent you brought in $198 million. What 
was going on there that you were able to do this? Because, Mr. Minister, according to your own statistics, 
retail sales were not up all that amount last year. I suppose there was a little bit of inflation on the price of 
retail goods, but not that much that a drop from 5 per cent to 3 per cent could bring you that close. So I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, why the deficit, why the big deficit? Secondly, how did you get so close to your budget 
with a 2 per cent less sales tax? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I am sure if you check the record you will find that the Minister of Finance and myself 
and others have always said a $20 million loss in terms of the reduction from 5 per cent to 3 per cent, not 
$32 million . , . (inaudible interjection) . , . No, a loss of $60 million with two-thirds of it refundable to the 
province from the federal authority. I said these were estimates and you have to add the $198 million and the 
$20.5 million together — $20.5 million on the liquor consumption tax which previously had been under the 
E & H tax. 
 
So if you use that figure of roughly $218 million and you look at it and the actual results, we would say the 
1978-79 actual will come out at about $158 million with about $60 million off because it went down from 5 
per cent to 3 per cent on a portion of the E & H tax. About $137.4 million of that came from regular E & H 
tax; the $20.6 million from what we now term the liquor consumption tax. That was 10 per cent and it was 
included in the E & H tax previously. So if you add those two together you come out around $217 million. 
Then if you dock off the $40 million, you get the actual result of about $158 million to $160 million. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — What $40 million are you talking about on that last comment? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The $20 million, I am sorry — the $40 million is refundable from the federal authority. 
That is approximate. We don't know exactly what it will be, but two-thirds of the loss. So, we will be out 
about $20 million in total, in terms. We wouldn't be far out in terms of the estimates. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — So, then what you are saying is the E & H tax, the figure you put down here now, the 
estimated figure which is given in the budget as a summary of estimated budgetary cash flow, which last 
year was $204 million, did not include revenue from liquor tax. Correct? This year the figure of 
$239,100,000 does have that figure, that 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2102 

liquor tax, built into it. Is this correct? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — They are both included in those figures, included in both figures. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, if they are included in both figures, in your estimate of very close to 
$240 million out of E & H on the basis of last year's experience, (assuming that you are relatively accurate 
on your $198 million actual, and let's assume that you are), if you can come that close to your $204 million 
and putting those same factors in that bring you that $198 million coupled with a 2 per cent increase in the 
sales tax, is that not in fact going to bring you in considerably more money than $240 million, assuming the 
conditions are equal, that brought you in the $198 million? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, I think you are getting confused a bit with the figures. Let's start again. 
 
I said $198 million and that was an estimate, not an actual but an estimate, plus $20.5 million for liquor 
consumption tax, and if you added the two together you came out with about $218 million. That was one 
estimate. 
 
If you look at the actual return, 1978-79, we don't know what it will be in total as yet, but it looks like about 
$158 million, of which about $40 million should be paid back to us from the federal authorities. Now if there 
had been no temporary reduction, we would've had returns of about $217 million, which come pretty close to 
the $198 million and the $20 million — $218 million, relatively close. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, does your department, in any way, shape or form, have any input or do 
you administer the collection of a corporation income tax in the province? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, we do not. That's under finance. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — My goodness we're running out of things to talk to you about, rather quickly. 
 
Mr. Minister, the gasoline tax has been one of a fair amount of controversy in various parts of the country. 
Has the minister come to the conclusion that the high taxes on gasoline — well, now that we're on to litres 
nobody really knows how much or what percentage they really do take; when they were on gallons, I suppose 
we could understand it — are having any effect in consumption? Would the minister agree that probably 
they are not? Would the minister agree that if there is perhaps one thing in the West that we may have some 
bit of a natural advantage of over eastern Canada, it is in the area of oil and gas because of our proximity to 
them? Would the minister tell me whether he supports the Trudeau Government concept of the same 
gasoline price from one end of Canada to the other, the concept that a Maritimer should pay no more than a 
resident of, shall we say, Calgary, Alberta, or Regina? Do you support that concept, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I suppose that as Canadians we have to work on the assumption that they are part of 
Canada and, because one of the major problems we have in terms of inflationary trends is related to oil, there 
is merit in a levelling out. But I must say that if you travel across the country you will find very wide 
variances in terms of gasoline prices at gasoline pumps. 



 
April 25, 1979 

 

 
2103 

I should also inform the member that there is evidence of some decline in the actual consumption of 
gasoline. I don't know whether he's listening or not. There's some evidence of some decline in the 
consumption of gasoline, and the rate of increase that has been occurring is declining partly, I suppose, 
because of the tendency to drive smaller cars is evident. It's beginning to have some effect, and there is some 
reduction in gasoline consumption. Your argument that we have high taxes — I don't want to get into an 
argument with the member on that respect. It's true that B.C.'s 2 cents a gallon lower. Alberta wiped out their 
tax. I don't agree with that and many people in Alberta don't agree with that. I've had some discussions with 
some of them. Manitoba tax is 1 cent lower than ours. Ontario's is now 3 cents a gallon higher than ours. 
Quebec's the same as ours, and all the maritime provinces are much higher — running up to 27 cents a 
gallon higher. So there are variances, of course across the country but it's true that based on crude oil 
supplies there is some attempt to level out average costs right across the country. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I would like to get into the area of CVA and since this involves the 
aircraft and automobiles and trucks, I think it would be wise to take it one at a time. Let's start with aircraft. 
To expedite matters and, I think, to make it easier, are you prepared to give us a photocopy of the logbooks 
of each aircraft in your fleet? I understand that you have a separate logbook in the office, a copy of that one 
as well. Are you prepared to give us that? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Yes, we're prepared to give you the copies of the journey logs and we're prepared to 
give you the same information as given in public accounts with respect to the second item. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I'm sorry, I didn't hear that last part. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I'm willing to give you the same information as is given in public accounts with respect 
to the second request. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Could you elaborate a little bit on that? I'm not sure what you're talking about. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — We can give you the flight log from the aircraft but it's an MOT (Ministry of Transport) 
requirement that it remain in the plane so you can't get that information until they're down for maintenance, 
and they are regularly down for maintenance. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — So in other words, you will give me photocopies of it once that is available. Again to 
expedite matters, you have three aircraft in your air fleet, is that right? Or is that incorrect? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Four. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Sorry, I should have said four; that's right. It's two Cheyennes and two Navahos? 
Right. O.K., we've talked about this in the House before and you've indicated at that time that you would 
give us answers in estimates, so now is the time to ask the question. You are charging 30 cents per mile to 
user departments. First of all, why 30 cents? Secondly, why the reduction from 60 cents, which at one time 
you were charging and now 30 cents? And thirdly, what is your actual cost of operating those aircraft? 



 
April 25, 1979 
 

 
2104 

MR. ROBBINS: — What we do with executive aircraft is we charge all six costs; that is depreciation, 
insurance, the salaries of the pilots, the salaries of the maintenance engineers, the salaries of the flight 
co-ordinator to an appropriation in the Department of Revenue. It's a fixed cost. The cost of those pilots' 
wages for example, or salaries will be there whether they make one flight a week or 20 flights a week. We 
charge 30 cents a mile and if you want to compute this, this covers aviation fuel, maintenance, engine 
reserve plus the sustenance for pilots if they have to eat meals or stay overnight on a flight. For your 
information (and we review this regularly) we may have to increase that as costs rise of course, but for your 
information, if you look at the actual cost of $82.54 an hour, that's the variable cost, not the fixed cost on a 
Cheyenne . , . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What's that number? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — $82.24 an hour. The variable costs on a Cheyenne at the average flight speed of around 
275 per hour, it works out to a cost of 29.99 cents per mile and we charge 30 cents a mile. We can't get it 
much close than that. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You didn't answer all of my question. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 
 
The Assembly recessed from 5 to 7 p.m. 


