






















































Hansard: December 13, 1979


429 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 13, 1979 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
Bill No. 46 – An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act (continued) 

 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): – Mr. Speaker, prior to adjournment for dinner, I proceeded 
to mention the poor quality of debate given by the two members in relation to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority. I will not go into that at this particular time. 
 
I do want to, however, go back to another era when this kind of a discussion arose. But not within the 
Assembly, because at that time they had a different kind of opposition and I wonder if I could just read to 
you the Debates and Proceedings of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, April 6, 1962. It concerns an 
act respecting an area to be known as Wascana Centre. I notice here, the late Mr. W. Ross Thatcher, who 
was the leader of the opposition at that time said ‘I say it once that I rise with pleasure to support the 
principles of this legislation.’ And there really isn’t very much difference in concept and in principle 
between the Wascana Authority and the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
I also want to go on and say that Mr. Thatcher went on to say, ‘I say that we support in principle this 
legislation.’ Also, there was a Mr. Ross McCarthy who said, ‘I am very much in favor of this type of thing 
. . .’ and I’ll not go into why. Also, a Mr. Foley who was a member of the opposition at that time for 
Turtleford, ‘Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate myself with my leader and other speakers who have 
spoken in connection with the Wascana Centre project.’ 
 
I do want to say one thing, Mr. Speaker, that here you have an example in my quoting from the Debates and 
Proceedings of an opposition that had some substance. A noble opposition, if I may say, as compared to the 
members opposite who sit across from us and politicize this sort of thing. I want to, just briefly, touch again 
on the political bias that has been injected into this whole debate in Saskatoon and area. One political hack 
who has been doing the work for members opposite . . . You know I can’t fathom, Mr. Speaker, why the 
Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party (and I don’t know where he is, I can’t see him, Mr. Speaker) 
. . . Well at any rate, I will address myself to you, in keeping with the tradition of the House. I can’t 
understand how the Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, coming from Saskatoon, could manipulate 
those . . . well, not 17. I think half of them have taken off for sunnier climes or are about to. I can’t 
understand how a gentleman like that would be so violently opposed and allow those members opposite to 
oppose the concept of Meewasin Valley Authority. I’ll tell you one thing. In Saskatoon Centre I know all of 
my constituents – not all but about 90 per cent – are in favor, and should he or members opposite care to 
venture into my constituency I in all sincerity say I cannot guarantee you safety. 
 
Now if I could just mention one other thing. One of these members who tried to stir up – and did some 
stirring up of people said (and I thought he was referring to an alderman from Saskatoon, I could be 
mistaken) this alderman said, yes, he accepted the legislation last year, he thought it was good, but now he 
admits he was duped. He never mentioned any names and that’s why I say that gentleman has to be 
associated with those 17. He was really a spokesman for them, because those are the kinds of tactics they 
have used and are using. They never name names unless it is to besmirch the honor and the integrity or a 
civil servant of the calibre of Wes Bolstad. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
430 

Well, I simply say that after looking at the amendments there, those amendments are just absolutely 
nonsense. It limits the authority to 90 metres on each side of the river bank. What they really want is an 
authority that has no authority at all. They want to control a river edge but they want no river edge in it. I 
don’t know what you would want to control in there. The only things there are trees and grass, and maybe 
you feel you have to control them, or the fish that swim in the river. And I tell you after this, there are 17 fish 
that aren’t in the river, they are right over there. If you think you are going to capitalize on this politically in 
Saskatoon and area, you’re badly mistaken because 90 per cent of about 150,000 gives about 130,000 people 
who are foursquare behind the concept of this. And the amendments as proposed by the provincial 
government, I believe, are acceptable to many. I also believe they are not acceptable to all of them, but the 
Attorney General has said amendments will be made. He is a man of honor; his word has been good. You’ve 
accepted it before. I see the gentleman is pulling his choker. Now I would too if I found myself in the same 
position as you – a leader who has not leadership. I don’t know but I would imagine that there should be 
little wires, you know, from there to there because that is what puppetry is all about. 
 
Well, I simply say, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. gentlemen opposite wish to destroy this thing. We want to 
listen to the people. Amendments introduced by the Attorney General show we listen to people and will 
continue to listen to people. If you people want to speak for the speculators, and I know you do, fine, it will 
rest on your consciences, not ours. I simply say that I fully support the concept of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority. And the residents’ associations in my constituency – in fact they put an ad in the Star-Phoenix last 
week, probably Saturday – fully support it too. If you oppose the amendments proposed here, as I mentioned 
before, you will rue the day and you’re selling down the drain your children and your grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will certainly be supporting the amendments put forth by the Attorney General, but the 
nonsensical ones put forward by the nonsensical opposition, I will be opposing them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P. PREBBLE (Saskatoon Sutherland): – Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to be able to enter into 
this debate, because for the first time in this House, in black and white, we now have a very clear example of 
what Progressive Conservative environmental policy is really like. We are seeing it in black and white. My 
desire to enter cabinet has nothing at all to do with my motivations behind this speech and I do not 
particularly mind whether I enter cabinet or not. I am afraid you are a great deal further away from entering 
cabinet than I will ever be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the main part of this debate. We are looking at an authority which has really 
only been operating for two months and we have had the operations of that authority clouded by comments 
from the Progressive Conservative Party calling the executive director of that authority a cheap hack. 
 
I particularly in the opening part of my comments want to point out how thoroughly disgusting I find that 
comment about a gentleman whom I believe almost all citizens in Saskatoon and Regina know as a very, 
very honorable man whose integrity is beyond question. It is truly disgusting, in this House, that Mr. Wes 
Bolstad has to come under this kind of attack. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
431 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it has been very clear that the Meewasin Valley Authority had no intention of 
interfering with ordinary, day-to-day land transfers which were taking place within the control zone or the 
buffer zone, ordinary improvements that were being proposed or ordinary construction which was being 
proposed by local residents. I think we see that indication, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that almost immediately 
when the authority began operation, it delegated to the city of Saskatoon the authority to look after all 
proposed developments in R-1 and R-2 areas. Unfortunately the Meewasin Valley Authority’s efforts have 
been hampered by the recent SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees Association) strike and 
naturally that has meant a great inconvenience in terms of land transfers because people have not been able 
to transfer the title to their land. I fear this is one of the things which has led to misunderstanding about the 
kind of authority and the kinds of intention which the Meewasin Valley Authority actually had. 
 
Now, I want to say that there has been much talk on the part of the opposition, much concern about 
interference with agricultural lands outside of the city of Saskatoon. I want to say that it was very clearly 
established by the authority, from its very beginning, that one of the major goals of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority was the retention of agriculture as a major part of the authority. One of its major goals was to see 
agriculture retained outside of Saskatoon. 
 
That has been demonstrated by its announcement that it intends to set up an agricultural advisory committee. 
Its good intention toward local farmers in the Corman Park area has been clearly demonstrated by the fact 
that the authority has already given notice that any approvals of an agricultural nature which are approved by 
the Department of Agriculture had the automatic approval of the Meewasin Valley Authority. It is not 
attempting to exercise powers over and above those that would normally be exercised by the Department of 
Agriculture. We had that announced just a couple of weeks ago. 
 
I want to say in regard to agriculture, the intent of the authority (which I regret has been misunderstood by 
the members opposite) has been to focus development in certain specific areas along the river, to relieve 
farmers of the current problem which they have experienced from dozens and on some days hundreds of 
people crossing their potato fields and their grain fields, interrupting their farming operations. One of the 
intentions of the authority was to deal with that problem and focus development along specific areas of the 
river. 
 
The authority stated from the beginning that the master plan was a broad vision. It committed itself at the 
very stages to public participation – to comprehensively involve the public and local residents who would be 
affected in any specific implementation of the plans which were being contemplated. 
 
In this context, Mr. Speaker, I think we must look at the Conservative proposal and find it extremely 
unfortunate. I want to paint, for all members of the House and particularly for members opposite and for the 
public, the implications which the Conservative amendment would have for the operation of the Meewasin 
Valley Authority and the operation of the overall plan that the authority laid out. The overall vision, not a 
specific plan, Mr. Speaker, but a vision that the Meewasin Valley Authority and all those people who have 
been involved in this Saskatoon area in planning it had. 
 
I want to start, Mr. Speaker, by looking at the southern end of the river valley. I remind all members of the 
House we are talking about the protection of a river valley and not just 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
432 

about the protection of the river edge. The protection of the valley is fundamental to the overall well-being of 
the river edge, one of the basic points the Conservative amendment overlooks. I want to start by turning to 
page 51 of the Meewasin Valley Project, a booklet I’m sure all members will be familiar with now and have 
had several months to review and consider. I want to turn to page 51 and look first at the proposed Oxbow 
Lakes Sanctuary. If you look at the proposal for the sanctuary which spreads over an area of approximately 
two miles and which called for the establishment of a conservation, research and passive recreation area 
within the sanctuary, if you look at the intention establishing an interpretive centre that would provide an 
opportunity for students and all members of the public to better understand the process of glaciation that 
took place in the area, to better understand the history of the Moon Lake archaeological site (which I’d like 
to point out to all members is outside the 92 meter zone they are proposing) that was going to look at 
preserving fine ecology and wildlife on the Meander Plains of that sanctuary, we find almost the entire 
proposed sanctuary would be outside the 92 metre boundary that is being proposed by the members opposite. 
 
If we go to the next major project proposed by Moriyama in this overall vision we had, a vision that would 
be developed with comprehensive public participation for the local people who were going to be affected, if 
we look at that we find that the Conservative proposal would stop the plan to develop Beaver Creek as a 
conservation area. It would stop the plan to halt the destructive use by many persons within that area right 
now so it could return to its natural condition. It would hinder the plan greatly to establishing an outdoor 
education and archaeological study site in the Beaver Creek area because once again the Beaver Creek area, 
Mr. Speaker, lies almost entirely outside the 92 metre zone that’s being proposed by the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
And if we turn to page 55 of this broad vision Moriyama has outlined and we look at Cranberry Flats we see 
the Progressive Conservative proposal would greatly hinder though it would not stop completely the 
preservation of Cranberry Flats. A good part of the flats does lie within the 92 metre area proposed by 
portions of it lie outside. The plan to develop an alternative site to be used by all-terrain vehicles so we don’t 
have cars driving up and down Cranberry Flats all the time would virtually be destroyed by the PC 
amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to look, Mr. Speaker, at the northern portion, the portion of the river valley authority north of 
Saskatoon for a minute. I want to look at one of the key parts of the vision, Petursson’s Ravine. The 
intention there was to establish a conservation area. I want to refer all members of the House to page 69 of 
the report and read into the record, Mr. Speaker, what Moriyama proposed for this area. He said the 
Petursson’s Ravine area includes not only Petursson’s Ravine but the underground water emerging at the 
bank west of the penal hospital, rare sedges and saline vegetation 300 to 350 metres south of Petursson’s 
Ravine together with essentially undisturbed geological formations showing the series of glaciating. Illegal 
dumping is damaging this area. There are only two sets of words to describe the area and to suggest action. It 
is beautiful; clean it up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the proposal by the Progressive Conservative Party to limit 
development to 92 metres from the riverbank would once again upset the development that is proposed for 
this area because the intention Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You will have your opportunity to 
present your case member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane). You will have a full opportunity to present your case 
and if you wish to rebut me at the time, I will listen with interest to your rebuttal. Now, Mr.  



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
433 

Speaker, I want to say it is my belief that the Progressive Conservative proposal will hamper our ability to 
fully develop the Medicine Wheel Park that is being proposed and it will hamper our ability to develop as 
Moriyama proposed, an in-city recreation area somewhat to the south of that. 
 
I want to say to members opposite that it is not just enough for the city of Saskatoon, if it were to later own 
and control that area, to develop it. The whole notion behind the establishment of this authority was to have 
them place a vehicle that would look at development with a special eye to the sensitive nature of the river. 
That is the special intention of the Meewasin Valley Authority and that is the intention that you are in fact 
destroying by way of your amendment. 
 
Now I want to look at Cathedral Bluffs node that was being proposed further north of Petursson’s Ravine. 
That was another fundamental part of the Moriyama concept. I want to say that the intention was to create a 
lake, a ski hill and to develop an interpretive centre. Once again, the Progressive Conservative proposal 
interferes with the fundamental intent of the Meewasin Valley Authority to develop this as a recreational 
area to the north of Saskatoon. the whole intent behind the plan was to preserve the southern portions of the 
river valley for ecological purposes and to move recreational development to the north. The amendment 
destroys the opportunity of the authority to implement that plan. 
 
I want to turn especially to the subject continuously being raised by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
which is the question of the refinery – the uranium refinery. I want to say that under the PC plan, the refinery 
would no longer be under the control of the authority at all. It would no longer be under the buffer zone. 
Under the PC proposal it would simply be left to the private market forces to develop the refinery in 
whatever way they want. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Meewasin Valley Authority would exercise no 
control over that area, which seems to run in complete conflict to what the member for Rosthern was 
advocating. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: – I want further to say, Mr. Speaker, the PC plan would greatly hinder our ability to 
develop a lake between the river and the downtown city core which is another of the basic concepts that 
Moriyama and the authority have advocated. The plan was for the authority to play a role in preserving 
historical sites and preserving the character of portions of the downtown area. The 92 metre restriction 
would virtually make that impossible, Mr. Speaker. It would also make impossible the ability of the authority 
to stop highrises anywhere outside the 92 metres which potentially could mean that within 150 yards of the 
river, we could be looking at highrises that could not be controlled by the Meewasin Valley Authority at all. 
We would be looking at all kinds of opportunities for land speculators to come in and to violate the basic 
character of the downtown area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to say that the authority was to play an important role in developing a continual linkage of green 
space and open space along the river valley and within the downtown area. It was to play an important role in 
placing controls on private developers to assure that continuous green space, continuous linkage was 
developed over a period of time. Again, removing the ability of the authority to exercise any control outside 
the 92 metre area would make it virtually impossible for that goal to be implemented. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
434 

If we look, Mr. Speaker, at the fact that a lot of the sloughs and ponds and small lakes are essentially an 
integral part of Moriyama’s plan, an integral part of developing a linkage between the city and the rural 
community, and playing an important role in assuring water retention, we see once again that the opportunity 
to exercise that vision is destroyed by the PC proposal. I think that what we are faced with, Mr. Speaker, is in 
effect a proposal amendment from the Progressive Conservatives that would destroy the river valley 
authority concept completely. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: – What they are proposing is allowing the most sensitive ecological areas outside the 92 
metre area to be destroyed. They are saying that they are not willing to protect many of the most precious 
ecological preserves that, for the most part, fell outside the 92 metre area. They are saying that they are not 
willing to prevent dumping and pollution in sensitive areas that lie outside the 92 metre area. They are 
saying, Mr. Speaker, that they are not willing to take action to preserve the precious drainage system, the 
Coulee, the wooded areas, that for the most part lie outside the 92 metre area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: – They are essentially saying, Mr. Speaker, leave that to the private land speculators to 
develop in the way that they want to, to exercise the full pressure on rural municipalities which are not fully 
equipped to deal with that kind of pressure. Now I want to say that in my view the proposed amendments as 
put forward by the Attorney General which I am willing to support and to live with, are in fact a compromise 
because there are many person who would like to see the powers of the river valley authority strengthened, 
or at last would like to see the amendments not carried to the point that they do. It’s my view, Mr. Speaker, 
that some of the amendments run the risk of weakening the authority to the point where it may not be the 
kind of effective vehicle that we need to take the kind of comprehensive action that I believe is needed to 
preserve the river valley. 
 
I want particularly to say with regard to the proposal repeal of section 50, that I do have some concerns that 
the repeal of this section will make it very difficult to keep track of proposed land transfers that are going to 
be taking place. This will mean that the Meewasin Valley Authority will miss opportunities to purchase land 
in the ordinary way through the ordinary process, because it will not be notified of the proposed interest of 
some parties in selling their land. Mr. Speaker, I think that the loss of that opportunity will indeed be 
unfortunate. 
 
I also want to say that I personally would like to see the authority have more influence over development 
within t some portions of the buffer zone, because essentially right now, the authority plays no active 
advisory role in deciding what kinds of development will take place in the buffer zone. It is simply advised 
of the proposed development. It is simply notified of them. It does not have a major input into determining 
whether those developments are satisfactory or not. I think, Mr. Speaker, that in some cases where the 
control zone is not wide enough and does not protect precious areas of the downtown fully enough. I believe 
that it’s unfortunate that the authority is not able to exercise more control in the buffer zone. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that we still have a requirement on the books for 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
435 

the Meewasin Valley Authority to have to buy land within a year if a proposed development for that land is 
rejected by the authority because this leaves the authority wide open to the kinds of land speculators that the 
Conservative Party is supporting. It leaves the authority wide open to a land speculator coming forward with 
a ridiculous development for an area, the authority having to turn it down and then the authority being 
obligated within a year to purchase the land. I think Mr. Speaker, that the authority should have the ability to 
stop developments without having to purchase the land involved, but only after having established criteria – 
public criteria – by which that judgment will be made. So I want to say that very clearly the amendments are 
what I would describe as a compromise, a compromise between those who are concerned that the river valley 
authority does not have quite the necessary jurisdiction that is required to protect the river valley and those 
who are concerned that in fact the authority has too much power and too much jurisdiction. What we have is 
an attempt at a compromise which I am sure all members of the public, other than the 17 members opposite, 
will realize is realistic and something that attempts to meet the needs of all those concerned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to sum up by saying that the Conservative Party has said the decision regarding 
the establishment of this authority, it’s operation and the establishment of the boundary should be 
non-political. And what we are seeing now is a clear attempt to establish the boundaries of the authority in a 
very political way, the most political kind of way you can imagine. 
 
They are turning the establishment of these boundaries into pure politics, Mr. Speaker. They are destroying 
the entire concept of the Meewasin Valley Authority. They are drawing up these boundaries without any 
knowledge of ecology, without any effort to consult someone who is knowledgeable in ecology. Here we 
have a very clear illustration of what the real environmental policies of the PC Party are. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that clearly those policies will be condemned by the majority of people in Saskatoon and 
surrounding area. I have already been in touch with the presidents of the heritage society and the 
environmental society in Saskatoon. They have informed me they completely reject the PC amendments, and 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as many of the community associations in Saskatoon have already indicated 
their support of the existing Meewasin Valley Authority concept, they clearly must reject the PC 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge the PCs to withdraw their amendments. They are clearly not in the public interest 
and I say, Mr. Speaker, there can be no question about the fact that anyone who is concerned about 
protecting the river valley will support the government’s amendments and defeat the PC amendments. Thank 
you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): – I think this debate has been a very good debate for a 
number of reasons. Obviously the issue is an important issue and I think it has, for my part, in any event, as 
one member very much involved in the whole concept of Meewasin Valley Authority, at least clarified the 
fighting ground – if I can put it that way. 
 
I think the member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Prebble) and the member for Saskatoon-Centre (Mr. 
Mostoway) particularly made illuminating addresses about the effects of the PCs amendments. I think they 
made an effective argument on the PC amendments and I won’t go over the territory too much with respect 
to the speech 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
436 

made, particularly by the member for Sutherland just before he sat down, on what the amendments mean. I 
will have a few comments to make with respect to the amendments in just a moment, because I too want to 
tell the members opposite that as one member I reject the proposed amendments. 
 
I want, however, to make a couple of remarks in rebuttal to the points raised primarily by the member for 
Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) this afternoon on the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one issue that bothers me a little bit just as a technique is, if you will notice carefully, the 
member for Kindersley never states his position on any particular area. The member for Kindersley (as I 
think has been unfortunately the habit of the PC Party since they’ve been in this House for the short 
duration) argues like this – some people say this and this and that. I’m not saying I’m saying it, some people 
say this. Or he will say, have the mortgage lenders received a legal opinion? And when you ask where is the 
legal opinion? How does he know he got the legal opinion? Some people say this kind of a section is . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Where do you stand on this? Do you subscribe to those arguments or do you try 
to defend the arguments? Not a word. And I think this is a very interesting tactic because that indeed is the 
case. 
 
I do, nevertheless, want to make a couple of points which I think should be put clearly on the record again 
since this debate is out in the open. The member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) in the Progressive 
Conservative Party I say should be voting against these amendments in second reading tonight in a few 
minutes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Obviously you’re not going to vote for them because of your 
amendments. Your amendments effectively kill the entire bill. I’ll just tell you in a minute how they do this. 
Just hang on. I want to speak specifically to the points raised on the section by section arguments that some 
people (mind you not the member for Kindersley) but some people raise. The member for Kindersley says 
some people out there are worried that under section 13 of The Meewasin Valley Authority Act there is an 
unprecedented power. Those were the effect of his words. Because it says the authority may by resolution 
alter the area of the valley by adding thereto or excluding therefrom with respect to the land. Then he makes 
a great big argument out of this. Unprecedented and exceptional power – well, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to 
tell the hon. member opposite this is not the case. It is not unprecedented power. The Wascana Centre 
Authority, section 12 says: 
 

The authority may with the approval of the participating parties (the same situation we’ve got) by 
resolution alter the area of the Wascana Centre by adding thereto or excluding therefrom any parcel 
of land. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can only assume that since the member for Kindersley and the Progressive Conservative 
Party objects to this section in the Meewasin Valley Authority, they equally object to it in this section of the 
Wascana Centre Authority . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, the member for Souris-Cannington 
(Mr. Berntson) says that. That’s why I’m saying I want them to vote against this now because I think this 
clarifies exactly where they stand. 
 
Take the area on improvements. The member says, mind you, not me, but some people are worried about 
improvement and the high authority with respect to improvements in the Meewasin Valley Authority. Well, I 
decided to just check this for one moment again to see what the Wascana Centre Authority says about 
improvements and to . . . and behold I see on section 15: 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
437 

Any person may apply to the authority (Wascana Centre Authority, I’m talking about) for approval of 
his proposal to make an improvement within the land. 

 
And then lo and behold I see on section 18 that if it’s under $5,000 (and the bill before it was amended under 
the Meewasin Valley was $2,000; here it says $5,000) you don’t need approval. Otherwise you need 
Wascana Centre approval. 
 
I assume since the hon. member for Kindersley opposes this particular power, he, too, opposes the particular 
power that exists in the Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of issue was made out of the question of section 45 of the Meewasin Valley Authority. I 
don’t know, maybe I should sit down and let the member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) make 
speeches and we’ll all be a little bit better off. But section 45, Mr. Speaker, I said . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I have really got to ask you to call the member for Saskatoon Centre to order because I 
cannot hear. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Order! I was having some trouble before and I didn’t want to mention it. But I was 
having some trouble when the member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Prebble) was speaking. I thought what 
he was saying was relevant and in order but it was being drowned out occasionally. There was some object 
between me and him drowning it out. I find now I have the same problem. The Attorney General is speaking 
and it seems I’m getting the same kind of static. I wonder if the members in that general area could keep a 
little quieter. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – I want to make the point with respect to section 45. I’m not going to belabor this too 
long but I think you see what I’m saying section by section. 
 
Section 45 of the Meewasin Valley Authority says – this is the section we are amending. I said in may 
argument it was a specious misrepresentation to argue section 45 prohibited any kind of land transfers. This 
is the one dealing with public easements, and the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) particularly spoke to 
that area and objected. Well, I want to tell the hon. member about section 38 of The Wascana Centre 
Authority Act. This is an act that’s been around for many years. It’s been around for 17 years as worded. 
Section 39 is identical to section 45 – we are amending section 45 now to put in . . . similar and it’s been 
interpreted by the courts – section 39. As I said in second reading and I repeat to you now, that is a specious 
argument. Why are we amending it? Again, we want to try to show to the public that any kind of a concern 
they have which can be amended to clarify the situation we are prepared to do. That’s no good for the PCs. 
Apparently, it’s not good also if the same thing applies with respect to the Wascana Centre Authority. So 
we’ll be assuming a private member’s bill is coming to make an amendment there. 
 
Then there’s the question, Mr. Speaker, of certificate of title. You’ll recall this is an amendment which we 
are proposing. This is the endorsement of the title. This is the part, Mr. Speaker, I want to very much stress 
in a moment. This is section 46 in the Meewasin Valley Authority Act which say there shall be an 
endorsement on title; this land is subject to Meewasin Valley Authority. This is the one which created the 
whole hubbub and as the hon. member for Kindersley says, some people are worried about this, that it may 
cloud title, etc., and Wally Hamm and all of his boys out there may be worried about that. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I notice by section 40 of The Wascana Centre Authority Act, these words: 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
438 

Every certificate of title within Wascana Centre shall be endorsed by the registrar of the land 
registration district in which the land is situated with the following note: 

 
The land herein described is subject to The Wascana Centre Act revised statutes, 1965, chapter 401, 
section 40. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there was and is private land in the Wascana Centre Authority. I don’t know if it is mortgaged 
or not. This is an identical section we have in the Meewasin Valley Authority. The money lenders of 
Saskatoon, when they issued their press release saying they wouldn’t lend any money because it clouded 
title, did so either not knowing this was the case with the Wascana Centre Authority where they have lent 
money, or if they did, were doing it for purely political purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell the hon. member for Kindersley and the hon. member for Rosthern where the titles 
of Wascana centre were endorsed – and may I say back in 1962 the Premier was the person who piloted that 
bill through – there was undoubtedly controversy for the same reasons. It has this provision with respect to 
endorsement of title as well, I ask the citizens of Saskatoon to ask the money lenders in Saskatoon and the 
PC Party why it is on identically the same provision that exists in Wascana, when it is being implemented for 
Saskatoon, that they are threatening to cut off the funds for this provision and have not done so with respect 
to the Wascana Centre Authority? Why? 
 
Oh, the hon. member for Kindersley says, let’s not inject politics into this. Mr. Attorney General, we’re just 
trying to be reasonable people about this. And then the hon. member raises the question with respect to 
section 53 of the powers, the extra owners for expropriation. Why do you need to go for expropriation, and 
once you’ve expropriated why do you have to have all these wide powers of search? Why another police 
force in there? Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell the hon. member for Kindersley and I tell the members of the House 
– you know what I was going to say – it’s in the section of The Wascana Centre Authority Act the same way. 
But I daresay you could pick almost any statute in Saskatchewan, be it The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act or wherever an expropriating authority exists (and there are many of them around) 
and I daresay you might even look at some of the expropriating authorities under relevant municipal 
legislation and you find, it not identical, substantially similar follow-up powers of expropriation. 
 
If we did away with section 53, if we did away with the Meewasin Valley Authority and its power to 
expropriate, the city of Saskatoon would still have the power to expropriate and still would have the powers 
to follow up on the expropriation to which the member objects. And it’s in The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Act. So look at the totality of the ‘people concerns’ arguments. Look at them. Section 13, alteration of 
boundary identical to Wascana. Where do the Tories stand on that? Do they want to do away with Wascana, 
section 13? Sections 15 to 18 with respect to improvements – where do they stand on that? Section 45, with 
respect to the business of public easements – do they also want to put this twisted interpretation on it? Where 
do they stand with respect to endorsement and filing of title in section 46, and particularly I ask that question 
of the money lenders? And what bout section 53, the main arguments which are being advocated? Those are 
the five or six points that we are not sure the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew) objects to, but some 
people are objecting to. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
439 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservatives claim the Meewasin Valley Authority has unprecedented 
powers. I say that is a falsehood, as I have pointed out. I say they know that to be a falsehood, or if they don’t 
they have not done their homework. They either need to get better legal advice – because the precedents are 
in black and white on The Wascana Centre Act, and the court cases around that – or are they seriously saying 
they are going to impair and limit the powers of the Wascana Centre Authority? What is their position in this 
regard? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that any objective observation of those point-by-pint arguments has to be rebutted in this 
area, and I invite them in committee of the whole to rebut them for me – I invite them. 
 
Now I turn, Mr. Speaker, very briefly to the Progressive Conservative amendments – what is the alternative? 
And why I say – actually after many weeks, several days – when everybody would say the going has been 
pretty heavy . . . and I don’t expect that it is going to be a lot easier there with some people who simply don’t 
want an authority. They will find some reason to argue against the amendments, but in a sense I feel relieved 
about the position being taken by the PCs, as I said, by these amendments because the fighting ground is at 
least clear and the choices are clear for Saskatoon citizens. 
 
I repeat again, take a look at the amendments and we will argue then in detail, but they were referred to in 
second reading by the House Leader, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor). Mr. Speaker, there 
are four main aspects to these amendments. I had my lawyers, over the supper hour, look at all four points. 
The first point defines control zone. By the way, I am not going to object on technical reasons because I 
think the important thing is tog et the substance of the debate out. But I don’t know, with all due respect, 
whether it is in order (the amendment) if and when it is tendered, because we don’t deal with the control 
zone in our amendments. But let’s leave that on the side. 
 
Control zone means all lands within 92 metres of the river bank or any part of the slope leading down to the 
river bank where the gradient is in excess of 20 per cent, whichever extends the greater distance measured 
horizontally from the river bank. Now, Mr. Speaker, part from not knowing legally where the river bank 
stops or ends – and this amendment doesn’t offer us that definition . . . at least the draft by-law we tabled 
which talked about river bank says river bank as surveyed and registered in the land titles office, so it defines 
it legally. Apart from not defining river bank, what does 92 metres amount to, Mr. Speaker? I don’t’ know. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Approximately 100 yards. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – About 100 yards on a 20 per cent gradient. Now you know something, Mr. Speaker, 
on this control zone there is a proposed project called, five Corners highrise. Now on that kind of a gradient 
on that side, because it is a very steep uphill incline up the river bank, I think on the PC control line we 
would get up about three-quarters of the side of the river bank to control – maybe two-thirds – but we 
wouldn’t be able to control the Five Corners highrise under those circumstances. We wouldn’t be able to 
control if that was the choice of the MVA, the Eldorado Nuclear refinery operation, something which the 
hon. member makes a big deal of out of conscience – the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman). You can’t do 
that now. His amendment says it is outside of the area, if it was to be done. I’m going to come to this in just 
a moment – the ownership of property. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
440 

What the 92 metres does, Mr. Speaker, is strip away everything except, as I have said, about 100 yards from 
the river bank, wherever the river bank is defined. We have a control zone now, Mr. Speaker, which will be 
the toughest control zone in the world, when it comes to controlling the chipmunks and the beavers and the 
squirrels that inhabit that river bank. That’s what this amendment does. That’s point number one. 
 
The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, is, I find, an interesting amendment because it ties to define . . . Oh, I 
think there is one other point I should make about the control zone area. I draw this to the legal beagle’s 
attention on the opposite side. They changed the control zone to mean 100 yards – that’s from the river 
banks – but they forget to put in the lateral boundary, and so now, we’ve got 100 yards from the Alberta 
border all the way out to the Manitoba border in the South Saskatchewan River bank because there’s no 
conclusion on the boundary. There is under the Meewasin Valley Authority as it’s drafted. Now the PC 
amendments have created more land, albeit all under the control of the beavers and the chipmunks, more 
land under public control by the PC scheme than even the MVA had – all the way from Alberta to Manitoba. 
There’s no lateral control at the other end. We can control it either way but it will go from Manitoba to 
Alberta, non-stop, Mr. Speaker. So I think the member for Saskatoon centre (Mr. Mostoway) will be pleased 
to know that we can go all the way from Manitoba to Alberta and look on either side so long as we go in our 
canoe and say that’s Meewasin Valley Authority and that’s Meewasin Valley Authority and that’s Meewasin 
Valley Authority. Boy oh boy, if that beaver decides to build a dam on the river bank, is he going to be in 
trouble, because we’re going to send old Wes Bolstad to check whether or not that beaver got the appropriate 
approval and the like, you know! 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, a second amendment deals with the control . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, no with 
the improvements area. I find that also a very interesting one, because here on the control zone, on the 
improvements area, what they are talking about here is in effect, removing the ceilings. The way 
improvements are defined now under our bill, 2,000 or less, you don’t need any approval; 2,000 and over, 
you do. We’re coming in today with amendments raising those ceilings. They’re taking those ceilings totally 
out. There’s no more ceiling on the improvements. Any improvements you want to make within those 100 
yards, of course, you have to receive the approval of the Meewasin Valley Authority. I don’t know whether a 
planner yet has figured out quite how to build a highrise on the edge of the river on the Saskatoon bank. But 
here might be one someday, who is clever enough and then, this bill may come into play, Mr. Speaker, under 
their definition of improvement. That’s the second, taking away the limits on the definition of 
improvements. No limitations, no notifications – taken it away. 
 
The third amendment, Mr. Speaker, (and this is the one that the members make a great deal out of and I want 
to speak to and I want to lay to rest) is proposed amendment 2(q). This one, I say, Mr. Speaker, is 
unbelievable. This is the rebuttal across the way to the member for Saskatoon Sutherland (Mr. Prebble) and 
my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Centre (Mr. Mostoway) when they say it’s outside the area. They 
say oh no, look at 2(a). Here’s what 2(a) says, ‘Meewasin Valley means the area described in Schedule A 
and any other public land or private land which is placed within the area’ (get this, Mr. Speaker, I under line 
these words), ‘with the express, written consent of the participating party or person who owns that land.’ We 
can use the Eldorado Nuclear as an example, (and I’m going back to this, in a minute). Their answer, the 
member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) says 2(q), 2(q). If we adopted 2(q) what would have to happen is the 
Meewasin Valley Authority would have to get the express written consent of the 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
441 

person who owns the land, whether it’s SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) or 
Eldorado Nuclear. It doesn’t matter, before that land could be taken in to the Meewasin Valley area. 
Consent. What happens if, using my example, the owner (for my purposes I will say Eldorado Nuclear) says 
no. 
 
Let’s drop Eldorado Nuclear as the example. Let’s say the owner is a developer in Five Corners who we 
think, the people of Saskatoon and area think, is going to despoil the area by a 22-storey highrise and we 
come to him and he says no. What happens? We’re out. We’re out by this amendment. Not quite out, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not quite out because the PCs, I think by accident, let a little loophole (I don’t know if they 
knew about the loophole) because I asked the lawyer again who is talking to listen to this: ‘Public or private 
land which is placed with the area, with the express written consent of the participating party, or’ (not and, 
but or), ‘the person who owns the land.’ So, I could go to Eldorado Nuclear or SEDCO and say, I want your 
written consent to own that land. They would say no. I could then go to the participating party, rural 
municipality of Corman Park, and if they said, yes, I could disentitle any private owner without the interest 
holder having any written consent at all on the operation. Not and, Mr. Speaker, written consent of the 
participating party and, but or. 
 
So we have the situation now, Mr. Speaker, where my friend the member for Saskatoon Centre and I when 
we take this canoe trip this summer starting on the Alberta border, will sort of go down surveying Meewasin 
Valley Authority land on both sides of the river bank. When we decide all of a sudden we want some land 
for the MVA that lies within the jurisdiction of the participating party, all we need to do is gent consent of 
the participating party and we can disentitle every private individual landholder. And these boys have the 
audacity to come to this House and to complain about the powers I’ve got in the Meewasin Valley Authority 
Bill? Mr. Speaker, this guy doesn’t even get compensated for this. I can enter into a contract with the 
participating authority and this guy doesn’t even know I’ve got a contract going. He’s out – 2(a), that’s what 
they say is the answer to that operation. 
 
And then the fourth amendment, Mr. Speaker – and this is obvious – schedule A is repealed. Schedule A is 
the control zone. Schedule B is repealed – the buffer zone. Those are the PC amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I obviously can’t support that kind of an amendment. And I’ll tell you there’s another reason 
why I can’t support that kind of an amendment. The amendments before you, Mr. Speaker, are amendments 
the MVA has requested of the government to implement. I’ve taken the liberty of making a telephone survey 
of the heads of those who represent the various partners in the MVA to tell them about this amendment. I 
have to report to the House, regretfully to the PCs, that I am not authorized, not surprisingly so and 
thankfully so, to accept these amendments for the MVA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to close my remarks now in second reading by saying this to the PCs. Don’t 
shilly-shally about voting on third reading. If we accepted these amendments . . . there is only one 
substantive part of this amendment, that’s 92 metres. Forget about all the others. Those are either sloppy 
drafting or not good thinking legally or pure maliciousness or whatever. Whatever it is, it doesn’t matter. 
Forget about it. The fact of the matter is it’s 92 metres. That’s the substantive side, 92 metres running from 
Manitoba to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if we adopt this it doesn’t matter what power you have or you don’t 
have for an authority at all. You don’t need an authority. City of Saskatoon can do that job. That’s what these 
boys are 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
442 

shouting across from me, city of Saskatoon, city of Saskatoon. Yes, city of Saskatoon can do it. And the rural 
municipality of Corman Park can do it. And the University of Saskatchewan can do it. The government 
doesn’t own any of the land. Why did we get together, Mr. Speaker? We got together because the three 
participating people who owned the land in the area said we’ve got to pool our efforts. We’ve got to do this 
in a rationalized and co-ordinated way. We’ve got to protect the creeks and the nodes and the drainage areas 
and swamps and Beaver Creek and Cranberry Flats. Anybody who knows that area knows how fragile it is. 
We’ve got to get together. We can’t say R.M. of Corman Park does this, allows this kind of development; 
city of Saskatoon say no. City of Saskatoon says yes to this development; university says no to that kind of a 
development. What kind of a hodgepodge are we looking at? What do you want? Do want a river bank like 
the Niagara Falls with all kinds of church bells and wax museums and displays built around over time or do 
you want something which is a monument to the natural beauty of the province and the city of Saskatoon? 
What do you want? That’s the question that’s involved. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, I said when I got up that I’m relieved at this amendment, because if we 
adopt this amendment you’ve killed Meewasin Valley Authority. There can be nothing plainer than that. 
There’s no use to regulate, as I say, the beavers that patrol the river bank area. No use. We don’t need our 
authority to do that. Mr. Speaker, I can only therefore conclude as I said in my opening remarks when I 
introduced this bill that the PCs are opposed to the MVA. That’s the bottom line on this. They’re opposed to 
the concept, as the member for Sutherland (Mr. Prebble) and the member for Centre (Mr. Mostoway) 
described it – the dream – they’re opposed to that. And I say to the PCs get up in second reading – we’re 
going to have a standing vote here – and vote against it. You’re going to be truer to your own constituents in 
this area and you’ll be truer to us and we’ll know exactly where you stand. You can’t say as you remember 
Mr. Taylor came in and said you accept the amendments or we’re going to vote against you on third reading. 
The amendments are central. They strike at the very heart of the Meewasin Valley Authority. There is 
nothing left. You can totally denude the authority and the boundaries and the reserve areas. That’s what 
those House amendments are proposed to do. And if you believe that’s what it should be you’ve said nothing 
about the other area; you do not believe in the authority. Make no mistaken about that. And I am saying to 
the PCs, you might as well be honest and put the cards right up front. You’re opposed to the MVA, your 
comments this afternoon show you’re opposed to the MVA. I’m against you on that because I favor the 
concept of the riverbank and the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, to those of the PCs who are out there politicking, the one of two who are clouded by the 
presence of the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew), the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), at those 
public meetings agitating, to those one or two in Saskatoon who have opposed the amendments without even 
seeing them publicly (that’s what happened today); to those, I can never solve their problems because they’re 
insolvable. The only solution for them is to adopt the PC motion. I can’t do that unless the people of 
Saskatoon and the rural municipality of Corman Park want us to do it, which means we’ve got no MVA. 
 
That’s it. Those are the amendments. Those are the issues. I say to the PC boys opposite, have the guts to at 
least stand behind what you truly believe. I hope, I still hope you’re going to make it unanimous straight 
across the piece. I make that to you now – a plea. If you do, I’m going to ask you to withdraw your House 
amendments. If you don’t, then I 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
443 

challenge you, let’s get the debate defined – vote against this bill. It’s going to hurt me to do this (to have 
you vote against the bill) because I think it’s still non-partisan, but it’s not me who chose to limit it. 
Withdraw your amendments, vote for the bill; let’s get on with repairing it; let’s listen to the public from 
now until February or March when we come back; let’s come in with some more amendments. Let’s build in 
the foundation; let’s modify it, but let’s keep the dream alive. That’s the challenge that’s before us today. I 
support second reading of this bill. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division nemine contradicente. 
 

YEAS – 36 
 
Blakeney Byers Solomon 
Pepper Vicker Berntson 
Romanow Rolfes Birkbeck 
Snyder Tchorzewski Larter 
Robbins Koskie Lane 
Baker Matsalla Taylor 
Skoberg Lusney Ham 
McArthur Prebble Garner 
Gross Johnson Muirhead 
Mostoway Nelson Katzman 
Kowalchuk Poniatowski Duncan 
Feschuk White Andrew 
 

NAYS – 00 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – When shall this bill be dealt with in committee? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Speaker, by leave later this day. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Leave is requested. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is not granted – next sitting of the House. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – That’s fine. Then, Mr. Speaker, I have given an order of business for the members and 
I would like to just deviate with it and call the Minister of Continuing Education (Mr. McArthur), his items 
38, 12 and 13 and pop back up to An Act respecting Security Interests in Personal Property. 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 44 – An act to 
amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I have the honor and the privilege to introduce to this Assembly a bill to amend The 
Teachers’ Superannuation Act. In so doing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to make a few 
comments on the reasons for bringing forth amendments to significantly and favorable alter teacher pensions 
and also to comment on the process which led to the presentation of these amendments. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
444 

Teachers in Saskatchewan have to date participated in a defined benefit or average earning formula plan 
which provides pension using a formula based on years of teaching service and salaries received in the years 
prior to retirement. While the approach has provided relatively good pensions to teachers it has been difficult 
to determine accurate future costs and to correspondingly calculate contributions required to fund or pay for 
the benefits of the plan. 
 
In addition, the average earnings formula plan has implicity discriminated against short-term teachers and 
those who periodically enter and withdraw from teaching. These groups by the way, Mr. Speaker, tend to 
contain a disproportionate number of women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a monitoring of the Saskatchewan teachers’ defined benefit plan has taken place during the 
term of office of this government. In this we have had the assistance of the actuarial profession and of the 
provincial negotiating committees composed of teachers, trustees and public servants. They have paid 
regular attention to teachers’ superannuation in the course of their work. 
 
Over the years it has become clear that major changes would have to be considered to ensure that teachers 
will be able to enjoy satisfactory retirement income related to their years of service in their chosen 
profession. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, teacher bargaining legislation initiated by this government and enacted in 1973 has 
provided the mechanism through which matters of this sort can and have been resolved. Any problems with 
teachers’ superannuation can be, and are addressed in a responsible and co-operative manner through the 
collective bargaining process involving representatives of the government, boards of education and teachers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
During 1978 and 1979 a number of particular problems were addressed by the provincial bargaining 
committees and were resolved. The terms of this solutions are express in the 1979 provincial collective 
bargaining agreement. These terms, Mr. Speaker, in so far as they apply to superannuation, are embodied in 
these amendments. These amendments contain nothing more nor less than the results of careful and effective 
collective bargaining involving teachers, trustees and government. As such they should be seen by all 
members of the legislature as worthy of their wholehearted support. They clearly stand as a concrete 
indication that collective bargaining for teachers can and does work in Saskatchewan. They clearly tell the 
story of how collective bargaining can work to resolve difficult problems and to face new challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the three parties to the provincial collective bargaining process, of which I have said the 
government is one, have approached the subject of teachers’ superannuation in a carefully considered and 
responsible manner. 
 
The provisions of the 1979 agreement, as reflected in these amendments that I am placing before this 
Assembly, provide recognition of: 
 
1. The need to assure Saskatchewan teachers that they will receive satisfactory levels of retirement income; 
 
2. The need to assure taxpayers of this province that the provision of such income will 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
445 

be financed each year as the liability accrues so that it will not be translated into an unwarranted future 
economic hardship, particularly at such times in the future when there will be a significant change in the 
ratio, in favor of the number of people retired to the number of those in the work force. 
 
3. The need to improve the current plan by way of increased contributions by teachers, direct matching 
contributions by government (something I might add that we have not had to date) and some changes in 
improvements to the benefit package to benefit current participants who, because of factors such as age and 
amount of service already provided, have not been entirely satisfied with the current plan. 
 
4. The need to phase into a new pension plan designed for teachers to deal with some of the difficulties that 
have been encountered in the past. 
 
The new design, Mr. Speaker, brought in through these amendments, may be described as a defined 
contribution plan based on the principle of pay as you go. It will apply to teachers entering the profession on 
and after July 1, 1980 and for those in the average earnings formula plan which has existed to date, who 
might consider it to be worth their advantage to transfer. It prescribes the contribution to be made by a 
participating teacher and the government on his or her behalf. Pensions will be determined by the total of 
such contributions, the period of time over which they are made, the investment earnings achieved on such 
contributions and the cost of various forms of pension available at the time of retirement. Specific needs of 
teachers that have been met in this plan include: 
 
1. The provision of generally comparable benefits to those received by participants in the defined benefit 
design; 
 
2. Fully paid-up and therefore assured pensions with no additional cost to be borne by future generations. 
 
3. The provision of pension benefits for each period of service where service is intermittent. This has 
become an important factor in these times of career and physical mobility and is particularly pertinent to the 
teaching force, which in Saskatchewan is about 50 per cent occupied by women who statistics how are more 
apt than men to experience interruptions in service related to various reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to outline some of the more specific aspects of these amendments to The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act. Amendments to sections 4, 5 and 6 of the present act will alter the appointment 
procedure and the number of members sitting on the teachers’ superannuation commission. The new 
commission shall consist of seven members appointed for five years by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 
with three nominees from the teachers’ federation, three nominees from the Minister of Education (Mr. 
McArthur) and a chairman nominated by the other six nominees. The commission will also be in a position 
to select its own vice-chairman from its members. 
 
There is no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that the most important contribution this bill makes to the 
pension needs of Saskatchewan teachers is the proposed creation of the fully-funded annuity plan. 
 
A new section in this bill, section 12(1) will establish the annuity fund on July 1, 1980. Teachers who begin 
teaching on this date and afterward or teachers who elect to transfer from the existing teachers’ 
superannuation fund will make up the participants 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
446 

in this plan. Direct contributions towards teachers’ pension matched by the Government of Saskatchewan 
will be made at a rate of 7.5 per cent of teachers’ salaries, less required contributions to the Canada Pension 
Plan with a certain portion of the annuity plan contributions being diverted to a second new fund. Annuity 
fund contributions by an individual teacher will be no more than 6 per cent of teachers’ salaries. 
Contributions under the annuity plan will grow in value at prevailing investment interest rates. Upon retiring, 
teachers will be able to purchase annuities reflecting in value their lengths of service and contributions 
standing to their credit in the annuity plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to mention something that is both unique and progressive in this regard. Section 29(g) of 
this bill states: 
 

That the annuity to which a teacher is entitled shall be determined by tables in the regulations created 
without regard to the sex of the superannuates. 

 
This, Mr. Speaker, is the first annuity pension plan in Canada, of which I am aware, that eliminates the 
long-standing sex discrimination of annuity calculations. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, sections 48 and 49 of this bill provide for a survivor benefit arrangement under the new 
annuity plan comparable to that which exists for teachers who elect to continue with the average earnings 
formula plan to which the existing teachers’ superannuation fund is attached. Mr. Speaker, section 12(2) of 
this bill establishes the second new fund I mentioned earlier – the companion to the annuity fund – to be 
known as the supplementary allowances fund. The purposes of this fund are threefold, Mr. Speaker: 
 
1. To provide annual cost of living adjustments to those in receipt of annuities. 
 
2. To provide annuities to surviving dependents of deceased annuity plan participants. 
 
3. To help re-establish a teacher who after having left the profession, returns to teaching and re-instates a 
position in the annuity plan. 
 
Moneys paid into the supplementary allowances fund will come from two sources, Mr. Speaker; those being 
teachers and the province of Saskatchewan. The basis upon which moneys will e paid into this fund are as 
follows: 
 
1. Teachers whose combined annuity fund and Canada Pension Plan contributions represent less than 7.5 per 
cent of salary will pay the remaining amount up to 7.5 per cent into the supplementary allowances fund. This 
amount is expected to be about one-half of 1 per cent of teachers’ salaries. 
 
2. The province will be matching teacher contributions dollar for dollar. 
 
3. When a teacher dies leaving no spouse or dependants or when a teacher accepts a refund of his 
contributions to the annuity fund, the province’s matching contributions in both cases, plus the interest on 
these contributions, will be transferred from the annuity plan to the supplementary allowances fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the joint payment of contributions by teachers and the province into this plan created solely for 
the benefit of superannuated teachers and their survivors offers a sound guarantee. When teachers retire they 
will receive all the benefits to which they 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
447 

are entitled. Also, the government, by matching teacher contributions during the years when teachers are 
active in their profession, will avoid the risk of having to pay high and possibly dislocating payouts on 
pension benefits in future years when the number of teacher superannuates is expected to increase 
dramatically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this principle of anticipating and laying away funds now for tomorrow’s pension needs is also 
reflected in amendments to the current average earnings formula plan. Section 18 of the bill requires that 
after July 1, 1980, the province will also match contributions made by teachers into the teachers’ 
superannuation plan. This commitment by the province will better assist in securing future pension benefits 
for those participants remaining in the average earnings formula plan. Further, Mr. Speaker, section 32 
contains an amendment which will reduce effective January 1, 1980, annual cost of living adjustments under 
the average earnings formula plan from the current level of 100 per cent of the Canadian consumer price 
index to 80 per cent of this index. All parties to the collective bargaining agreement from which this bill 
proceeds have acknowledged this change is necessary to reduce the pressures of 100 per cent indexing at 
current inflations rates. As I have already mentioned, pensions received from the new annuity plan will also 
be indexed on a fully funded basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the title average earnings formula plan comes from the provision of pension benefits based on 
the average of a specified number of best salaried years in a person’s career. Section 29 of this bill has 
amended this figure downward from six to the best five salaried years which will significantly improve, Mr. 
Speaker, benefits paid to those receiving pensions from the existing formula plan. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, section 14(a) of this bill proposes that teachers having active contributory service to their 
credit in the province before July 1, 1980, will have two years to decide whether to remain in the average 
earnings formula plan or to switch to the new annuity plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 28 has been amended such that in addition to creating age and service pension criteria 
for annuity plan participants similar to those for participants in the average earnings formula plan, it also 
provides an option to annuity plan participants such that they may retire after 30 years of contributory service 
regardless of age. 
 
I would like to close by saying once again, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased with the opportunity of 
introducing these amendments into this House. They are a significant step forward in terms of 
superannuation and benefits for teachers. They have been supported by all of the parties to the collective 
bargaining agreement, and I have no doubt, they will be supported by all members of this House. Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to put forth a few comments on 
this teachers’ superannuation bill. I think first and foremost, I would like to remind the government it was 
the Saskatchewan teachers who, for many years, worried about the unfunded liability of the existing plan. I 
see the government has come forth with a new idea on a money accumulation plan or MAP as it’s known in 
the teaching circles. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
448 

I think this was rather a drastic change in superannuation thinking that the teachers had to wrestle with in the 
last year. I think it was a very serious concern in their negotiations. In checking with teachers, I think they 
have accepted this idea. There are certain things about the plan I think are commendable and I do not hesitate 
to let these be known. 
 
One of the things I think the teachers were concerned about was the coverage for dependent children and 
disability allowances. The minister has spoken on these. I think the coverage that has been extended to this is 
acceptable to the teachers of Saskatchewan. I was happy to hear him mention there was no sex 
discrimination in the act, because as we all know, a good many of our faithful teachers in Saskatchewan are 
females and are doing great service out there in the classroom. 
 
I do wonder, personally, about the two-year limit on transferring from the existing superannuation plan to the 
money accumulation plan. I don’t know the reason for this. If the money accumulation plan turns out to be 
the better of the two plan I cannot see the reason for limiting the teachers in their period of transfer. I, in 
being a teacher and a taxpayer in Saskatchewan, want to see a fair and equitable superannuation plan for our 
teachers. I don’t think the teachers have figured out at just what point of service it is most advisable for a 
teacher to opt for the money accumulation plan. I would think, Mr. Minister, we wouldn’t want to close 
these doors. If it’s more beneficial for teachers to move to the money accumulation plan, I don’t see the 
necessity for the two-year period in which you have to make that move. 
 
Other than that, (I have checked with teachers throughout the province) to have it indexed to the cost of 
living, I think is an acceptable situation. I think the bill finds acceptance within the teaching ranks and I 
would support the bill. 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to make 
a few comments on this bill, simply because it is related to pension plans and I have a deep interest in 
pension plan. I think the teaching profession is to be commended in terms of the fact that they’re willing to 
take a hard look at their pensions and become more realistic in their approach. The old teachers’ plan, if I 
may refer to it as such, was a unit benefit plan which obviously gave them a pension at the end of the term of 
service related to a formula. The formula, of course, is based on four basic facts. Any actuary who draws up 
these types of pension plans look at mortality, at interest rate accruals on which he makes an assumption, at 
an escalation of wages over a long-term which again, is a guess, an educated guess, and at terminations. The 
key in all these pension plans is the number of terminations that occur. Frankly, because the teaching 
profession is pretty well paid in this province (and I’m sure the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) will agree with me) fewer and fewer teachers have been leaving the profession and that creates an 
increasing problem with respect to a unit benefit type approach. I might just give you a quick example to 
illustrate. I took a teacher who started to teach at 18. If that person taught for 35 years he would make 
contributions to the old teacher’s plan for that period of time and would be retiring, of course, on the 
formula. Working that out on the basis of a $10,000 average (and I realize teachers’ salaries are appreciably 
above that at the present time, but you have to go back a long way in terms of the formula), that teacher 
would end up with a pension of about $7,000 a year. If the formula found the wages increasing very rapidly 
in the latter end of that teacher’s teaching career, obviously the pension would be up a great deal. If the 
salary doubled, you could get into $14,000 or $15,000 bracket in terms of pension. However if that’s 
occurring you obviously run into grave difficulties in terms of the financial costs related thereto. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
449 

I took the liberty of working a similar situation out for the teacher who happened to go into the money 
accumulation plan. If that was available to that teacher from the start of the teaching career. that person 
would accumulate (on the basis of that same amount of salary over the same period of time) a pension of 
(based on current annuity rates and no one can know exactly what they will be in the future) about $1,400 
per month or around $16,800. 
 
I noticed the member of Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) raised the point with regard to transfer. He said 
why would you only give two years time? The key question here is that the person must make the transfer in 
the earlier years to get the major benefit under the money accumulation. He has to have is money in there for 
a long period of time to really get the results. If you leave it open for a longer period of time – and people 
delay and they will delay – if you had it for 10 years there’d be people coming after you had closed it off and 
say, I didn’t make the decision soon enough; I wanted to get in. You have to make it a short period. We did 
the same in the public service superannuation set-up. We had criticism by people coming to use and saying 
why did you only allow one year’s time? I notice the teachers are allowing two year’s time. But you simply 
cannot permit the person to make that choice over a long period of time or you defeat the motivation and the 
end result in relation to that type of pension. 
 
I want to make one quick comment if I might with respect to the cost-of-living index. I note the teachers 
agreed to reduce the cost-of-living index from 100 per cent to 80 per cent. I think that’s being realistic 
looking at the facts of the situation as it now exists, but I would suggest if we continue with inflation rates in 
the 10 per cent category or more, it will have to be reduced again. It is totally impossible in the long run, if 
you look at pensions to index them at more than four per cent cost-of-living index over any prolonged 
period. 
 
I again commend the teachers for being realistic. All of these things have to be done on an evolutionary 
basis. They cannot take away from any person the pension rights they already have. You must do it on an 
evolutionary basis. You will gradually move away into the new approach which is obviously much more 
realistic in terms of the funding approach. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): – Mr. Speaker, I want to close debate and a couple of 
brief comments. I want to acknowledge the statement the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. Taylor) 
has made with respect to the major change that has taken place here. It is quite true there has been a 
substantial and major change made. I think it is extremely commendable that the teachers have participated 
in negotiations leading up to this necessary change. I agree with the hon. member that it was a difficult kind 
of decision for them to make. Their participation was certainly highly commendable. We certainly were 
pleased with the successful completion of these negotiations that have led to the introduction of this new 
plan in association with the existing teachers’ superannuation plan. 
 
Certainly, it is true pensions will continue to be bargainable with the teachers and so a couple of the concerns 
the hon. member mentioned, certainly can be addressed in the future should they prove to be problems with 
respect to the operation of this plan. We do believe on all sides, however, that it is a good plan, that it will 
work extremely well. I think everyone is now looking forward to now seeing it put into place and made 
operable. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
450 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 17 – An Act to 
amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to introduce the bill to the members. 
While the amendments proposed through this bill to The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 
Contributory) Act are neither numerous nor complex, they do represent a significant improvement in 
teacher’s life insurance provisions and a substantial increase in the financial commitment this government is 
prepared to make to the group life insurance needs of teachers of Saskatchewan. It’s therefore, with pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, that I introduce these amendments into the House. 
 
Every years the provincial collective bargaining agreement between the boards of education and the Premier 
and the teachers of Saskatchewan produces the terms upon which the Minister of Finance (Mr. Tchorzewski) 
under section 4 of The Teachers Life Insurance Act, establishes life insurance packages with the life 
insurance companies for Saskatchewan teachers. For the 1978-79 insurance year between September 1978 
and August 1979 there were four levels of term insurance coverage between $15,000 and $30,000 for which 
teachers were eligible. 
 
Levels of coverage were based upon four annual teachers’ salary ranges, three below $20,000 and one above 
$20,000 per year. Under section 6 of the act, the province paid premiums on the first $7,000 or insurance 
coverage and the teachers paid premiums on the remainder. During the 1978-79 school years, therefore the 
average teacher earning over $20,000 was covered by $30,000 of life insurance whose total premium cost 
was $52. The government’s pay-out for the first $7,000 of coverage was about $12 or 23 per cent of the total 
premium cost and the teachers was $40 or 77 per cent of premium cost. 
 
The latest board of education-government-teacher collective bargaining agreement concluded in June, 1979 
has altered significantly the provisions of the teacher insurance package and also the level of the 
government’s share of premium costs. During the bargaining process there was a review done of the 
insurance coverage levels in place elsewhere in the public and private sectors and what has been agreed to is 
not out of line with current trends in this area. Effective September 1, 1979 the ranges of cover age and the 
salaries governing eligibility have been reduced from four to two, and the levels of coverage have increased 
as well. 
 
Last year’s minimum level of coverage of $15,000 has been increased to $30,000 and has been available 
effective September 1, 1979 to all teachers earning less than $20,000 annually. Also, Mr. Speaker, the new 
maximum level of coverage for all teachers earning $20,000 or more has been increased from $30,000 to 
$50,000 effective September 1. 
 
Further, the government proposes by amending section 6 of the act (and this is very significant) to increase 
effective September 1, 1979, its share of premium costs from payment on the first $7,000 of coverage, as 
was the case last year to 50 per cent of the total premium costs in this insurance year. 
 
The average teacher, I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, now has $50,000 of term life insurance coverage at a 
premium cost of $87 but because the government will be 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
451 

paying one-half of this bill, or $43.50, the teachers’ cost will only have increased by $3.50 or about 9 per 
cent, and this in order to receive 66 per cent more coverage. The government’s pay-out on behalf of this 
teacher, however, for group life insurance will have increased from $12 to $43.50 or about 265 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance under section 4 of this act, has also established with the insurance 
companies, in accordance with the terms of the collective bargaining agreement, a new accidental death and 
dismemberment benefit. The annual premium cost of this provision is 36 cents per $1,000 of coverage and 
the ranges of coverage and salary levels governing eligibility are the same as those for term insurance. The 
average teacher will pay about $18 annually for this provision and will receive $50,000 of accidental death 
and dismemberment coverage. The province of Saskatchewan is not cost-sharing premium payments on this 
provision. The second amendment worthy of note, Mr. Speaker, relates to section 8. Currently under section 
2, a school board has the option of deducting from a teacher’s salary his or her life insurance premiums in 
one lump sum or in such instalments as the board wishes. New subsection 2 of section 8 will eliminate the 
above option and will require that the board deduct premiums in 10 equal instalments from September to 
June. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that if I were a teacher in this province, I would be I think, 
extremely pleased with the heightened level of security these amendments provide for me. I would also 
appreciate the modest increases in the cost of the package to me when measured against the new level of 
insurance coverage. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to place these amendments before you in this 
House. I am sure they also will be supported by all members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few comments 
regarding the bill. First of all, I say it’s long overdue. The increase in the coverage for teachers – I’m glad to 
see it has arrived, $50,000 life insurance – I think is a very welcome type of coverage for teachers to have. I 
am happy to see the addition of the A.D. & D., (accidental death and dismemberment) the accident clause. I 
think this is something we’ve looked for for a long time. I think the 10-month instalments is a good idea, 
because many teachers in this province are paid on the 10-month basis. It certainly is easier on their 
pocketbooks than having it all taken off at one time. 
 
I noticed the minister said the cost was 50 per cent funded by the treasury. I think that is acceptable to the 
teachers. However, I did notice that in the A.D. & D., it’s 100 per cent paid by the teachers. My question to 
the minister would be if the government could see it’s way clear to fund 50 per cent of the basic insurance, 
why not go a little further, show your appreciation for the teachers of this province and fund the A.D. & D. at 
50 per cent also? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: – Mr. Speaker, in closing off debate, I would like to say that I am pleased to see the 
hon. member is favorable disposed to these amendments. I certainly agree with him. I think they will be a 
vast improvement in the position of teachers in terms of their group life insurance. 
 
The hon. member made reference to the possibility of government contributions to the accidental death and 
dismemberment insurance. I can only say to the hon. member 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
452 

these amendments are the result of negotiations with teachers during the course of the collective bargaining 
process. I would not presume to speak for teachers as part of that process. Certainly, there is a possibility 
teachers may, at some point, propose such a change and of course, it will be bargained in the normal fashion. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 18 – An Act to 
regulate Private Vocational Schools. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it is pleasure to introduce and speak to this bill respecting the regulation of private 
vocational schools in Saskatchewan. This new bill addresses the very important questions of educational 
quality and standards within the private vocational and trade schools in this province. 
 
I should mention at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that this proposed act had a predecessor, The Trade Schools 
Regulation Act. In many respects, Mr. Speaker, this new act, when passed, will update the application of that 
previous legislation. But I will also do more, Mr. Speaker. It will also make the whole process of setting and 
regulating standards within the private vocational trade school sector more responsive to the needs and the 
overall public interest. 
 
Our province, Mr. Speaker, is entering a new decade of exciting and challenging development. Among other 
things, that new decade will see ever-growing and ever-expanding opportunities for our young people. New 
opportunities and new jobs will abound. It is clear, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan will see the creation of 
well over 13,000 new jobs a year during the coming decade and certainly likely more – over 13,000 new jobs 
for the young men and women of Saskatchewan who grew up in this fine province. 
 
In addition to this, Mr. Speaker, an additional 8,000 jobs per year will be opened as our seniors in our work 
force reach retirement age. 
 
Now what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? It means that all young men and women completing school in this 
province can and will make their career plans confident that the job opportunities they need and want will be 
right here in Saskatchewan. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, job opportunities will, in each year, be in excess of the 
number of young people able to fill those jobs with the result that substantial numbers of young people will 
be coming into this province from outside in order to take advantage of the opportunities here. 
 
Now to those of us on this side of the House, that creates an exciting challenge. We believe that we must rise 
up and meet that challenge. Our young people today, Mr. Speaker, are making their career plans confident 
that they can and will take their training in Saskatchewan and settle down to permanent jobs and a happy 
family life here in their home province. Our young people are confident, Mr. Speaker. They are excited and 
challenged. Fortunately they are putting the lie to the nonsense which we hear coming from the new Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party. They are not listening to his urgings that they leave this province. 
They are not listening to his ridiculous claims that other young people are leaving this province, a claim 
totally disproved by all the figures and statistics which are available. 
 
The imaginative ramblings of the new leader are silly and would be pathetic were it not 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
453 

for the fact that it is a clear attempt to exploit the thoughts and hopes of our young people for political 
purposes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: – We, on our side of the House, find that kind of political opportunism abhorrent. But 
fortunately, Mr. Speaker, all of the data and statistics reveal clearly that the Tories and their so-called new 
leader know nothing about what is happening in this province. 
 
All of the statistics and figures and studies illustrate the optimism and excitement with which young people 
look to the future in this province. They reflect confidence, confidence in individual and family opportunity, 
confidence in the social and economic developments in this province, confidence in the political future of 
this province. So, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent upon all of us to reply to that confidence and optimism 
positively and not negatively in the style of the Tories. 
 
This includes the very best of educational and training opportunities for our young people. We must support 
and acknowledge the individual initiative being shown by your young people by providing to them the kind 
of training opportunity which they need and which they deserve. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, I am now moving forward with a series of new measures in fulfilment of the 
responsibility we owe to our young people. This bill reflects the first of many important measures which will 
be undertaken in the coming months in order to improve and expand post-secondary training opportunities 
for young people in this province. 
 
There are many important needs which must be fulfilled and we must move forward to meet those needs 
now and in the months and years ahead. 
 
An important part of my plans and this government’s plans will be directed toward vocational and trades 
training. New industrial development and new resource development means we need many highly trained 
people, some within the traditional job skill areas, and some with wholly new job skills unique to the new 
developments. 
 
I will be speaking more in the months ahead about specific steps that will be taken on many fronts in this 
regard. I want only to say at this time that private vocational training institutes and schools will play a part in 
meeting those needs – probably not a big part but not an unimportant part either. And thus, Mr. Speaker, in 
preparing ourselves for the decade of the 1980s and the demands that that decade will place on our 
post-secondary institutions, we will update and modernize our legislation governing private vocational 
training institutions. We must provide the assurances to our young people that the training they receive in 
this province, regardless of its source, is of the highest standards. We must reward their confidence and 
excitement with positive and responsible steps and not, Mr. Speaker, with the irresponsible negative claptrap 
totally devoid of program we hear coming from the new Leader of the Conservative Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: – So I turn, Mr. Speaker, to the specifics of this bill. I should say at the outset that we 
are in no way extending controls over private vocational schools with 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
454 

this act. We will, Mr. Speaker, be improving the quality and standards of education provided in those 
schools. This act will confer no new regulatory authority on the government and it will add no new 
regulations governing the operation of private vocational schools. In general, the scope of the powers and 
regulations contained in the old trade school act were considered satisfactory. So what were the 
shortcomings of the old act? Well, first the terminology was badly outdated. And second, the old act did not 
contain adequate provisions for public input into the whole practice of setting standards and regulating 
operations – and that, Mr. Speaker, the latter one, is a serious shortcoming in my view. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, we must have an open process of regulation that draws on the knowledge and experience of those 
people who operate these institutions, of people in industry and of many other knowledgeable people in the 
public. 
 
The private vocational schools regulation act then is in many ways a recasting of The Trade School 
Regulation Act, an act which had undergone no significant revisions since its promulgation in 1965. As the 
hon. members will appreciate, Mr. Speaker, the area of trades training (as it used to be known) has 
undergone considerable change since this period. Not unexpectedly, the terminology of the old trade school 
act has become dated in some respects and obsolete in others. It is necessary, therefore, to update the 
terminology of the act to make it consistent with present day practice. Perhaps the most significant semantic 
change which is being made is to replace the term ‘trade’ with the term ‘vocation’. The previous act used the 
term ‘trade’ and attempted to define the term by means of a lengthy list of examples, including such 
standards as plumbing, bricklaying, carpentry, cabinet making, plastering, painting, etc. While the examples 
just cited are indeed trades, the potential range of occupational training programs which may be offered in 
institutions regulated by this act go far beyond such conventional notions of what constitutes a trade. In order 
to bring the act into conformity with current usage, and indeed, to provide it with the flexibility in this 
respect for the future, the word ‘trade’ is replaced by the term ‘vocation’. I would draw to the attention of the 
hon. members the definition of vocation that appears in section 2(d) of the bill, before this Assembly now. 
There vocation is described as the skill and knowledge requisite for employment in any of the occupations 
included in the alphabetical index of occupational titles in volume 1 of the Canadian Clarification and 
Dictionary of Occupations, 1971, and more particularly described as a vocation in that publication. In this 
way the definition is related to a system for classifying occupations, which is not only current but also 
regularly revised and internationally recognized and which will fully encompass all forms of vocational 
training in the province. 
 
The other significant changes in terminology involves the replacement of the term trade school by the term 
private vocational school. I would draw to the hon. members’ attention section 2(b) of the new act which 
defines private vocational school as a school or place in which instruction in any vocation is offered or 
provided by classroom instruction, including institutes of applied arts and sciences, the provinces, two 
universities, or any schools or courses of instructions maintained under any other act. This definition clearly 
describes those institutions to which the act was originally intended to apply. Certain sections of The Trade 
Schools Regulation Act provided for the levying of fines upon persons or institutions failing to comply with 
its provisions. As I mentioned the act has not been revised since 1965, and as a result the dollar amounts 
specified in connection with these fines have been rendered virtually meaningless by the inflation which has 
taken place since that time. The maximum penalties associated with offences under the act have been 
adjusted in the new act to bring them into conformity with current dollar values. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
455 

Finally, I would draw to the hon. members’ attention to section 5 of The Private Vocational Schools 
Regulation Act. This section which provides for the appointment of an advisory board is a new section 
without precedent in our old legislation. The addition of this section provides the minister with the authority 
to establish an advisory committee on any matter respecting the administration of this act. I would expect 
that the authority being granted to the minister here would be utilized in the following way. In cases where it 
is necessary to establish minimum standards for institutions wishing to be registered in conformity with this 
act, or where for any reason it becomes necessary to develop additional regulations under this act, the 
minister will be able to call upon the knowledge and experience of individuals from the private vocational 
schools themselves or from the public for which such schools provide training. In this way the minister 
responsible for administration of the act will have access to the opinion and advice of persons most 
concerned with and most affected by the act in question, namely the institutes themselves, the industries 
affected and the public. This will ensure that the institutions remain the highest possible standards and that 
standards are developed with the fullest consultation of interested parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I close off with those remarks. I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 16 – An Act to 
regulate Private Vocational Schools. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): – Mr. Speaker, I must start out by saying how disappointed 
I am to hear the recent remarks of the Minister of Education. We had discussed two bills earlier this evening 
in a most gentlemanly and statesmanlike fashion. I had assumed that maybe this Minister of Education 
would have the same high profile as some of those who have served in the past. I remember last year when 
the then Minister of Education – and I was the critic – conducted estimates in this House. One of your civil 
servants who had served for about 30 years in your government said that was the highest level of discussion 
he had ever heard. I’d hoped to continue on the same plane but unfortunately my new Minister of Education 
is living up to what I said about him the other day in the House. He lets his political philosophy blind him 
when he gets down to the issues. Now he comes on and condemns our new leader as to his views on 
education and his view on youth. 
 
Well, I would say, first and foremost, our new leader has helped more students in Saskatchewan than you 
have today. He has a very good reputation at the University of Saskatchewan. He’s a man who believes in 
youth. I was shocked to hear you open with this kind of statement and then for you to express your concern. 
My friend, this is rather ludicrous at the same time when the students of Saskatchewan are out of the 
institutes in the province because of a strike. 
 
I’ve been urging you, for the last three weeks, for the last month, to do something about this. You stand in 
this Assembly, my friend, and express your concerns for the students of Saskatchewan. I want to know bout 
some of your concerns and I asked you today in the House about your contingency plans. And what does he 
tell me, Mr. Speaker? He says we’ll wait and we’ll talk about it when the strike is over. Now he says he’s 
going to use the holidays, one of the holidays coming up is Christmas. If by some act of God this strike 
should be settled within the next few days, are you going to have these students observe their Christmas 
holidays in the institutes? They would like to know this, because it affects their plans. You also have come 
out with some loans. You said, I’ll give them loans regarding their education if they’re cut off from their 
manpower. Well I 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
456 

want to tell you, Mr. Minister, the reason that they were on manpower was that they didn’t qualify for the 
loan in the first place. I would like to know if you do have the Christmas spirit and if you’re going to make 
the loans forgivable as you did hint you might do. So it rather makes me concerned when I hear you stand up 
and lambaste the Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, a man who has a record of helping students, 
when you, the Minister of Education (Mr. McArthur), are doing nothing to get the students of this province 
back into the technical schools. So when you talk about these things my friend, have a little bit of action. 
 
Now, anyway, getting on to your bill of the private trade schools, vocational schools, I have had an interest 
in this. I think there may be some merit in this bill if it isn’t too shaded with your political philosophy which 
seems to be creeping right into the education system of Saskatchewan. I can tell you I’ll do everything with 
my power to keep it out of the education system of Saskatchewan, but I would like to study this bill. There 
are may things I have to look into. There are a few items there that I want to talk to the people of 
Saskatchewan about, which I’m afraid you refuse to do. So therefore I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Leave to adjourn debate negatived. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – The House Leader of the opposition has requested leave to adjourn 
debate because this bill is a substantive new program and there were certain political areas touched upon by 
the Minister of Education. A lot of them seem to be in conflict with the intent of the act. It’s a little 
surprising when we have something such as an act dealing with a vital segment of education, where the 
minister has to come in and politicize the same bill. It makes one wonder and I’m sure that the people of 
Saskatchewan as well are going to wonder what the real intent of the bill is. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – The press will see it. 
 
MR. LANE: – Obviously one could proceed on this, Mr. Speaker, but the colorful language and the coloring 
of the intent of the bill, as given by the minister, is going to make not only the opposition question what the 
real intent is. I’m sure when we take this bill to the general public over the next few months, that they too are 
going to be wondering. So I’m going to beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The member is out of order in requesting adjournment because you can’t ask for 
adjournment unless there’s been an intervening speaker. 
 
MR. LANE: – Well, I could keep talking for some considerable time, if I keep my remarks to the remarks 
made by the Minister of Education (Mr. McArthur) and in fact I repeat again that it is a little strange for a 
minister of education to come before this Assembly. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): – If I might just raise the point of order. I’m interested in 
having this clarified. Am I not correct in saying that when the hon. member makes a motion to adjourn 
debate and resumes his seat that he has lost his entitlement to speak? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The member of Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane) did not make that motion because it was out of 
order, therefore it can’t be counted as being in order, so therefore he continues to speak. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
457 

MR. LANE: – Again, it’s a little sad, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education . . . you know we have a 
rule of law before the courts of equity that in order to obtain equity you must do equity and you don’t appear 
before the courts of equity with dirty hands. And here the Minister of Education had the gall to stand up here 
tonight and tell this Assembly that the particular bill is vital. At the same time as he stood here over the last 
couple of weeks and talked about so-called contingency plans he had for the students affected by the strike. 
He had zero; he had nothing. And one of the groups that has really been affected by the strike are the 
students. That has been well documented by the opposition, Mr. Speaker. It’s a strange concern the minister 
has, that tonight he wants to talk about this particular bill, get it through the House, ram it through the House 
tonight and in fact, not take the same speedy action when it comes to concern about the students who are 
affected by the strike. 
 
We have detailed students who are taking correspondence courses, severely affected, and the same minister 
doesn’t have the concern for them. We have the students in the technical schools – we have raised the 
concerns . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I want to take this opportunity to caution the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. Lane). The 
previous speaker was discussing the matter of the strike and technical schools. He was very close to being 
out of order because the subject before the House is An Act to regulate Private Vocational Schools. I just 
want to take this opportunity because the member for Qu’Appelle is getting into that area as well, and unless 
he relates what he is saying to the bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. Unless he relates what he is 
saying to the bill which is An Act to regulate Private Vocational Schools, I would have to rule him out of 
order. 
 
MR. LANE: – Mr. Speaker, I assume I have the same latitude as the minister did when he referred to the 
Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party and matters of leaving the province. I’m sure that Mr. Speaker 
would want me to address myself to the same issues raised by the Minister of Education (Mr. McArthur). In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the politicization of the particular issue here I think was unwarranted and uncalled for. I’m 
sure the Minister of Education right now regrets most sincerely what he said because in fact the Minister of 
Education probably underneath that verbiage has a bill that’s worthy of deep consideration by the public of 
Saskatchewan. We in the opposition would like to give the public that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
determine whether it was a valid bill worthy of consideration or whether it’s just a political weapon in the 
arsenal of the government opposite. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): – Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I want to apologize to the member. I may have lead the member slightly astray. I believe 
I said an intervening speaker and I should have said an intervening proceedings. It doesn’t matter how many 
speakers there are, but if there was an intervening proceeding such as an amendment or a move to adjourn 
the House, then the member would be in order to again seek the adjournment of the debate. So the position 
we’re in now is that the Leader of the Opposition has the floor, he has moved to adjourn the debate and I’m 
going to declare that out of order. The member still has the floor. I will recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): – Mr. Speaker, I am very interested in the great concern 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
458 

shown for the students of Saskatchewan by the members of the opposition. I’m very interested in the great 
concern expressed by them when they were talking about legislation that was to be brought forth at an earlier 
date – yesterday, for example. I believe the member for Qu’Appelle stood up and said there’s nothing of 
importance within this House to be discussed. That was the general tenor of his remarks. There’s nothing of 
importance here. In fact, he said there’s only one piece of legislation that meets the criteria of being an 
important piece of legislation. That I would like to quote. That shows, Mr. Speaker, the interest these people 
have in the students of the province. I would like to give you a direct quote of the member for Qu’Appelle. 
 

There’s only one bill that meets the criteria set out by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy) 
and that is The Personal Property Security Act, and this is going to take some serious study. 
 

Now then, when it comes to dealing with the students of the province of Saskatchewan, he said it’s 
unimportant. We don’t need to take the time of this House; we’re wasting the taxpayer’s money by coming 
here to discuss it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, if the mouth from Moosomin wants to take over and 
talk, let him go at it. Mr. Speaker, I think this shows the extent of the interest of the members opposite, even 
in what they consider to be an unimportant bill. Maybe we should give them time to consider what they have 
to say and what they consider to be an unimportant bill. At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I ask the indulgence of the members for a few moments. I understand the member for 
Yorkton (Mr. Nelson) asked for the adjournment of the debate. It would appear, as I said earlier, that we had 
to have an intervening proceedings. An intervening proceeding is something that can be entered in the 
journals. Now, I’m going to advise the members how we can move on with the business of the House. I’m 
going to declare that the member for Yorkton cannot ask for the adjournment of debate because there has 
been no intervening proceeding. If the member (and we’ll assume that the member for Yorkton is out of 
order on that and still has the floor), the member for Yorkton could ask for the adjournment of the House. 
That could be passed or defeated. If it was passed we would all go home. If it was defeated, that is an 
intervening proceeding. Then someone could move the adjournment of the debate. So I leave it up to the 
member for Yorkton whether he wants to move the adjournment of the House or not. 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): – Mr. Speaker, I would close off the debate on this bill 
by pointing out once again as I pointed out in the debate, that it indicates the concern of this government, the 
very real concern for the vocational training needs of the young people of this province. The young people 
are staying in this province in vast numbers. They are needing the kinds of vocational training opportunities 
that these private institutions, as well as our public institutions, can provide. This act will modernize the 
licensing and regulation of the private trades training schools, the vocational training schools. The provisions 
are not substantially different, as I mentioned before, than those that were contained in the earlier act. I 
would recommend to the members that they get a copy of the earlier act and compare it when we go into 
third reading, because they will find that the differences are not all that great. There is a provision for more 
public input and I think that is important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I’d like to close the debate. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
459 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): – In the light of certain developments tonight, this is an 
historic night in Canada. We got the Meewasin Valley Authority bill read unanimously. What I’d like to do 
is to committee of the whole. These are very, very short bills which the opposition has indicated they’re 
prepared to let go through with relative ease and then we’ll adjourn the House. So can we go to committee of 
the whole and whip off these bills in just two minutes? 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17 – An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 
 
Section 1 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 2 agreed 
 
Sections 3 to 7 as amended agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 1 – An Act to amend The Attachment of Debts Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): – I’ve just got the one question seeing as I doubt very much whether I’m 
going to be able to get into the second reading debate on The Exemptions Act. Why was it so pressing when 
there were no amendments to The Exemptions Act to extend the amount of the exemption which seemed to 
be needed as much as this significant change to The Attachment of Debts Act? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): – I have an answer. It just came to my mind. The answer 
that I would give you is that the law reform commission is, as I indicated in my second reading speech, doing 
a study of this entire area, attachment of debts and exemptions. They reviewed the levels and they felt that 
this was the only bill which was so serious down in Canada it had to go up. 
 
MR. LANE: – I wonder if the Attorney General wouldn’t mind submitting to me in due course the report of 
the law reform commission because I would think that for example, such things as private primary residence 
and what not, certainly are not very high. But other than that, if the Attorney General would respond, I 
wonder, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – I want to give you the information, but I want to check it to make sure I’m not giving 
you something I shouldn’t be give you. I have a letter here from the law reform commission re attachment of 
debts and addressed to the co-ordinator of our policy and legislative programs, Mr. Scratch, who is sitting 
beside me, and he sets out the argument for doing it for the attachment of debts. I would like to just check it 
before I commit myself. 
 
MR. LANE: – If you’re making an amendment here that there should be similar amendments in extension of 
the exemption – I see no consideration of that, but if the Attorney General has an answer and would supply 
it, it’s not worth holding up the 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
460 

business of the House. I am going to suggest to Mr. Chairman that we will take the balance of the bill as read 
if the Attorney General would consider and submit the information if he can. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – One House amendment that the boys are working on right now . . . same year, the year 
is the date, there’s no need to change there. I will try to get this to your privately in the mail and I will try 
also to answer why not others because I think that’s a very good point. We may have to come in the spring 
with others. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – There’s an amendment seconded by . . . that section 1 of the printed bill by striking 
out 1980 in the second line and substituting 1979. 
 
Section 1 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 4 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill with amendments. 
 

Bill No. 2 – An Act to amend The Attorney General’s Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. LANE: – Mr. Chairman, is the only House amendment the date? Take that bill as read. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour, the Hon. Gordon Snyder, that we amend 
section 1 of the printed bill by striking out 1980 in the second line and substituting 1979. 
 
Section 1 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Strike out section 3. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill with amendments. 
 

Bill 24 – An Act to amend The Administration of Estates of Mentally Disordered Persons Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. LANE: – If the Attorney General would permit a question and it’s only a peripheral matter: is the law 
reform commission studying the whole question of the necessity of The Homesteads Act? It strikes me that 
with the changes to the married persons property act, substantively it perhaps is an anachronism given the 
recognition that the married persons property act gives. Would the Attorney General advise if the law reform 
commission is in fact studying it or if they will consider the repeal of it? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Chairman, I’m advised the Department of Attorney General lawyers are indeed 
reviewing it as opposed to the law reform commission. In the light of the married persons property act I 
cannot tell you what we will expect specifically with timetable, other than there may be something for the 
spring session. There may be. It’s 



 
December 13, 1979 

 

 
461 

a very complicated area. But we are working it out within the department. 
 
MR. LANE: – Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney General would do me the courtesy of checking that with your 
solicitors and perhaps if the information can be supplied to me about what the concerns may be of the 
considerations. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – We’ll get you a letter in due course, or a memo – whatever we can give you, so that 
you can get an idea. 
 
Section 1 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 2 and 3 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill with amendment. 
 

Bill No. 3 – An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – I will move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) 
 

That section 1 of the printed bill be amended by striking out 180 in the second line and substituting 
1979. 

 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): – The question as it relates to clause (3), am I in order to ask at this 
point in clause (3)? 
 
Concern was expressed, striking out the words ‘in permanent full-time positions’. Does this then have that 
act apply towards the part-time positions, with that amendment? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Mr. Chairman, I am not sure that I am addressing myself directly to the member’s 
question because I may not be understanding it. The way it has been explained, the existing definition of 
‘employee’ and the exiting definition has in there the words ‘permanent full-time positions’. What we are 
doing here is making it a requirement that service provided must be continuous for a period of six months. 
The two interpreted views, namely, permanent full-time positions and six-months are in complement with 
one another and the proposed amendment is going to correct that to mean that you have to be in service for a 
continuous period of six months. 
 
MR. ANDREW: – As a part-time employee or as a full-time employee for that period of six months? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: – Full-time. 
 
MR. ANDREW: – That was the only concern with all parts of the bill. 
 
Section 1 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Section 3 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 4 as amended agreed. 



 
December 13, 1979 

 
 

 
462 

Sections 5 to 13 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 14 and 15 new sections agreed. 
 
Section 16 to 18 as amended agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill with amendment. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:44 p.m. 


