






















































Hansard: April 22, 1980


2045 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
April 22, 1980. 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The members of the Assembly, I know, will join with me in welcoming a very 
distinguished guest to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. He is Hon. Gerard Amerongen the 
Speaker of the Alberta legislature. He is situated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I mentioned that Speaker Amerongen is a distinguished visitor because I have seen the manner in which 
he conducts the House in Alberta. He is certainly respected as a Speaker in his jurisdiction and as a 
distinguished person. In fact, among Canadian speakers presently serving, Speaker Amerongen happens 
to have the greatest length of service. 
 
It’s especially appropriate that he visit us this year when Saskatchewan and Alberta are co-operating on 
a celebration of our 75th anniversary. We are discussing the co-operation between the two provinces 
with regard to the parliamentary association involvement in the 75th anniversary of the provinces. 
 
I know all members will welcome Speaker Amerongen to our legislature this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I too want to introduce a 
distinguished parliamentarian to this Assembly this afternoon. We have in the Speaker’s gallery with us 
the financial critic for the New Democratic Party in the House of Commons in Ottawa, Mr. Bob Ray. I 
think it is evident that he has taken a very established an prominent leadership role in the issues that face 
this country today, in a financial and economic world. And it is a pleasure that I introduce him through 
you, Mr. Speaker, to the members of the Assembly and ask them to join me in welcoming Mr. Ray to 
the legislature this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — On behalf of the official opposition I would like to join you, Mr. 
Speaker, in welcoming Speaker Amerongen. I had the pleasure of meeting with him some years ago and 
enjoyed the hospitality that he so graciously supplied, and it is good seeing him again. 
 
I would like to join the Minister of Finance in welcoming the financial critic of the New Democratic 
Party in Ottawa. I would hope that he is here to join with the official opposition in attempting to get 
some action out of the government to assist the farmers, small businessmen, home-owners, and wage 
earners of Saskatchewan with some help from the high interest rates. I’m sure we may have common 
cause, Mr. Ray, and we welcome you in your efforts. I’m sure that’s why you’re here. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2046 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A.S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me to introduce to the 
House a fine group of 31 Grade 11 students from the Canora Composite High School. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Michael Okrainetz, bus drivers Mr. and Mrs. Harold Gogo, and a tour 
guide Alfred Labas of the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development. 
 
This is a second visit by students from the Canora Composite High School to learn about the role that 
the co-operatives have in our society here in Saskatchewan. The group is sponsored by two local co-ops 
— the Gateway Co-op as well as the Canora Credit Union. Participating as well is the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development. 
 
Earlier this day they visited the Co-op refinery and the federated warehouse. Following the visit in the 
legislature they will proceed to visit the Credit Union Central. I will be meeting with the group later this 
day for discussion as well as pictures and refreshments. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Melfort): — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome this 
afternoon, and I hope the House will welcome, through you a group of students and chaperones from a 
little town of Annaheim which is yet in my constituency. They are accompanied this afternoon by a 
number of chaperones and their school teacher. Their school teacher, Orville Thiesen, is with them, and 
the chaperones, Mr. and Mrs. Al Wuchner, Mr. and Mrs. Don Kimmen, Mr. and Mrs. Clarence 
Hoffman, Mrs. Irvin Meyer, and Mr. Leo Freyling. Mr. Speaker, the students and the chaperones toured 
a few places in the city of Regina, and they’re in the House this afternoon to take on a little bit of 
education and I hope it will be. I would like everybody to join with me in welcoming the group and 
wishing them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all the 
members of the House this afternoon, a group of 43 students from Jonas Samson Junior High School in 
Meadow Lake. This is the third group from that school that has visited here in the last week or so. As I 
mentioned before and I’m sure all members will agree with me, it’s quite an undertaking for people to 
travel that distance with this number of people. They’ve been visiting in Saskatoon and various points 
here in the capital city — visiting the two major cities, basically, in Saskatchewan. They are 
accompanied here today by their chaperones, Mrs. Owen and Mrs. Pylot and three of their teachers, Mrs. 
Betty Hill, Mr. Tim Sarich and Mr. Wayne Pike. Would all members join with me in welcoming them 
and wishing them an educational time here at the legislature of our province. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Saskatoon Buena Vista): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to join with the 
member for Melfort in welcoming the students and the adults from Annaheim, Saskatchewan. I have 
many happy memories of Annaheim, since I was born and raised in Annaheim and attended Annaheim 
Laurier School. I want to particularly welcome a 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2047 

good friend of mine, Irvin Meyer, who still resides in Annaheim and is with the students today. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also introduce to you today one of the largest groups I think we 
have had in the Assembly. A group of 89 Grade 7 and 8 students from Prince Philip School in my 
constituency. They are accompanied by their teachers Joan Fowler, Harold Sauder, and Larry Edwards. 
They are also accompanied by one of the parents, Mrs. Karoll. I will be meeting with the students a little 
later. I hope you have a good day in Regina, a successful educational day here, and I ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

NATURAL GAS IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister for Kelsey-Tisdale. In light 
of huge natural gas discoveries in British Columbia, and in light of what Premier Lougheed stated last 
night on television that the quickest way to strengthen the Canadian dollar was to export massive 
amounts of natural gas, is the minister now prepared to accept the fact that there is a little more natural 
gas than what he anticipates? Are you ready now to do more exploring in Saskatchewan and prop up this 
concept that there is a lot of natural gas available? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to the member 
on previous occasions that we are reviewing the policy in respect of natural gas exploration and 
development in the province of Saskatchewan. We do believe that we have the probability of 
discovering larger quantities of gas than we thought was the case 10 years ago. A lot of that assumption 
is based on the success that Alberta has enjoyed, and to a lesser degree, that British Columbia has 
enjoyed, in the last decade in proving up pools of gas. We are not so ambitious to open the gates, as I 
believe the member is alluding to, because of the problems which go along with that. We have Alberta 
in particular indicating that they have a surplus of gas for a shorter medium-term period of time, and are 
seeking very ambitiously, large export permits into the United States. 
 
I would suggest to the member that if we were to expand gas exploration and development in 
Saskatchewan, we would not want to attain that level of shorter medium-term extra capacity. Because 
we would like to guarantee that the pools of gas we have in the province of Saskatchewan will guarantee 
and give assurance to Saskatchewan consumers in years to come, that we will not be the victims of 
imported gas from outside this province, and pay what may well be a very heavy penalty in order to 
have that source of energy available to us. 
 
MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister tell us if SPC, with the additional 
discoveries of gas in B.C. and Alberta, has long-range contracts to protect the people of Saskatchewan at 
present day prices instead of waiting until natural gas does go up? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member knows full well that we have no opportunity to 
guarantee fixed prices for any energy that may cross provincial borders in the future. He knows there is 
a federal agency in place which will rule on the 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2048 

movement of that gas and will establish and rule on pricing of that gas. In some instances, some 
provinces and some utilities in those provinces have suffered some negative consequences in respect to 
that agency’s power. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A supplementary to the minister. In light of the obvious difference 
between your position and that of your federal counterparts, are you prepared to indicate that the 
Government of Saskatchewan supports the province of Alberta in its attempt to obtain, (to use your 
words, I believe) massive exports of natural gas? Are you fully supportive of Alberta in its efforts to sell 
the surplus of natural gas? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, Mr. Speaker, we have not given unqualified support to the province of Alberta 
in seeking those export permits. It may be, given the circumstances of the province of Alberta, because 
of the lack of planning and lack of staging of exploration and development of natural gas, that in the 
minds of those persons who went out and invested money to prove up gas, that they should have access 
to market. I think it would have been much wiser had Alberta had the foresight, as Saskatchewan has, to 
stage and plan the development of gas exploration and development, so that we don’t have what people 
interpret as a short-term oversupply of gas. Surely when we are (and I listened to the member for 
Estevan in this Legislative Assembly as early as last night) saying that all non-renewable resources are 
quickly depleting, and if that is the case, then that surely is a good argument to not move massive 
quantities of gas outside the Canadian region. 
 

BLOOD FRACTIONATION FACILITY 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Minister of Health. I have a letter from a 
person, dealing with the supply of freeze-dried blood concentrate for people suffering from hemophilia. 
My question to you is, have you entered into discussion with your counterparts in other provinces to 
make a blood fractionation facility available in Saskatchewan, or at least in Canada? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is in the positive. We 
had an item on the agenda last fall when we met with the federal Minister of Health and Welfare. I think 
the member must take into consideration that there is a difference of opinion between Ontario and 
Quebec as to whether or not the blood fractionation plant should be in Ontario or in Quebec. Other 
province shave also indicated they would be interested in a blood fractionation plant. Saskatchewan did 
put forward their suggestion as Newfoundland did, and I think Manitoba also indicated they wanted to 
be involved. It is not a simple matter to resolve. It (I think) has to be resolved amongst all the provinces 
but the main characters involved in this item are the provinces of Ontario and Quebec at this time and 
the federal government. 
 
We want to have self-sufficiency in blood fractionation in Canada. We indicated and all the provinces 
indicated, with the exception of Quebec, that we would be prepared to pay extra for that to make sure we 
did not have to rely on a foreign country for our blood. I think most provinces (with the exception of 
Quebec) have agreed with that. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. Since people suffering with hemophilia must have 
blood available on short notice or have it available at all times, do you not feel that Saskatchewan has a 
responsibility to provide this kind of service in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it is not financially feasible. I think all the ministers agreed 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2049 

with that; it is simply not financially feasible to do on a province-by-province basis. What we need is the 
involvement of the Red Cross. The Red Cross functions throughout Canada, and through the Red Cross, 
if we have a source of blood available (let’s say through Connaught Laboratories in Ontario or through 
some organization in Quebec) I think this is what we have to do. If each province goes on its own, the 
costs are going to be prohibitive and therefore I think we, in Canada, have to set a policy which will 
guarantee blood is available to everyone when it is needed and for the last year or so. Hopefully we will 
be able to come to some resolution on that. I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, the Red Cross must be 
involved and is anxious to be involved in making sure there is self-sufficiency of blood in Canada. 
 

JAMMING OF TV SIGNAL 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister in charge of 
Sask Tel and the Premier and the Deputy Premier, I would address my question to the Minister of 
Culture and Youth, the former minister in charge of Sask Tel. I am sure the minister and everyone is 
aware that an unfortunate situation exists in Saskatoon cable network. My question to the minister is 
this: in the absence of the Saskatoon cable network. My question to the minister is this: in the absence of 
the minister in charge of Sask Tel, has a legal solution been considered since it has been previously 
discussed in this Assembly? If so, what sort of steps are going to be taken to resolve a situation which 
has relegated itself to the crude level to say the very least. 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — I take notice of the question. 
 

WESTERN UNION WITH U.S. 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Mineral 
Resources. In view of the decision of the Alaska government to pay its citizens cash dividends for its 
resource wealth and since I assume you support the theory of the Premier where I quote: 
 

I strongly believe that one of the reasons why many people in Quebec react unfavorably to the idea of 
being Canadian is because in the minds of others it means nothing more than being North Americans 
north of the 49th parallel. 

 
Would you not agree that we are now, and probably always will be, controlled by the U.S. economically 
and that we should now take steps to deal with the reality and seek union with those who control us? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that as states within the 
union we would stand a better chance to gain industry and especially a better chance for an increase in 
the price of our oil products? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, Mr. Speaker. 
 

TESTING OF FOOD ADDITIVES 
 
MR. P. PREBBLE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2050 

Health. In light of the fact that the largest group of food additives in Canada, namely natural and 
artificial flavors, which number some 1,500 are not subject to regulation or safety testing by the federal 
government, would the minister make representation to the federal Minister of Health requesting that 
food flavorings be made subject to federal regulation and subject to federal testing in order that the 
Saskatchewan public can be assured that unsafe flavorings are not being placed in our food? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for discussing this particular item with me 
some time ago because you never warned me beforehand. Mr. Speaker, he indicated to me some time 
ago that he was concerned about this particular item and had put a resolution on the order paper. I want 
to tell the member that we have had some discussions with the federal government on this (not in any 
detail but there is some difficulty in the question that he has put forward. 
 
First of all, food colorings and flavorings are not considered as additives. Therefore, you immediately 
take out of the 1,500 about 1,200 substances which are not under strict regulation. But these particular 
additives, as he refers to them, do come under scrutiny of some international agencies, such as the World 
Health Organization and the food and agriculture organization. Mr. Speaker, I am told that many of the 
flavorings are used in very minute concentrations and are identical to many natural flavorings or natural 
substances that occur. So consequently they are not a real danger to individuals. But if the member can 
bring to me some substantial evidence that they are a danger to the health of individuals, certainly I 
would be compelled and also it would be my responsibility to take it up with the federal government to 
see if we can’t get some stricter regulations pertaining to food coloring and food flavoring. At this 
particular time I do not think it is as important as some other things I would like to discuss with the 
federal government. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In light of the fact that many additives such as red 
dye no. 2 and brilliant blue FCS have been banned in either the United States or in European countries, 
but are being used in Canada, and in light of the fact that over 40 additives now in our food are suspect 
with regard to safety problems, would the minister make the hazards of specific food additives a priority 
for discussion at the next federal-provincial meeting of health ministers? Further, would the minister 
establish, as part of the Feeling Good program, an information program on the most hazardous food 
additives and what food brands consumers can purchase which do not include these additives? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me say to the member again that on red dye no. 2 (the 
investigations that we have done here) the Canadian scientists simply do not agree with the experiments 
carried out by the United States people. They feel the scientific evidence that was brought forward 
simply was not based on valid investigation. Therefore, it has not been banned in Canada by the federal 
government. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think I have to agree with the general intent of what the member is 
putting forward. That is we should try to limit the number of additives that we use in our food. But the 
thin is, Mr. Speaker, we have to keep in mind that many of the additives used preserve the length of the 
food. In other words it would be very difficult for people to buy fresh meat or fresh bread unless we use 
some additives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will give the member the assurance that I will take under consideration as to whether or 
not we should put it under the Feeling Good program. However, I think our emphasis on the Feeling 
Good program should be on nutrition and balanced diet 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2051 

 rather than putting it on additives or food coloring or flavoring. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Additives such as red dye no. 2, Mr. Speaker, are used on one-third of factory 
processed foods. In view of the fact that red dye no. 2 has been banned in the United States and is a food 
coloring (many of the other additives I have mentioned are food colorings, which means they are only 
cosmetic in nature and are not essential at all to the preservation or quality of food), would the minister 
make immediate representation to the federal government to have red dye no. 2 removed from all 
Canadian foods? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, as I have already indicated to the member, the evidence I have received 
from my officials and from the federal government (this is something that has been under consideration 
for a couple of years now), indicates to me that the experiments carried out in the United States simply 
were not conducted in a valid manner and consequently they have been rejected by the federal 
government. But, Mr. Speaker, I will give the member the assurance that we will follow up on his 
suggestions. I will, in my meeting with the federal minister, have further discussion as to how we can 
protect the people from the additional additives we find in our foods which simply protect the people 
from the additional additives we find in our foods which simply aren’t necessary, either for the 
preservation of food or for the health of the individual. 
 

CLEAN-UP OF CHEMICAL SPILLS 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, maybe we’ll be able to drop item 1 
seeing that a lot of the debate has taken place. My question is to the Minister of the Environment, Mr. 
Minister, there are at present over 30,000 hazardous chemicals used in Saskatchewan and I understand 
that the number is increasing by approximately 1,000 per year. The EMO organization states it is highly 
likely or possible that there could be a serious spill in the province of Saskatchewan. My question to you 
is, what emergency measures is your department prepared to immediately implement if such a spill 
should occur? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, the department does have 
series of actions which they would take if an emergency were to arise of such a nature where there was a 
spill that was considered of sufficient importance to require that those steps be taken. I don’t have the 
six-step proposal before me, Mr. Speaker, but I could bring it to the member for his information. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. My concern is spills similar to those at Mississauga, 
Ontario, and McGregor, Manitoba. Can you assure this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that if 
such a thing should happen in this province, your department would be immediately on the scene with 
clean-up operations that would safeguard the people in the vicinity as well as the people involved in the 
clean-up of the spill? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I believe I can assure the member that either the Department 
of the Environment would be there or the emergency measures organization, whichever department had 
responsibility for the incident which occurred; but I would have to know the situation before I could 
give a specific or precise answer. 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary to the Premier. Would the Premier — or the minister, I’m sorry. That 
would never happen, I think I can safely assure the people of Saskatchewan. Would the minister not 
admit that the assurance he has given is a rather hollow one, 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2052 

given the fact that his department completely missed the PCB spill in the city of Regina for a period of 
two years? We are well over two years now; there has been no clean-up and you have continually stalled 
the clean-up of the major PCB spill in Regina, and as I say, the assurance just given to the hon. member 
is a sham and really a very hollow one. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. 
 

ANSWER TO QUESTION RE DIALYSIS PROGRAM 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yesterday the Premier took notice of a couple of questions directed to me from the 
member for Maple Creek. I would like to supply her with the answers today. One of the questions was 
on the home renal dialysis program, as to why we were so far behind the other provinces. I want to 
indicate to the member for Maple Creek that we do expect to have a home dialysis program in full 
operation by the spring of 1981. Construction of facilities is to begin at the St. Paul’s Hospital in the 
summer of 1980, and we hope to have them completed by next March. Construction is necessary in 
order to provide suitable training units for home dialysis. 
 
She also wanted to know what some of the program would be about. The individuals will be trained at 
St. Paul’s Hospital. Cost of training, supplies and equipment will be borne by SHSP. The patient will 
retain responsibility for the cost of food, lodging, and travel, while in training. Responsibility for patient 
selection — equipment selection and all medical aspects — will be left to the judgment of the medical 
supervisor, Dr. Richard Baltzan and/or Dr. George Pylypchuk. 
 
Secondly, she also asked why there wasn’t money put into the budget. Mr. Speaker, there is money in 
the budget. My understanding is that we have put it in health estimates, on Saskatchewan Hospital 
Services Plan and grants to hospitals and health centres. 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Just a short question to the Minister of Health. Do you know 
about how many of the approximately 60 people now using renal dialysis will be able to take advantage 
of the home program? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, that certainly will depend on how quickly we can get our facilities in 
order and also on how many individuals (who will be assessed by the specialists) can benefit from such 
a program. I would think it will be slow in starting but hopefully we will be able to accommodate all 
those who want to have home dialysis within the next year. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary to the Minister of Health. Is your department giving any 
consideration to establishing renal units in outlying hospitals such as Estevan, Yorkton, Swift Current, 
Prince Albert, to make it more accessible to the people that require these services? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that was considered at one time but that’s 
somewhat difficult at this time. We really only have, I believe, four specialists in the province who are 
able to train the people — one in Regina and I think three in Saskatoon. Consequently, in order to train 
the people to be able to have home dialysis in their own home (which is the trend that, I think, we have 
right across Canada) it is somewhat difficult to have those particular programs in the areas which she 
indicated. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN ASSISTANCE TO MORTGAGE HOLDERS 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2053 

MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. The federal 
government’s minibudget announced last night appears to have closed the door as far as federal funding 
is concerned for assistance of home-owners caught with the high interest rates as it relates to mortgage 
renewals. Can the minister advise the Assembly whether the citizens of Saskatchewan facing mortgage 
renewals can expect the same treatment from the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 
knows the interest rates are a matter of federal responsibility and not of the province. It’s part of the 
monetary policy of the federal government and it’s their responsibility. I can advise the hon. member 
that back on March 31, I met with the federal minister in charge of CMHC (Central Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation), Mr. Cosgrove. I discussed the problem of high interests with him. I have since 
then communicated directly with him and made a number of suggestions about what the federal 
government ought to be doing to help out with the housing and to help relieve the problem of high 
mortgage interest rates. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In an earlier question period, Mr. Minister, the 
Premier indicated that he would await federal initiatives in this field. Clearly those initiatives are not 
forthcoming. You’ve had ample opportunity. You’ve waffled on the issue. Can you advise the Assembly 
if you are prepared as the Government of Saskatchewan to offer any assistance to those home-owners 
who are facing mortgage renewals — as a provincial program? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is suggesting that somehow the province ought to 
assume the responsibility of providing subsidies where the federal government has the responsibility. I 
think that this would be a wrong approach for the provinces to take. I can assure the hon. member that 
I’ve been in contact with the federal minister, and I also urged the federal minister to convene a meeting 
of all the ministers in charge of housing in Canada. I should also advise the hon. member that other 
ministers throughout Canada have been urging Mr. Cosgrove to call a meeting of all ministers in charge 
of housing so that we can consider not only the matter of interest rates, but other urgent matters in the 
problem area of housing. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister. Would the minister not admit when you’re giving 
interest free loans to Crown corporations that you in fact have a moral obligation . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 

POINTS OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — I would like to raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker, before the 
orders of the day. Mr. Speaker will recall on many occasions giving the rulings to members of the 
legislature pertaining to oral question period, that matters shall be of an urgent nature. He will also recall 
that the agreement reached on the rules for oral question period spelled out in no uncertain terms that 
items which are already on the order paper shall not become matters for oral question period. I refer, Mr. 
Speaker, to the matter raised by the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland today on red dye no. 2. I ask Mr. 
Speaker to please explain, since the particular item has been raised on the order paper, item 1, page 14. 
Since that matter in precisely the same fashion as it is raised on the order paper, was raised today, is 
there a special rule for members of that 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2054 

side of the House or does it apply to all? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. The rules apply to all members and I think that members on either 
side of the House are free to ask questions about red dye or food additives. I think members on either 
side of the House are free to ask questions about native rights or Indian treaties, even though there may 
be a resolution on the order paper. The idea of the resolution on the order paper should not be used to cut 
off or prevent what a person believes to be an urgent question on a matter which has come up in the 
question period. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that interpretation. I hope, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow you 
will be prepared to provide the members of this Assembly your ruling, your support, your authority, 
your precedent for that ruling. And I also ask Mr. Speaker to regard that he just said it’s up to members 
to decide whether a matter is urgent or not. I certainly appreciate that ruling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it’s clear that the rules which govern the question period are the basic 
guidelines set down by the rules committee on March 12, 1976, and Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 
and Forms which I quite often refer to — Chapter 5, citation 171 which governs the question period. I 
realize that from time to time people put debatable comments on questions and it’s difficult for me to 
prevent the member from putting it in until I hear it. I realize from time to time ministers may put 
debatable comments in their answers and it’s difficult for me to catch them. I assume we’re all 
honourable people and would not attempt at any time to put debatable comments in a question or an 
answer. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, to a point of order — and of 
course you’re right because you can’t allow resolutions to preclude urgent topics from question period. 
It can’t work that way. But I can remember, Mr. Speaker, several statements you’ve brought into this 
House that relate to question period and they contained words like factual, brief, specific, urgent, 
compelling, topical, precise. Mr. Speaker, is the reason that you didn’t cut the member for Saskatoon-
Sutherland and the Minister of Health off today the fact that perhaps they might not understand some of 
these words. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, they carried on with that rhetorical crap for 11 minutes. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I rise now for the very reason I quite often rise — because members are unsure 
how to put a question or unsure how to answer it or unsure how to make a point of order. I think the 
Leader of the Opposition has demonstrated just now how a point of order should not be put. If a person’s 
raising a point of order, he should cite the rule that has been broken. I welcome the attention the 
members are now focusing on the rules that govern the question period and I’m sure the question period 
will be more within the rules and hon. members will not seek to pervert the question periods either in 
question or in answer. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to know, as a point of order, 
whether it is going to become common procedure for backbenchers on the government side of the House 
to have prepared written questions and the ministers to respond having prepared written answers and 
monopolize 11 minutes of that question period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I want to know what is the member’s point of order? I don’t want to 
hear the argument. I want to know the point of order the member’s 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2055 

making. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I guess what I’m asking, Mr. Speaker, are there going to be two standards of 
rules, one for over there and one for over here? I’ve been turfed out for a heck of a lot less than what 
was allowed over there. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The member for Thunder Creek has just illustrated how not to put a 
point of order in the Chamber. I might direct the member for Thunder Creek and all members of the 
Assembly to the guidelines for this question period as laid down in March 12, 1976. The number one 
guideline is that questions may be asked of cabinet ministers by any private member. That’s the rule 
we’re adhering to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I see members reading questions all the time. I don’t 
wish to engage in conversation with the member for Thunder Creek. I see members reading questions 
everyday. If the members are going to insist there should be a new rule in the question period that you 
cannot read a question, then maybe we should bring that up in the rules committee which will deal with 
it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Mr. Speaker today stated that it was up to the 
individual member to decide whether a matter was urgent. If that member believes the matter is urgent, 
you are not going to step in and say that the question is not urgent. Those guidelines you refer to state 
that Mr. Speaker shall decide the urgency. My point of order is, it appears that you allowed the member 
for Saskatoon-Sutherland to have one set of urgent rules but you allow members on this side of the 
legislature to have another set of urgent rules. Could you please elucidate? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t think it’s necessary for me to enlighten the members here as to what 
urgency is. My view of urgency might be altogether different from the member up there for a member 
over there. If I don’t think it’s urgent, then I’ll pass on to the next question. If the member still thinks it’s 
urgent, he will raise the subject again because obviously he still thinks it’s urgent. I don’t make a final 
decision as to whether something’s urgent or not. I leave that up to the members. If, in my view, it 
doesn’t appear to be urgent but appears to be trivial, then I will go to another question or attempt to find 
another question. If I’m unsuccessful, then obviously I have to come back and deal with a question that I 
may think is trivial but the member thinks is urgent. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I would like you to perhaps give an explanation to the 
House as to what is urgent about a matter that was raised as a motion. It is number one on the order 
paper, Resolution No. 1; it was tabled the first day of this Assembly; it is dealing with food additives 
and today it was brought up in a 12-minutes diatribe. Can the Speaker advise this Assembly what is 
urgent about a matter which has been on since day one? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! All I know is the guidelines which govern this question period. One 
of them is that questions should be asked only in respect to matters of sufficient urgency and importance 
as to require an immediate answer. Obviously the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland thinks his question 
is urgent. Members there may not. I know some days there are members over here who don’t think the 
questions from there are urgent. However, if there are no other questions I have to take what is available 
to me, and the members will have to be guided by that. 
 
Unfortunately, I cannot make a final decision about urgency. I can only pass on to another question if I 
don’t think the questions are urgent. I don’t intent to get into the position of debating whether the 
member for Saskatoon-Sutherland had an urgent question or not, because that immediately puts me into 
the debate. I just can’t do that. 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2056 

MR. LANE: — Well, speaking to the point of order, Mr. Speaker. Raising a new point of order, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If the member has a point of order, I will take it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Point of order. It has been the practice (and I have been called to account on numerous 
occasions) that the ruling as to urgency of questions was made by the Chair. It is a rather fundamental 
difference from the traditions of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to now let the members decide what is 
urgent. I think that is a rather unique precedent being established here today. 
 
Would Mr. Speaker perhaps again give some guidelines to the Assembly as to what is urgent about a 
matter presented on the first day of the Assembly in Resolution No. 2, and which now is brought up for 
11 or 12 minutes of debate on a frankly, silly matter of the government being in the kitchens of the 
province. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member, in making a point of order, can’t editorialize on whether the subject 
is silly or not. It is not up to the member to do that when he is raising a point of order, so therefore his 
point of order is out of order. 
 
I direct the members to the rules which govern the question period. Please read them over; please 
acquaint yourselves with them, and you will understand the position the Speaker is in with regard to 
whether something is urgent or not. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, if I may respectfully suggest to you, aside from an 
interpretation on this matter as to what urgency is, that an equally prevalent issue is also one of 
impartiality, because, Mr. Speaker, I respectfully suggest to you that I can hardly visualize the 
circumstance where I would have been allowed, or the member for Qu’Appelle would have been 
allowed, to carry on in a fashion like that of the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that raises the issue of impartiality. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think we are in an area which I can’t allow the members to get into now. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Rule 35(2) states the length of 
the question period; once again the question period was shortened by you and once again, as I always 
do, I kept the exact time. Once again you sat down one of our members while there was still sufficient 
time left for him to repeat his question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’m sorry if I cut the question period short. I assure the member I had no 
intention of doing that. I extended it about 5 minutes beyond what I would 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2057 

normally call the termination of the question period. I assumed we were over by about 5 minutes. I 
didn’t catch exactly when the question period started but I thought I was close. 
 
In the future I will certainly attempt to keep a closer eye on the clock to prevent the question period from 
being too long or too short. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker today stated rather 
categorically, that he felt it was up to the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland to decide the urgency of his 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 2, 1980, in answer to the member for Swift Current, you spoke as follows: 
 

The member for Swift Current asked a question with regard to the referendum in Quebec and 
consequences of that. Under the rules it says that questions should be asked only in respect of matters 
of sufficient urgency and importance as to require an immediate answer, and questions must not be in 
the nature of a lengthy . . . Pardon me. Yes, I think the first rule I suggested covers the reason why I 
didn’t allow the member to proceed; because I didn’t feel it was of sufficient urgency and importance 
to proceed further with it. 

 
MR. COLLVER: — Then Mr. Speaker goes on to say: 
 

Now at some other time the member is quite free to bring the same topic back in for another question. 
 

MR. COLLVER: — I suggest that in your own words and in the words of other members of this 
legislature today, Mr. Speaker is not giving the same rules to those members of that side of the House as 
he is providing to this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that perhaps the page you referred to 
might be read by you and in the future, perhaps, attended to a little more closely. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Oblique criticism of the Chair has to stop. I think the rule I stated to the member 
for Swift Current at that time (and I am not getting into debating that question period because it must be 
settled at that time) is the same rule I would apply today to any member who rose in the House. It is the 
rule I’ve been applying from the beginning. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, would there be any chance that your terminating comment on the 
member for Nipawin’s point now is because he just nailed you to the wall? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I hardly think that’s parliamentary, I’ll take it as I recognize where it comes from 
and let it go at that. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 32 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current) moved, seconded by the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver), that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 32 showing: 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2058 

All studies, surveys, questionnaires, correspondence, reports, memoranda, aide-memoires, 
recommendations, and any other documents of the Department of Highways with regard to the 
reconstruction or rerouting of Highway No. 43 from Highway No. 4 east to No. 2, or any other 
alternate reconstruction or rerouting of adjacent highways. 

 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, to comment here, I think we dealt with 
some motions of a similar nature two or three weeks ago and I think the problem of the motion is the 
broad, sweeping amount of material it is after such as aide-memoires, etc. I think the Attorney General 
at that time indicated that is simply was impossible to comply with this kind of motion. Therefore, I 
would urge the members, Mr. Speaker, to defeat this on the same basis they did the others. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, I am more than a little baffled about the attitude of the government on this 
particular motion. The Minister of Highways and I got into a debate some weeks ago with respect to the 
possibility of a change on this highway under question and he refused to suggest that there were any 
studies. I don’t know what terminology he was using at the time but it in no way related to . . . Well, 
what it related to was the fact that he didn’t want to answer. I have had reams upon reams of mail from 
constituents in that area of the province, who are not my constituents, who happen to be constituents of 
the member for Morse as a matter of fact. I have never received so much mail other than the mail I have 
received the last several weeks in support of the most recent cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to me it is a cop-out on the part of the government. It is a refusal to answer the wishes of 
the people of that area. I have kept these people aware by mail and by telephone and by news releases. 
They will continue to be kept aware of what is going on. I think this government is going to pay, and 
Mr. Gross, the hon. minister for Morse will pay at the polls for this kind of attitude if this project 
proceeds. I simply wanted information to confirm whether or not this highway is to be constructed. If it 
is not to be constructed, then the Minister of Highways and his officials should simply tell the people of 
the area. If it is going to be constructed they simply want to know. They have a right to know; they are 
taxpayers of this province, and I think it is absolutely disgusting we can’t get simple information such as 
this. I have not loaded the order paper with 50, 60, 75 or 100 motions. I have 1 or 2 or 3 this session 
wanting simply straightforward information and they refuse to give it. I think it is unforgivable. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 9 
 

Berntson Katzman Collver 
Thatcher Andrew Ham 
Lane McLeod  
Swan   
 

NAYS — 31 
 

Pepper Banda Tchorzewski 
 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2059 

 
Allen Kaeding Koskie 
Bowerman Hammersmith Lusney 
Smishek Kowalchuk Prebble 
Snyder MacAuley Long 
Baker Feschuk Johnson 
Skoberg Byers Thompson 
McArthur Vickar Engel 
Shillington Rolfes Poniatowski 
MacMurchy Cowley Solomon 
Mostoway   
 

RETURN NO. 238 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 238 showing: 
 

(1) The number of Saskatchewan people in every calendar year since 1971 who have been forwarded 
to Penetanguishene Hospital Centre by Saskatchewan courts under Saskatchewan Lieutenant-
Governor’s warrants. 
(2) The name of each Saskatchewan inmate released from the Penetanguishene Hospital Centre since 
1971, the date of release and the original offence for which he was charged. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 497 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 497 showing: 
 

As of March 1, 1980, the total number of employees in the Department of Mineral Resources: (1) the 
number of permanent employees, (2) the number of casual or seasonal employees, (3) the number that 
are on contract, who they are, and the nature of their contract, (4) the number that are out-of-scope 
employees, who they are, and the nature of their job. 

 
MR. COWLEY: — I have an amendment to offer for Return No. 497. I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural) (Mr. Kaeding), that all the words after ‘employees’ in the first line 
be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

Employed by the Department of Mineral Resources who were: (1) permanent, (2) casual or seasonal, 
(3) on contract and the nature of the contract, (4) permanent out-of-scope, their names and positions. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 498 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 498 showing: 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2060 

As of March 1, 1980, the total number of employees in the minimum wage board: (1) the number of 
permanent employees, (2) the number of casual or seasonal employees, (3) the number that are on 
contract, who they are, and the nature of their contracts, (4) the number that are out-of-scope 
employees, who they are, and the nature of their jobs. 

 
MR. COWLEY: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural) (Mr. Kaeding), that 
all the words after ‘employees’ in the first line be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

employed by the social planning secretariat who were: (1) permanent, (2) casual or seasonal, (3) on 
contract and the nature of the contract, (4) permanent out-of-scope, and their names and positions. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 499 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 499 showing: 
 

As of March 1, 1980, the total number of employees in the minimum employees’ superannuation 
commission: (1) the number of permanent employees, (2) the number of casual or seasonal employees, 
(3) the number that are on contract, who they are, and the nature of their contracts, (4) the number that 
are out-of-scope employees, who they are, and the nature of their jobs. 

 
MR. COWLEY: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural) (Mr. Kaeding), that 
all the words after ‘employees’ in the first line be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

employed by the minimum employees’ superannuation commission who were: (1) permanent, (2) 
casual or seasonal, (3) on contract and the nature of the contract, (4) permanent out-of-scope, and their 
names and positions. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 500 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 499 showing: 
 

As of March 1, 1980, the total number of employees in the social planning secretariat: (1) the number 
of permanent employees, (2) the number of casual or seasonal employees, (3) the number that are on 
contract, who they are, and the nature of their contracts, (4) the number that are out-of-scope 
employees, who they are, and the nature of their jobs. 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2061 

MR. COWLEY: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural) (Mr. Kaeding), that 
all the words after ‘employees’ in the first line be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

employed by the social planning secretariat who were: (1) permanent, (2) casual or seasonal, (3) on 
contract and the nature of the contract, (4) permanent out-of-scope, and their names and positions. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 323 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 323 showing: 
 

(1) The number of employed civil servants who since January 1, 1977 listed as their immediate 
previous employer, another government in Canada (federal, provincial or municipal); (2) the date each 
of these civil servants was hired by the Saskatchewan government the name of each civil servant, their 
present position and salary range and their previous position and former government employer. 

 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments about this one. Reading the question — the 
number of employed civil servants who since January 1, 1977 listed as their immediate previous 
employer — if one reads that, if someone hasn’t listed it since then . . . I think what the member 
obviously meant was the number of civil servants who have become employed since January 1, etc. I 
think, Mr. Speaker, we would have some real problems with it. I am making an assumption here, but we 
would probably have to go through 6,000 or 7,000 files, maybe more, because you have all of the 
temporary people, casual people, plus all the permanent employees who have turned over. 
 
There is no way you can punch a number and this will come rolling out. In fact, you would have to 
search all of the files. I am not sure they are even categorized by the year people came on staff, but I 
suspect alphabetically. So you would have to go through every file to find when the person was 
employed, and if this is the case, it would mean literally thousands of files. I think if the member has a 
question concerning some individuals, or a smaller class with respect to this, the government would be 
capable of coping with the request. I think this one is just too broad and sweeping. As I say, it would 
literally require, I think, tens of thousands of files if, as I believe is the case, they are not set up by year, 
but simply alphabetically. You don’t know whether the fellow was employed in 1968 or 1971 unless 
you look in his file, so you would have to go through every file. 
 
Also (and I don’t make this as a strong argument) in some cases employees are not required to list their 
previous employers. Now in 99 per cent of the cases I am sure they do. But you would have some cases 
where you would receive inaccurate information because it simply wasn’t there. 
 
I think the last part of the question gives a little bit of a problem. That is, the date each of 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2062 

these civil servants was hired by the government, name of each civil servant, their present position and 
salary range and their previous position and former government employer. I think the last part is a 
problem in terms of confidentiality for the individual in releasing the information concerning his 
previous employer. 
 
So for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the Assembly defeat this motion. 
 
MR. LANE: — First of all, the time involved to obtain information, certainly was not accepted as a 
justification for refusal under previous governments in this province. I think some of the members 
opposite recall the effort they placed on the previous Liberal administration to obtain information for 
them. 
 
The real issue, of course, on this particular question is that this government has become the political 
haven for political civil servants defeated when the NDP was defeated in British Columbia and in the 
province of Manitoba. This government is the haven for the NDP secretariat from one end of the country 
to the other and the political administrative training ground for the NDP apparatus. The reason for the 
refusal of this information is another example of the secrecy of this government. It is another example of 
attempting to cover up. I think successfully covering up through the use of the majority, the 
politicization of the civil service of the province of Saskatchewan. This effect is that honest, industrious 
and sincere individuals are being squeezed out and are being subjected to the political reign of the 
government office. At taxpayers expense the civil service of Saskatchewan has become the political 
haven for NDP members across the country. 
 
The interesting thing is a lack of reaction by the government members opposite. They know it’s true. In 
fact they are proud of the situation that exists. It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that at the present time in the 
province of Manitoba a debate is going on because the Conservative government in Manitoba happened 
to hire a campaign manager on a part-time basis. One individual constituted a two week debate in the 
province of Manitoba. In this province the press sits idly by, the public sits idly by while the taxpayers 
are being bled through an abuse of the political process. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan are being forced 
to hire and pay for the political apparatus of the government, the New Democratic Party. 
 
No government in Canada (I say that including even the federal Liberals which is now how it gets), not 
even the federal Liberals have gone to the extent this government has in hiring defeated candidates, 
members of defeated NDP governments. They sit there proud of the number of defeated candidates and 
political civil servants from the governments of Manitoba and B.C. They are proud of the number they 
have hired. They take it as a badge of political pride that they can slip all these people in at the taxpayers 
expense. 
 
Again, for some reason in Saskatchewan this is not politically immoral. It is done to such an extent in 
this province that the press, for example, couldn’t care less and the public accepts it as a part of 
government. No other province in Canada, no other government has made such a deliberate practice of 
hiring defeated candidates and political civil servants. I suggest from the indications and information 
we’re getting that the civil servant, whose prime purpose is to work for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan is 
starting to get pretty fed up in his own right. He knows the people of Saskatchewan owe no debt or 
obligation to those civil servants hired by this government solely for political reasons, making this 
government the haven for the political apparatus of the government opposite. That is the reason this 
government refuses to answer the 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2063 

question I asked. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 6 
 

Thatcher Swan Duncan 
Lane Katzman McLeod 
 

NAYS — 29 
 

Pepper Banda Koskie 
Allen Kaeding Lusney 
Bowerman Hammersmith Prebble 
Snyder Kowalchuk Long 
Baker Dyck Johnson 
Skoberg MacAuley Thompson 
McArthur Byers Enger 
Shillington Vickar Poniatowski 
MacMurchy Cowley Solomon 
Mostoway Tchorzewski  
 

RETURN NO. 589 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 589 showing: 
 

For all government owned nursing home sin the province of Saskatchewan: (1) the number of beds 
that facility was originally designed for, (2) the number of beds currently being funded, (3) the number 
of specified level 1 beds, (4) the number of specified level 2 beds, (5) the number of specified level 3 
beds. 

 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural) (Mr. 
Kaeding) that the words ‘nursing homes’ in the first line be deleted and the words ‘and operated special 
care homes’ be substituted therefor. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 592 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 592 showing: 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2064 

The name, rank, and salary level of all women holding executive level positions in the public service 
of Saskatchewan (including Crown corporations) from April 1, 1979 to March 21, 1980. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, a small amendment to plug it into a specific date. I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth, (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

As at March 21, 1980, (1) the name, position and salary range of women holding executive positions 
in all government departments, agencies, boards and commissions, (2) the number of women holding 
executive positions in Saskatchewan Crown corporations and their positions. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 593 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 593 showing: 
 

With regard to complaints from the medical profession to MCIC, their number and nature during the 
year 1979. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, the information I have, in addressing this motion, is that MCIC 
does not maintain a log of complaints received. They indicate they would need to know precisely the 
complaint — whether it pertained to the government or policy or MCIC policy and where there is a 
specific claim from a specific patient, whether it involved the payment schedule or individual 
personalities. As the question I presently worded it is impossible to answer. Therefore, I ask members to 
defeat it. I would suggest to the hon. member that perhaps she can reword a question, put it on the order 
paper, which can better be answered in relationship to the existing policy of the Department of Health. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Am I correct that if this motion is defeated 
and the member is to bring in another motion which is similar, you will rule it out of order because it is 
asking the same information for something which has been defeated? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member is free to resubmit a question similar to that if the question is 
defeated. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I find the reasons given by the hon. minister a little difficult to 
accept. I believe my motion clearly asks for the number of complaints from the medical profession to 
MCIC during the year 1979. He indicated that MCIC does not keep those types of records but I must say 
that did not deter the Minister of Health from going about the province talking about the horrendous 
number of complaints they have received from patients. Yet when I questioned him on that very same 
issue he also said MCIC did not, nor did he, keep any records of that nature. I just feel that MCIC should 
be able to provide me with this information as this motion stands. 
 
Motion defeated. 
 

RETURN NO. 624 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2065 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 624 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the provincial planning 
appeals board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the Minister of 
Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
provincial planning appeals board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 625 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 625 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1)the number of permanent staff members of the provincial mediation 
board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington) that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted, and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
provincial mediation board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 626 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 626 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2066 

the Provincial library that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. 
Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Provincial Library who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 627 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 627 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the provincial auditor’s 
department that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. 
Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
provincial auditor’s office who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay, (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 629 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 629 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Office of the Rentalsman 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2067 

Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the Office of 
the Rentalsman who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) the union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee 
was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 630 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 630 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Office of the 
Ombudsman that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you forgot to ask on the last vote, the calling question. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Thank you very much for filling me in on that, member for Rosthern. 
I’ll try not to make those mistakes in the future. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the Office of 
the Ombudsman who were (a) on educational leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 631 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 631 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the municipal water 
assistance board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I move the following amendment, seconded by the Minister of Culture and 
Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2068 

the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year, (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
municipal water assistance board who were (a) on educational leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 632 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 632 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the municipal financing 
corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I move the following amendment, seconded by the Minister of Culture and 
Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the municipal 
financing corporation that were (a) on educational leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay for purposes of union business, (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on 
leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 633 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 633 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the municipal employees’ 
superannuation commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
municipal employees’ superannuation commission who were (a) on education leave with partial 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2069 

pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government 
and each employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 634 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 634 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the minimum wage board 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
minimum wage board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 635 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 635 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Mineral 
Resources that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Mineral Resources who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2070 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 636 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 6336 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the milk control board that 
are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the milk 
control board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was 
on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN 637 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 637 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the local government board 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that 
all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the local 
government board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 638 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2071 

(Mr. Swan), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 638 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the liquor licensing 
commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the liquor licensing 
commission that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial pay for purposes 
of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 639 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 639 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the liquor board department 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the liquor board that 
were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial pay for purposes of union business; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 640 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 640 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Legislative Counsel and 
Law Clerk Department that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2072 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk department who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) 
on union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 641 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 641 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the labour department that 
are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Labour who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 642 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 642 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs that are (a) on education leave, with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2073 

employees of the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs who were (a) on education leave with 
partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the 
government and each employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 643 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 643 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Industry 
and Commerce that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the highway 
traffic board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was 
on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 644 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 645 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Highways 
traffic board that are (a) on educational leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the highway 
traffic board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was 
on leave. 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2074 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 645 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 645 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Highways 
and Transportation that are (a) on educational leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Highways and Transportation who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on 
union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 646 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 646 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Health 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — My apologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the House. I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Health who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2075 

RETURN NO. 647 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 647 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of 
Government Services that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Government Services who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 648 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 648 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the finance department that 
are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Finance who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 649 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 649 showing: 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2076 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Executive Council that 
are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Executive Council who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 650 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 650 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of the 
Environment that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 651 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 651 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the education department 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of the Environment who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay: (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order! I think you’re moving the wrong amendment, Minister of 
Agriculture. I think you missed one last time round. I think this was the one for last 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2077 

time. Is there leave to go back to the previous return which would be Return No. 650? O.K., We’re 
going back to Return No. 650. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), the following amendment on Return No. 650, that all the words after ‘showing’ be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of the Environment who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I would like to . . . (inaudible) . . . Return No. 651 on a motion by the 
hon. member for Rosthern. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), the following amendment, that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Education who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 652 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 652 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Culture 
and Youth that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), the following amendment, that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of al permanent employees of the 
Department of Culture and Youth who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2078 

while the employee was on leave. 
 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 653 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 653 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the cultural policy secretariat 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman) with respect to Return No. 653 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the cultural 
policy secretariat who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 654 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Thunder Creek (Mr. Thatcher), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 654 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Could I have some order here. I am having a little trouble hearing 
myself think. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman) with respect to Return No. 654 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial 
pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2079 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 655 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 655 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Co-
operation and Co-operative Development that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman) with respect to Return No. 655 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development who were (a) on education leave with 
partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the 
government and each employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 656 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 656 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of 
Continuing Education that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Continuing Education who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2080 

RETURN NO. 657 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 657 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Consumer 
Affairs that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay, (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 658 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 658 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of communications secretariat 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment (Mr. Bowerman), the 
following amendment, that al the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
communications secretariat who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 659 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2081 

659 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of Celebrate Saskatchewan that 
are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), the following amendment, that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of Celebrate 
Saskatchewan that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay for 
purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 660 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 660 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the board of revenue 
commissioners that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), the following amendment, that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the board of 
revenue commissioners who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 661 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 661 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the board of examiners that 
are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2082 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the board of 
examiners who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was 
on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 662 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 662 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of the 
Attorney General that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of the Attorney General who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 663 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 663 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the alcoholism commission 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion 
of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Environment 
(Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2083 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
alcoholism commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee as on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 664 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 664 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the agricultural development 
corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of the Environment (Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the agricultural 
development corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial 
pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 665 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 665 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of 
Agriculture that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of the Environment (Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the Department of 
Agriculture that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2084 

employee was on leave. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 666 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 666 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the 
Minister of the Environment (Mr. Bowerman), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted, and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial 
pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salary received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 667 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 667 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. 
Snyder), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial pay for 
purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2085 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 668 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 668 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Water 
Supply Board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. 
Snyder), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Water Supply Board that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial pay for 
purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 669 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 669 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the workers’ compensation 
board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. 
Snyder), that all the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the workers’ 
compensation board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 672 



 
April 22, 1980 
 

 
2086 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 672 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Transportation Agency 
of Saskatchewan that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that 
all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Transportation Agency of Saskatchewan who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on 
union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 673 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 673 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of tourism and renewable 
resources that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that 
all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, 
(b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and 
each employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 674 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 674 showing: 



 
April 22, 1980 

 

 
2087 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the teachers’ superannuation 
commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the Minister of 
Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the teachers’ 
superannuation commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 675 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 675 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the surface rights arbitration 
board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I move the following amendment, seconded by the Minister of 
Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the surface 
rights arbitration board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you might call it 5 o’clock? 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


