






















































Hansard: March 26, 1980


1119 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 26, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce 
to you and the members of the Assembly 44 Grade 11 and 12 students seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
from St. Louis High School. St. Louis High School is at the north end of the Kinistino constituency. 
They are here today with their teachers, Eric Harder and Richard Laycock. They have come in today and 
have been touring around Regina. They’ve been to the Leader-Post and CKCK Radio. My understanding 
is that they’ve been around to the university and now to the Legislative Building to watch some of the 
proceedings of their government. Hopefully they have had a good stay in Regina so far and will also 
have a very interesting and informative afternoon. I hope to meet with them a little later on. I am sure 
they will have some questions for me on the proceedings of the day. I also want to wish them a very safe 
journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this afternoon to 
introduce another group of students from my constituency, Regina North-West, to you and to all 
members of the Assembly. There are 55 Grade 7 and 8 students in the west gallery from Ruth M. Buck 
School. I welcome all of these students to the Chamber this afternoon, especially the boys and girls from 
Ruth M. Buck. The school is located, as some members may know, just a block from where I live in my 
constituency. It is one of 16 schools in the constituency, all of which I have visited personally except for 
Ruth M. Buck which I am going to attend on Friday afternoon. I hope the students enjoy the proceedings 
this afternoon. The teachers and chaperones who are accompanying the students are Vern Johnstone and 
Mrs. Papini. I look forward to meeting with you after the question period at 2:30 p.m. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to the Assembly 
some 54 Grade 12 students from Greenall High School in Balgonie. In addition to the excellent 
academic and athletic record at the high school, its full participation in the world famous Balgonie bed 
derby, which will be coming up again this summer, certainly puts the town on the map. I look forward to 
meeting with them not only this afternoon, but I believe I’ll be seeing most of them on Sunday night 
during the Celebrate Saskatchewan festivities in Balgonie. I look forward to that as well. I hope all 
members will join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly and wishing them a safe trip home. I 
look forward to meeting them a little later. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with my colleague, 
the member for Qu’Appelle, in welcoming the Balgonie school to the Assembly. Balgonie is famous for 
one of its students, an ex-student of mine and a very good friend, Mr. Rakesh Capila, who is not with 
them today. He’s a Grade 11 student in 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1120 

Balgonie and he is a member of the Canadian badminton team — I think it a great feat for a young boy 
from Saskatchewan. His brother, Mukesh, is here today and I would just like to congratulate Balgonie 
on Rakesh’s achievement and welcome them here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Auditor’s Salary 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban). The 
provincial auditor’s report has just come down this week. On page 3 of that report, it indicates that in 
April 1979 I was advised by the then minister of finance, that the government was proposing to 
introduce a bill to the Assembly to have the cabinet set the salary of the provincial auditor without 
having any future salary increases referred to the Assembly. Did you in fact make that representation to 
the provincial auditor. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice to check the records specifically for fear that I might 
be accused of trying to mislead the House, so I want to check that. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The accusation, Mr. Premier, being made by the provincial auditor. I think is quite 
a serious accusation that the cabinet is seeking to take away from the Assembly the determining of what 
the salary should be for the provincial auditor. Now that is contrary to the auditor’s special report made 
to the legislature in 1968 which reads, that if the provincial auditor is to remain independent the 
administration’s salary should be guaranteed by statute, and I think that further goes to the Wilson report 
which was an important report . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? The member should proceed at once to the 
question. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The question, Mr. Premier, is this. Can you give this House the assurance that the 
cabinet will strengthen the independence of the office of the auditor rather than to take away from the 
power of that office? 
 
MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any steps taken by the cabinet 
that would in any way undermine the position of the provincial auditor. The changes referred to, as I 
understand them in the auditor’s report, are the ones which were approved by the legislature last year 
and as far as I am aware, without objection from any hon. members. I would invite hon. members to 
check the record. I certainly do not now quote the record but invite hon. members to quote the record. 
 

PC Federal Pioneer Spill 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Environment. In 
light of the report brought out by Reid Crowther & Partners Limited recommending measures to clean 
up the PCB spill at the Federal Pioneer plant in Regina, and taking into consideration the numerous 
times I have called for action in this Assembly, is the minister prepared to immediately implement the 
recommendations contained in the report? 
 
MR. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1121 

begin consideration of the actions of the report. I don’t say that I will immediately do as the report 
advises. There has been a committee established. The committee is representative of Federal Pioneer. 
It’s been an ongoing committee. Federal Pioneer, the city and The Department of the Environment will 
now review the position of the consultant’s report. We have been proceeding on a step-by-step course. 
We’re not going to be stampeded into any action, which the members across the floor would like to see 
and thereby make some mistakes with respect to it. 
 
I want to indicate to you that as the House will already know, the National Research Council report 
came down in February. Before that report came down, we had undertaken to obtain the consultants to 
begin to assume what things may well be in the report and advise us on a technical basis, how we should 
proceed and on what basis we should proceed. That report has been tabled as of yesterday noon or 
thereabout; it came down. We will do so having been advised by the group which has been long 
established to give us advice and consideration with respect to it. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary. You haven’t been stampeded. You’ve had four years. My 
supplementary question to the minister is, considering you have talked long enough on this subject, can 
you assure this House that you will guarantee that there will be no more studies, no more discussions 
and assure us that there will be action taken? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I will assure this House, Mr. Speaker, that we will proceed in a positive, 
step-by-step basis, being advised, and we will consult. We will consult not only with the people who 
have been hired to give us advice, but we will consult with the city officials as well, and we will move in 
a positive way to respond to this situation. 
 
MR. LANE — A supplementary to the minister. The minister indicated in an earlier answer today that 
he was going to listen to this long-standing, ongoing committee — seemingly all of these expert studies 
that you’ve been setting up have been, in fact, wasting their time — that you were not listening to them. 
Would the minister not admit that four years since the spill is too long a time in the first place, and that 
he has, in fact, stalled this too long for the safety and the health of the citizens of Regina? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I would not admit that and I believe I am supported in that 
position by the National Research Council report. A National Research Council report indicated that in 
fact, there were certain ways in which one should proceed on this matter, and we have been 
subsequently advised with respect to the Reid Crowther & Partners Limited in their review of the 
National Research Council report. 
 
I say again, Mr. Speaker, and I can assure the House and all members of the House that we will proceed 
in a positive and in a direct way to respond to the advice that we receive, and we will not be stampeded 
by members across the way. 
 

Increased Licence Fees 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Revenue, Supply 
and Services. Mr. Minister, your justification for your announced increase in licence fees of March 24, 
was, and I will quote from your release: 
 

That there is a need to increase revenue from motor vehicle owners in order to keep pace with 
the increasing costs experienced by the government in the provision and maintenance of 
provincial roadways. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1122 

Would the minister advise this Assembly what the cost increase was or will be for the provision and 
maintenance of provincial roadways? 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — Mr. Speaker, if I understand 
the member correctly, he is asking what the increase in the fees will bring in revenue? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What will the cost increase be in the provision and maintenance of provincial 
roadways? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The budget calls for $165 million to be present on highways in the current year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to correct the minister. The budget calls for 
$157 million. But aside from that, can the minister explain how there is, in fact, a reduction in the 
estimate in the Department of Highways? There is a decline in the capital expenditures, including a 
decline in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan road construction. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, as usual, the member for Regina is wrong. The expenditures are $157 
million in the consolidated fund, and $9 million out of the heritage fund. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, are you now taking revenue from taxation into the heritage fund, Mr. 
Minister? Is that to replace that heritage fund money? Would the minister not admit that, in fact, he has 
no justification for the rate increase, and that his justification as outlined in his news release was 
misleading and false? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the information given in the release was not misleading nor false? 
Ten years ago, 85 per cent of the cost on the maintenance and provision of highways in this province 
was covered by gasoline taxation and the registration fees. Last year it dropped to 57 per cent. 
Obviously with increasing interest rates and the general cost increased to contractors and so on, the cost 
of maintaining and building highways is rising and obviously we have to find revenue to pay for it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I would like to debate with the minister but I can’t 
during question period; however since I have informed the minister that there is in fact a reduction in 
highway and road construction costs, would the minister be prepared to withdraw the announced 
increase? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we would not be prepared to withdraw it. If you look at the 
total costs of construction for highways next year, in the range of $165 million, the revenue flows and 
the gasoline tax and the motor vehicle registrations will come to about $130 million. 
 

Gasoline Tax 
 
MR. LANE — I would like to direct a question to the Premier. It pertains to the Quebec budget 
yesterday. The Premier has indicated in the past the province may have to take less for its oil than it 
would like, because the alternative would be a settlement imposed unilaterally by the federal 
government. The Quebec substitution of a sales tax for an excise tax, a 20 per cent sales tax . . . The 
indication of the finance minister in Quebec 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1123 

was that it was designed so (and I think cleverly so, although I don’t agree with the reason for it) that 
they expected Ottawa would take the public blame when the inevitable rise in prices and taxes occurs 
from the increase in sales tax on oil. Would the Premier assure this Assembly that he will not succumb 
to the pressures that Quebec will in fact be putting on Ottawa, pressures designed to put the blame for 
higher gas taxes on Ottawa? And will the Premier give the assurance that he won’t succumb to the 
federal pressures, which are inevitable given the referendum and the desire of the federal government to 
lessen negative federal impacts? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think I could talk about the color of Easter eggs and be about as 
germane as that question appeared to me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not at all sure what I was being asked, but if the hon. member is suggesting 
that we in this session are proposing to change the format of the gasoline tax in order to put pressure on 
Ottawa the way it is reported, the way the Quebec government has changed its gasoline tax reportedly to 
put pressure on Ottawa, I can assure him we have no such intention of changing the gasoline tax at this 
session for that purpose. 
 
MR. LANE — Well obviously if the report is accurate and it is designed to put pressure on the federal 
government, to let them take the blame for higher oil prices — and I’m looking at the press reports today 
wherein the minister indicated he expected Ottawa to take the blame for higher increases. My suggestion 
to the Premier is that the pressure on Ottawa, if they are taking the blame, will mean they are going to 
want to hold down oil prices because of the pressure from Quebec. What I am asking the Premier is, will 
he give the assurance that with the desire of Ottawa to hold down oil prices that he won’t succumb to 
any pressures from Ottawa to keep those prices down? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. member and all hon. member that we will be 
continuing to press for higher prices, prices more closely in line with Chicago prices or world prices 
than are the current Canadian prices. We will be continuing to press therefore for higher prices for 
western oil and nothing that is contained in the Quebec Budget will dissuade us from continuing to press 
in that direction. 
 
MR. LANE — Does the Premier have any indication that Quebec’s shifting to a sales tax means that 
Ontario will now consider the same and add to the pressure? Again, I refer him to his earlier position 
that he may take less than he would like. Would you give us the assurance that if there are further 
pressures you will not in fact succumb to those pressures and reduce the estimated or projected revenue 
that Saskatchewan should get from its oil? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not fully sure what the hon. member is urging. If he is 
suggesting that we are going to press for lower prices than what we might otherwise do because of 
pressures mounted by the Government of Canada out of concern for consumers, then the answer to that 
at least in the foreseeable future is no. We believe that we should be pressing for higher prices and that 
those higher prices should be paid by consumers. I am puzzled by the suggestion that somehow we can 
resist pressure and thereby presumably disarm the federal government and remove its powers under the 
Petroleum Administration Act. That is not open to us and we accordingly cannot give hon. members any 
assurance that any federal government will 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1124 

not use powers vested in it to set an oil price which it may see fit pursuant to any legal powers which it 
may have. 
 

Sales of Farms 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. I first raised this matter with the former minister of agriculture about a year ago and he 
assured me that this situation would be monitored. I more recently raised it with the current Minister of 
Agriculture — the Middlemiss case. I have a letter from the Minister of Agriculture dated January 14, 
1980 in which he says, Mr. Wesson reports that 67 sales have been completed and he is not aware of any 
problem similar to the Middlemiss case. However, I have some concern and will be monitored, etc. . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is, is the minister aware (and I want him to pay particular attention to the 
dates) that in 1973 a Mr. Wilkins sold section 6, township 16, range 20 to the land bank for $80,193? 
Last September he exercised his five-year option, September ’79, land bank sold it back to Mr. Wilkins 
for $258,000. Our land bank put $177,000 plus in their hip pocket. The final transaction was three 
months later Mr. Wilkins sold it to a Dressen farm for $468,000 or $210,000 in the hip pocket of Mr. 
Wilkins. Would you not agree that is at least a contravention of the spirit of the land bank act? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in respect to the letter I 
forwarded to the hon. member, I think the information that Mr. Wesson provided to me at that time was 
accurate in terms of his knowledge. I don’t think the hon. member is questioning that. I think that with 
respect to the implication raised by the hon. member of the amount of money that the land bank received 
for that land when they sold it — I don’t think there’s question with respect to that. I think the hon. 
member would know that the land bank turned around and purchased more land to assist another or 
more young farmers to get on the land, so I don’t think there’s an issue with respect to that issue. The 
issue that the hon. member raises with respect to the sale by the individual to a buyer is an issue and a 
concern of land bank, and is an issue and a concern of the government. We’ve asked land bank, the 
commissioners, to review the situation and put forward some recommendations as to how to deal with it, 
to the government. We’ve asked the land bank advisory council to do likewise. They are in the process 
of that work. As soon as we get an opportunity to consider the recommendations they may have for us, 
we will do so as a government. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. It’s a two-part supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would 
the minister firstly table in this House the number of people and the names of those people who have 
exercised the five-year option under land bank and secondly, how long will it continue to be this 
government’s policy to allow landlords whose address is 4400 Muenster, Kruesbreede 13, West 
Germany, to buy up high productive, top quality land, here in Saskatchewan in competition with our 
own local . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — With respect to the first question, I’m not sure of the policy of land bank. I 
think it’s been the practice not to reveal individual’s names, and I think I’ll take that under advisement 
and perhaps respond to the hon. member here in the question period if I have an opportunity, or forward 
the information to him. I think with respect to 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1125 

the issue of foreign ownership, in my remarks to the Assembly in the budget debate, I indicated that we 
would be considering very seriously as a government the resolution that was passed at the SARM 
convention to deal with that issue. 
 

Handicapped Drivers 
 
MR. H. J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Question to the minister responsible for driver licensing. I 
have a constituent who is handicapped to the extent that he has only one eye. He has overcome this 
problem and has been able to acquire a licence to fly aircraft, including a licence for commercial flight, 
but he is now being refused the right to have a driver’s licence to drive a class one vehicle. Are you 
purposely drawing regulations that discriminate against handicapped persons? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer 
the last statement first. We certainly are not. Any regulations that are administered by the highway 
traffic board, which very recently came under my jurisdiction and my ministry, have been the same as 
near as I know for the last 20 years. There may have been some minor revisions. The person who has 
made the application has probably applied to the board. The board is a quasi-judicial body that certainly 
should not be interfered with by the minister or a member of the legislature. If we are going to set up a 
board that is going to be fair it’s the same as a court. Some serious things have happened to ministers 
and members who have deliberately tampered. We have a situation in British Columbia where a deputy 
minister was suspended not so long ago. So I’m saying this, Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate getting 
your constituent’s name. At least you have been more polite than the member for Wilkie who is saying 
that he’s been trying to contact me and there’s not one scrap of paper, not one word from him. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I’ll take the next question. Supplementary. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. I have indeed raised this concern with the highway 
traffic board, and it has been before the highway traffic board. There was a change in legislation in 1977 
that set up the driver licensing classification and that is one which is causing difficulty. I wish, Mr. 
Minister, that you would take a serious look at it. I don’t think it’s an individual case but it is all cases 
which need to be looked at because it does apply across the board. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly take the member’s problem and discuss it with the 
chairman of the board, Mr. Sheard, and have him thoroughly review this situation. The last thing we 
want to do is to discriminate against anybody. But, at the same time, I would like to point out that the 
board acts from a position of responsibility. It is very easy to act against the public interest on an 
emotional question when it is completely irresponsible, when you have no responsibility. The board has 
a responsibility to protect the public. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the member that we 
are acting in co-ordination with the Canadian Council of Motor Transport Administrators right across 
Canada. These rules are made in conjunction with other jurisdictions right across this country and we try 
to relate at least to the majority of them as closely as we can. 
 

Higher Tuition Fees for Foreign Students 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 
Minister of Continuing Education. In view of the statements by Hugh Springer, Secretary General of the 
Association of Commonwealth Universities that 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1126 

growing numbers of universities around the world are charging higher tuition fees for out-of-country and 
foreign students. I would ask the minister if the universities of Regina and Saskatchewan are considering 
similar policies? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan make their own policy with respect to tuition charges. However, I am aware 
that neither board is considering charging discriminatory fees for foreign students. We do not have that 
situation in the province at the moment and I am ware that neither board is considering the possibility of 
implementing such a thing. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Is the minister aware that most of the other provinces in Canada are charging extra 
fees for out-of-province students? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that a number of universities in provinces which are 
governed by Conservative governments have implemented such a policy. It is not my feeling, 
personally, that such a policy is fair. I believe that the presence of foreign students in our universities 
enriches the lives and studies of our university students here in Saskatchewan and I will not be 
encouraging our universities to pursue such a policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I will put myself in the hands of the House. Are you prepared to accept an 
answer to a question? 
 

Delays in Payments on Hog Shipments 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member for 
Souris-Cannington asked a question in my absence, in the Assembly, on Monday. The Premier took 
notice. The question was: why is there a delay in payment on a shipment of hogs out of the province for 
slaughter and what steps are being taken to resolve the problem? The response from the hog commission 
is that under normal circumstances the delay in payment to producers doesn’t exceed eight days. On 
some of the shipments of live hogs to the United States there have been delays of up to one month. The 
reason for the delays is that truckers or assemblers fail to send the shipping manifest directly to the hog 
marketing commission. 
 
The hog commission is aware of the problem of the problem. It has contracted the truckers and 
assemblers in the hope that by the contract they will respond. If it becomes more serious or continues the 
hog commission reports they will begin to penalize the truckers who do not send the manifest for them. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — When was the last time the hog marketing commission operated under 
normal conditions, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get into a debate here on the operations of the 
hog marketing commission. I think it is doing an outstanding service for the hog producers. 
 
During the estimates of agriculture I’ll be glad to debate the hog policy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan compared any time with any other province. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1127 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Death of Archbishop Romero 
 
MR. P. PREBBLE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I am sure other 
members in the House will join me in expressing our sorrow at the death of Archbishop Oscar Romero, 
who was brutally murdered in the chapel in which he was preaching two days ago in El Salvador. 
 
As members will know, Archbishop Romero was a champion of the rights of the poor and the 
oppressed. In the midst of the operation of a repressive military government in his home country of El 
Salvador, Archbishop Romero spoke out courageously in defence of human rights. He publicly 
condemned the killing, the torture and the arrest without trial of members of the public and of his fellow 
priests. He criticized the El Salvador government for being party to such actions. In light of his 
courageous public statements Archbishop Romero had his life threatened on numerous occasions prior 
to his death. 
 
He was a staunch advocate of social reform. He established a hospital for terminally ill cancer patients in 
his home country. He was respected as a man of courage and moderation. In 1979 Archbishop Romero 
was one of the nominees for the Nobel Peace Prize. 
 
I am sure all members will join me in expressing our sorrow and in communicating our condolences to 
the Catholic church in Saskatchewan and in El Salvador at the loss of a man who provided such a great 
source of hope, peace and justice for the world. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I would like to join with the hon. member. I don’t think the 
impression should be left that Archbishop Romero was partisan in his country. I believe he opposed 
injustice whether it came from the left or the right and he made that quite clear in his country. As I say, I 
don’t believe that his fundamental beliefs were in any way partisan. I join with the hon. member in 
extending condolences to, not only the Catholic church but all people who subscribe to the beliefs of the 
Archbishop. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — VOTE 32 
 
Item 1 Continued 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Minister, I’d like to spend a few minutes on salaries 
within the Department of Health. Page 51 of the estimates, item 1, quotes in general administration an 
average salary of $21,095 overall. The average increase from last year to this year is $2,793, an increase 
of 15.26 per cent. What I’d like you to supply me with, Mr. Minister, is the number of employees in 
each classification, last year’s salary and their total wage increase including cost of living adjustments 
and increments. What I’d like is the lowest increase and the highest increase. 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Is the hon. member asking me for salary and increases 
for everyone in the administration — clerks and everyone? Secretaries? 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1128 

MRS. DUNCAN: — The 51 positions. I don’t want their names or anything. I want, for example, so 
many class 3 stenos or whatever, in that department. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K. Joe Blow received so much last year, so much this year and this was the 
increase. You want each individual person. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — If you have three employees under the same job description, I don’t really want 
their . . . 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We can supply that for you but it will take some time. I’ll have to give that to you. 
We don’t have that here . . . (inaudible) . . . Oh, much before the session ends unless the session ends 
tomorrow. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, in breaking down the average salaries and average increases and 
percentage of increases. It was interesting to note that under 11, health promotion, they got a grand 
increase of 0.45 per cent as compared to an average increase of 21.72 per cent in item 5. How do you 
decide the increases? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think if the member checks on subvote 5 and then turns to subvote 11, you will see 
that in subvote 5 we have reduction of one staff, and in subvote 11 there’s an increase of four staff. That 
will account basically for the difference of the increases. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — That was taken into consideration when we were calculating the average salaries 
and average increases over the salaries paid last year. That was taken into consideration, Mr. Minister. 
What we asked you was how do you arrive at different increases for different employees? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Basically there are two things involved in the increases. One is increments and the 
other is negotiated contract by the unions. Depending on where you are on the scale, some people get 
increments and others don’t. The increments amount to about between 4 per cent and 5 per cent, I 
believe. I think if you calculate that you will find that those are the two main reasons for the differences 
plus the transfer of staff. Now I’m not certain that when the staff were transferred from one branch to 
another their salaries may have been considerably lower than the people who originally held those 
positions. So those things would have to be taken into consideration. Your two main things are 
increments and the union contract. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — I’d like to now turn to the annual report ’78-’79. On page XIII (health), under 
health services expenditures you list a total of $419,605,618. 
 
Now according to public accounts, the actual expenditures in the Department of Health for the 1978-79 
period is $417,040,622.02. Can you give me the reasons for the apparent discrepancy? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Could the member tell me the number of the public accounts that you quoted from 
please? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Volume two? But what number? There must be a number in the 
public account. O.K., ’78-’79. What was the figure you quoted me — 417 million? 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re experiencing some difficulty here in trying to reconcile those numbers. I think 
we’ll have to have a look at the capital at the bottom of the annual 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1129 

report of $1.4 million, etc., and the capital for the heritage fund at $2.9 million and see if we can’t come 
up with the correct figure. But my officials are working on it right now. Perhaps we could go on to 
something else while they are working trying to reconcile those figures. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s fine, Mr. Minister. In the estimates for 1978-79 the appropriations voted on 
by this House totalled $435,626,010, of which an actual amount of $417,040,622 was spent with a 
surplus in the Department of Health of voted-on funds of $18,585,347. could you tell me where that 
extra surplus money went? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That went back to the consolidated fund. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — How would you justify putting it back in the consolidated fund, Mr. Minister, 
when for the Saskatchewan health services program you had a surplus of $10,600,000 which was 
already voted on for grants to existing facilities, and you put that back into the consolidated fund and 
probably 95 per cent of the hospitals across Saskatchewan, in 1978-79, experienced deficit budgeting? 
 
I might say too, that I was interested to read that on Tuesday, March 24, 1970, the order of the day 
called for Resolution No. 15, moved by Mr. Smishek and seconded by Mr. Blakeney: 
 

That this Assembly strongly disapproves of the successive modifications to the Saskatchewan 
Hospital Services Plan which have changed it from a plan which paid all hospital operating costs 
for insured services to a plan which pays grants towards operating costs. 

 
Now that was in 1970. To me it would appear these conditions still exit today, ten years after Mr. 
Blakeney seconded this motion condemning the former Liberal government. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — An explanation as to why the underexpenditures and why the money was transferred 
to the consolidated fund. In 1978-79, there was some difficulty in getting certain programs under way 
and also capital projects. We did not expend as much on the capital projects as we had anticipated so the 
moneys that were turned back to the consolidated fund were not moneys that were originally voted on in 
the House, here, for SHSP grants to hospitals in the operating sense. These were grants that were voted 
on, on capital projects, which capital projects did not get off the ground as quickly as we had 
anticipated. Also, some other programs that — well I guess most of them were capital. We had one from 
the Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan, the impaired driver treatment program, which was 
delayed and that is why the money was transferred back to the consolidated fund. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Which money are you talking about? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The $18 million that you referred to. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — That would account for about $8 million of that. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I will read those to you. Psychiatric services, regional psychiatric centre, delayed, 
$343,000; alcoholism commission, $500,000; SHSP (Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan), University 
Hospital delay expansion, $3 million; level 4 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1130 

expansion delayed, $3.5 million; savings in out-of-province hospital costs, $1.5 million; other delayed 
projects, for example, Prince Albert Community Clinic, the Red Cross, psychiatric (North Battleford) 
$2.6 million; grants to hospitals in construction delays, $1.2 million; regeneration, behind schedule 
(that’s I believe, the regeneration here in Regina) $4.5 million; clinical services fund, the college of 
medicine, $407,000. That should give you a total of around $18 million. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — What I’m asking you now, is the $10.6 million that was voted on under 
Saskatchewan Hospital Services plan to provide a grant? You talk about regeneration of hospitals. I 
think University Hospital and regeneration of the two Regina hospitals come under separate votes and 
are not included in this $10.6 million. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Would the member please elaborate a little further on what $10 million you are 
talking about now? Before it was $18 million. I gave you those. Are you referring to something other 
than what is included in the $18 million? 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Your estimates for 1978-79 were underexpended by $18,585,347 of which $10.6 
million was voted on for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. The remaining $8 million or so 
comes from the other things you. . . 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I have read those to you in SHSP there was the University Hospital delay; there was 
the level 4 expansion delay; there were savings in out-of-province hospital costs; there were other 
delayed projects — and I read those to you — and grants to hospitals. I think if you add those up they 
will add up to approximately $10 million. I read those to you and the total that I gave to you was 
$18,585,000 — the exact figure that you gave to me. In that $18.5 million, there was approximately $10 
million is SHSP. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Would you give me a breakdown of the $10.6 million again? I’m not disputing the 
$18 million plus. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — University Hospital delay (capital), $3 million; level 4 expansion delayed (that was 
rural hospitals) $3.5 million; savings in out-of-province costs, $1.5 million; other delayed projects like 
the Red Cross, psychiatric (North Battleford) $2.6 million; grants to hospital construction delay, $1.2 
million. That should give you about $11.8 million I believe and you probably did not include the 
construction delays, the last one I gave you of $1.2 million so you are at the $10.6 million. 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Minister, I would just like to follow her question a little 
bit dealing with the capital grants areas. Once you have agreed that a hospital is to go ahead and you set 
up a fund for capital grants, do you not set them up in a manner that they are carried forward into the 
next year if they are not expended this year, because the project is to go ahead? Do you not set up that 
up as a capital project and the grant held in abeyance? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It is my understanding that we estimate our cash flow requirements each year and if 
we underexpend, as we did in 1978-79, it goes back to the consolidated fund. We then re-estimate our 
cash flow requirements in the following year. 
 
MR. SWAN: — This seems like a very nice way of patting yourself on the back. You could set up any 
figure in health saying, we are going to give $25 million or whatever to 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1131 

hospital expansion, then by merely not going ahead with it you’ve taken credit this year for a big gift for 
capital grants and next year you take the same credit. You can do it time after time. Is this not a bit 
deceitful? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I can inform the member and I am sure he is fully aware of it, that is not a policy of 
this government and I don’t think it is a policy of most governments. There are unforeseen conditions 
that one cannot always anticipate — there may be a strike as we experienced a few years ago; weather 
conditions could have some effect. I think in some projects we are considerably ahead of schedule and it 
just so happened in these . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, in some we are ahead. We can show you 
in some cases where we have been ahead. If you have something to say you can stand up and make your 
point known and I will listen to it. Otherwise I will answer the member sitting behind you. 
 
It is, Mr. Chairman, not the policy of this government to put into the estimates things we feel we cannot 
accomplish. We feel that generally speaking when you look at your health estimates you will find over 
the years that they have been fairly close. Sure, there may be some years where they have 
underexpended and there are some years they may have overexpended to some extent. But I think on 
balance the officials have done a pretty good job in making known to us what we could accomplish for 
those particular years. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Under general administration in 1978-79 estimated you underexpended by about 
$45,000. What areas had been over estimated? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I would like your diligent attention on what I am going to be saying 
now. I have the answer for the last question but I would like to ask the Chairman to possibly rule on 
what we are doing here today. It is my understanding that I am here to answer for estimates of the 
current fiscal year. A number of questions I have answered from the ’77-’78 and ’78-’79 estimates are 
clearly two or three years in the past. Those questions, Mr. Chairman, in my opinion, should be directed 
to public accounts. We are here to scrutinize the estimates for the current fiscal year. I have, up until 
now, answered them. Well, all right there are a few questions — I don’t mind answering them. But if we 
are going to be going back saying what did you do 10 years ago? What did you do 6, 7 years ago and we 
are going to have to look those up, that’s more a question which should be directed to public accounts. 
 
In answer to your question for this one, There were savings in travel and sustenance of $24,500. There 
were savings in contractual services (I don’t have the details of them here) of $28,800. Pardon me, I 
think there’s an error there. That doesn’t add up, I’m going to have to check with my officials on this 
one. Yes, it does add up. I didn’t see the parenthesis. There were savings in travel and sustenance of 
$24,500. There were savings in contractual of $28,800. Then we had an overexpenditure on — right —
telephones of $7,500 and other miscellaneous variances of $1,356 for a total of $44,444. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Just on the question that the hon. minister raised about questions relating to 
other years, I think the general practice has been in this committee to answer questions relating to other 
years, within reason. I think all members realize the answers to the questions that you would ask about 
other years are easily found in the public accounts of the province of Saskatchewan. If you were inclined 
to look them up you could find them there. If something comes to mind and the minister has a readily 
available answer, just to keep the committee rolling along in the interests of 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1132 

brotherhood, etc., we probably would want to try to see that all questions were answered. That’s the way 
I think the committee has operated in the past. If it’s O.K. with everybody, I think it’s the best way to 
proceed. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll comply with the request of the member. I am on 
public accounts so I can get that information. If he wants to stick to the estimates of this year, that’s fine. 
We’ll go item by item. 
 
Item 1, I would like a detailed breakdown of personal services, permanent positions, other personal 
services. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, for permanent positions as indicated there is about a $142,000 increase. Those 
were for increments and adjustments. There was one position added and one deleted. There was 
provision made for an 8.5 per cent increase. The added position was to the associate deputy minister’s 
position. Pardon me, there was an added associate deputy minister’s position and there was a deletion of 
an executive assistant to the minister. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right — after I took the job. 
Other personal services — increments and adjustments, changes added. There are 11 months — deleted 
1.5 months. There was a research officer 3 converted to a clerk-steno 4 and also provision of 8.5 per cent 
increase. Those are for the temporary and nonpermanent positions. There were some other expenses — 
an increase of $24,600. Major items in the other expenses were: consultant fees, telephones, office 
supplies and some other miscellaneous. I guess that’s about it. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Minister, under other personal services — we’ve always had a 
hard time understanding (I think the employees of every department of government have a hard time 
understanding) why they are on temporary help for so many years? In some cases, there are people who 
have been with the government in excess of four years and they are still listed under temporary help. I 
wonder how many employees you have under other personal services. How many people do you have in 
there that are listed as temporary help? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — 5.2 
 
MR. LARTER: — Could you tell me how long they have been listed as temporary staff? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — It varies, but less than a year. 
 
MR. LARTER: — In the 5.2, they’re all less than a year? Will any of these 5.2 be taken into permanent 
staff this year? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — They have the option of applying for permanent positions. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Minister of Health, who is also responsible for 
the alcoholism commission. Last year I request the Danny Fisher Centre. I assume you are going to fund 
the centre again this year. Could you advise how much will be spent on it? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — About $28,000. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Minister, there is considerable concern in this 
province about anesthetists. Can you tell me how many anesthetists were trained in Saskatchewan this 
past year? Would you know that? 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1133 

MR. ROLFES: — We don’t have that answer right now but they are looking it up for me. Do you have 
another question you would like to direct while we find the answer for you? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — When looking that up, perhaps you could tell me how many anesthetists left 
Saskatchewan; how many came into Saskatchewan from other areas? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, my officials tell me that with the information they have here they 
can’t find that. Somebody has to go out and make some phone calls to try to get that figure for you. With 
the information we have here we can’t determine how many there are. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well as soon as you can get your phone calls I would like to know this because, I’m 
quoting from an article by Dr. John Parker who is on the executive of the Canadian Anesthetists Society, 
“the situation in Saskatchewan last August was critical.” I want to know if this has improved. He goes 
on in this article, Mr. Minister of Health to say, “Many of the anesthetists in this province (and I know 
this to be correct) are working somewhere in the neighborhood of 70 to 80 hours a week; some up as 
high as 90 hours.” Now certainly to me that seems a very dangerous medical practice. I am wondering 
what you are doing to rectify this? These people have the lives of people within their hands. How many 
cases a day are these anesthetists expected to do? How many hours of the day are they working? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, just a few comments on that. My officials have met with the hospitals 
in the past two weeks. The hospitals have indicated that the situation is fairly stable, although they 
would like to see more anesthetists. We are carrying on a fairly active recruitment. Certainly the 
recruitment that is going on right now looks pretty good. The establishment grant which we announced 
just recently seems to be attracting the attention of a number of people. We expect to have some fairly 
good results from the recruitment and advertising that has been done. More graduates certainly will be 
coming out this year. We hope to attract a number of those but I wouldn’t want the member to take from 
what I’ve said that a year from now our situation in Saskatchewan will be completely satisfactory. I 
think he knows the situation, not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada and North America and England 
— that anesthetists are very hard to come by. But in order for us to attract these individuals we have 
established this establishment grant, and I think the results of that will be very favourable when I speak 
to you again next year in estimates. 
 
In answer to your question on the hours of work, I think the member knows that the anesthetists work 
from a fee schedule. It’s not the Minister of Health who determines how many hours an anesthetist will 
work. That is determined by the anesthetist. If they work 90 hours a week, or 80 hours a week I think I 
would be somewhat concerned, but I’m sure that many of us put in 60 or 70 hours a week, and I’m not 
overly concerned about that. In answer to your specific question, I don’t determine the hours. The 
anesthetist, himself, determines that. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I think there’s a difference in what you do for 100 hours and what an 
anesthetist does who is in charge of the lives of X number of people. I understand they’re looking after 
four or five cases at one time, and I don’t think they can be safeguarding the lives of these people when 
they are working up to 90 hours. I don’t think your efficiency rate is very good, but I won’t say at what 
hour by the way, but certainly at 90 hours, Mr. Minister, neither mine nor anyone else’s is high — and I 
think 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1134 

it’s a terrible shame if we’re having anesthetists work that long period of time. 
 
In regard to your $25,000 attraction grant (or whatever you would like to call it) this article points out, 
by a member of the Canadian Anesthetist’s Association, that it is the disparity in the wages between 
them and the specialists which is causing the problems. Probably this is why these people are working 
long, and you should use your money to pay them better. You know if there are not enough people in the 
market, I think the way to attract them there is to make sure that when they train themselves, and when 
they are operating, that with a reasonable amount of hours of work they can earn the income they think 
is reasonable for their years of training. I don’t think your $25,000 grant is going to be the thing that 
solves your problem. You know, Mr. Minister, (and I’ve raised the situation with you) of an anesthetist 
in this province who has a certificate of specialization throughout Western Europe (and I can prove that 
certificate, Mr. Minister). The man in this province of Saskatchewan is paid at 80 per cent of the rate of 
the other anesthetists. I think you should look at your qualifications. You should look at your payment 
schedules and take immediate action to refrain from having these people working 80-90 hours a week. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, just a few comments on that. I don’t want to get into a heated debate 
with the member opposite but I think the member opposite should know and I think he does know, if my 
memory doesn’t fail me, in my discussions with him I indicated I did not set the standards; that those 
standards were set by another body. The Royal College of Canada set the standards as to whether or not 
someone qualifies as a specialist. I don’t set those standards. If the member would like to put a motion in 
this House that the Minister of Health be empowered to do that, I would look at that possibility. 
Secondly, as I indicated, I don’t determine the hours for an anesthetist. If the member opposite wishes to 
put a motion forward again that the Minister of Health consider establishing limited hours for 
anesthetists, again, I would look at that — maybe favorably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now have some numbers for the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. We will have four 
graduates this year coming out of the program. We have 18 people in training positions right now. I am 
told that there are 26 specialists fully qualified in the province. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — How many left last year? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The reason I didn’t give that to you is because we still haven’t got the answer. I gave 
you the answers I had so far. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I’ll allow you the time to get the answers but the thing I just want (and I don’t want 
to get into a heated debate with you either) to point out to you, and point it out very clearly so that you 
won’t forget it, is I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan think they’re getting the service they deserve 
when an anesthetist has to work 80 to 90 hours, and as I say, attend to many cases at the time, I’ve 
talked to these people. I know this is their feeling. You are the Minister of Health in this province. I 
think if you’re going to give the good medicare you tell everybody in this province we have, then you’d 
better get on your horse and solve this problem so it is not existing next year when you and I debate this 
issue again. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I do want to respond to that because I know for certain if the member 
for Indian Head-Wolseley will give me his word of honor that if I bring in some legislation which would 
limit the hours of work for anesthetists in this 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1135 

province — that they would only be able to work, let’s say 50 hours a week or 45 hours a week — he 
would support that kind of legislation . . . You can’t have it both ways. You can’t tell the Minister of 
Health, look, don’t allow the anesthetists to work 60 or 70 or 80 hours a week. Do something about that. 
Those are the words you have used. Because what you’re saying to me is that they don’t have the right 
to work 60, 70, or 80 hours a week if that’s what they want to do. The average income last year of an 
anesthetist in this province was $67,400. That is without the increases we have made to them in the 
interim. I would certainly expect the average income of anesthetists next year will probably be about 
$75,000. I don’t think I’ll be out very far. Now then, you have to determine . . . Well, you can work that 
out. If he says they worked 70 hours a week, you work that out. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister of Health, what I am saying to you is this: O.K., they made $67,000, 
which is the average wage last year. How many hours did they have to work to earn that wage? How 
many patients did they have to look after? I want you to come to a settlement with these people so they 
can work a normal number of hours and make enough money from that so they will stay in 
Saskatchewan and serve our people. That is what we want. That is simply put. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I just can’t let that go, because just a few minutes ago he said to me, 
anesthetists in this province work 70, 80 and 90 hours a week. Now you ask me to determine how much 
that is an hour. I’m saying to you that I gave you the salaries, the average income, and you can easily 
establish what their hourly wage was. What I am simply saying to you is that I don’t determine that. I 
am sure there would be some anesthetists who would make $100,000 a year and they would still want to 
work the 70 to 80 hours a week. In many instances it is not the finances, not the finances at all. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They don’t like golf, Herman? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Maybe not. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I’ll take the mathematics of my colleague here who says it is $18 an hour, which I 
think is less than a plumber. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. A.W. ENGEL (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Chairman, I might explain to the group which 
is here that this is the committee of the whole and the Department of Health is being questioned on their 
estimates. The group . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, if I can get back to introducing my 
guests. The department of co-ops led by John Dubnick and Roma Lafreniere have brought in a group 
from Coronach, Saskatchewan. They are Grade 11 and Grade 12 students. They are accompanied by 
their principal, Don Beattie and John Berquist. I would like to welcome them here and I hope they enjoy 
the questioning this afternoon as much as we do. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Committee of Finance Continued 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, I ask the Minister of Health, what is your 
policy in regard to Saskatchewan air ambulance out of the province? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — $1 a mile both ways outside the province. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1136 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Then can you explain this to me, Mr. Minister. I think there is no 
communication at all among your staff because when I was talking to the doctor in charge of 
Saskatchewan air ambulance, he said there is no policy in this regard. A panel decides because 
sometimes, in certain cases, we’ll send them to Rochester with no charge and we’ll send them to 
Vancouver with no charge. A panel decides each individual case on its own. Now there is a discrepancy 
here. Would you please explain this? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I think there is no inconsistency about what we have as a policy. 
There are exceptions to the one I have indicated to you. The letter to Clifford Watkins indicated some of 
that. It says, where the service is normally provided in Saskatchewan and because the doctor is not 
available, or the hospital unit can’t accommodate the patient due to workload, the normal in-province 
rate is charged if an out-of-province flight is required. So I will repeat that — where the service is 
normally provided in Saskatchewan and because the doctor is not available or the hospital unit can’t 
accommodate the patient due to workload, the normal in-province rate is charged if an out-of-province 
flight is required. Secondly, public assistance cases are not charged. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Then, Mr. Minister, what is your policy if there is no doctor in this province who 
can perform an operation of this sort? If it’s impossible, what is your policy? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — They pay $1 a mile. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Has there ever been a case where a person has been flown to say Vancouver, to 
Rochester, with no charge? Or any place out of province? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Are you saying from 1905 to the present day? You say, has there ever been a case? 
That would take a lot of research. I don’t know. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, Mr. Minister. I will say just in the last five years. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — No, there has not been. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, I have another question .What are you plans to encourage 
specialists to come to this province? Also what are your plans to keep the ones we have from leaving? 
Have you got any plans? Tell us! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to report to the member the number of specialists in this 
province is not decreasing but increasing. My officials say they can provide you with those numbers. We 
have established an establishment grant of $25,000 over a three-year period. In this particular instance 
we are going to be putting the money in the area of anesthetists because that’s the immediate one where 
we have some difficulties. I want to increase the number of anesthetists in our province. We are also 
attracting a number of specialists to teaching posts, in conjunction with the college of medicine. I’m also 
informed that in some of our other areas where we had some shortages and still do have, the shortage is 
decreasing. So it’s not as the member would want us to believe, that the aggregate number of specialists 
is decreasing in this province. It’s the other way around. It’s increasing. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1137 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, I say to the minister that we have a really good medicare plan in 
this province, but it just failed in one place. They've done exactly the same things as they did to the hog 
market people in this province. When you put hog marketing boards in you never consulted the hog 
raiser. When you’re dealing with medicare you have not consulted the doctors. I met with a group of 
doctors here not too long ago, and this is serious, Mr. Minister. He tells me on Christmas Day he was 
called out. What he received for his call was $18. The next day his fridge quit on him. He had to call in a 
man to fix it. It was $2 for the material and $25 labour. The man took a two-week course on how to put 
freon in a fridge. You think this is a joke, you people, the way you treat our specialists. Sure, I agree 
with you, Mr. Minister, that you brought all kinds of specialists in, but what kind. 
 
I’m going to tell you an incident. I’ll take you back to 15 years ago. W had a Dr. Korn from England 
brought to the University of Saskatoon. If it hasn’t been for this very rare specialist I would not have my 
second child who is 15 years old today. But he stayed here a few years. He said, I can’t cope with it any 
longer. He’s in B.C. Now we have another coincidence in our family. My daughter-in-law has the same 
problem .She doctors with Dr. McHattie. He left. My daughter-in-law says, where do I get another 
specialist? And she’s been trying and trying to get an appointment with another one. She can’t get it in 
Regina or Saskatoon. Now she has to go back to Colorado where she was born and raised to get them to 
perform this operation. You say you are bringing specialists in. It’s a bunch of tommyrot. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a few comments. I think the member was 
referring to obstetrical specialists in the city of Regina. I believe that’s what you were referring to, were 
you not? Yes — we’re looking up some figures right now to answer your particular comments in this 
regard. I have some concern, Mr. Speaker, about the wide-sweeping statement the member made. I think 
I can quote him when he said, oh, yes, we’ve got lots of specialists in this province but what kind? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m somewhat amazed at the member, that he would make such a sweeping accusation 
against our specialists. I’ll stack our specialists against any other specialists in this country. 
 
Again, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to make any comments on some of the other things that he has 
stated. If he gives me the particular cases I will certainly look into those, but on Regina thing . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, in regard to the specialists: obstetricians, gynecologists, the member was referring to — 
in 1975, we had 23; in 1979, we have 28 — an increase of five, or 21.8 per cent in this province. 
 
If the member has a particular problem I wish he would take it up with my associate deputy Duane 
Adams. We will see if we can get an appointment for your daughter here in Regina. Maybe there are 
some difficulties but I am sure that we can be of some assistance to you in that regard. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now, it pleases me that you are bringing people in. 
You say you are, but 28 more, or 38 more, or whatever it is, is not enough or we wouldn’t have to be 
flying people out of the province. Where are the specialists who could have sewed this person’s thumb 
on? And there are more; I’ve got several more 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1138 

instances on thumbs that are coming to this House. Why isn’t there a specialist here instead of in 
Edmonton who could perform this operation? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, just a very brief comment to the member. I think the statement I 
made was that the number of specialists has been increasing in this province (I think, fairly 
dramatically). It is true that in certain areas we do not have the specialists, but neither do some of the 
other provinces. For example, pain treatment — people are flown into our University Hospital in 
Saskatoon for pain treatment because it is the most up-to-date pain clinic in Canada. Sure, if someone 
wants microsurgery as the individual to whom the member was referring the other day needs — yes, he 
may have to go to Edmonton. In some of these areas they are so specialized and so expensive that each 
province does not go into them. Their residents will come to ours and we will go to theirs. I think that is 
using money wisely, and I don’t see anything wrong with that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. J.L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a question for the 
minister which I was going to direct to him at a later time, but I think the member for Arm River and the 
member before him for Indian Head-Wolseley, raised a point which is relevant to the question I would 
like to raise at this time. 
 
The free enterprise system in North America and throughout the world is dependent in North America 
and throughout the world. It’s dependent and very flexible when it comes to demand and supply. What I 
am saying is that in terms of increased demand it creates pressures to increase the supply. The supply of 
doctors has been, or can be, somewhat compared to the supply and demand situation in North America, 
in my belief. What I’d like to ask the minister, in view of this alleged shortage and actual shortage 
throughout Canada of doctors in various specialities, would the minister be willing to look into the 
doctor shortage in Saskatchewan and in so doing have his officials investigate the possibilities of 
ultimately increasing the number of medical graduates in Saskatchewan, and in Canada generally. What 
I am saying, Mr. Minister, is would it be possible for your department officials to investigate having 
more control over the college of physicians so that we could have good quality physicians and 
subsequent to that, specialists in larger numbers for our province? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, the questions raised by the member for Regina North-West certainly, 
I think, get at the crux of the problem, or some of the problems that we have in Saskatchewan and across 
Canada. It is my hope, Mr. Chairman, that the Hall review of health services will come to grips with 
some of those things, and they may. 
 
In answer to the question that he put — generally speaking, in Canada there is no shortage of doctors. In 
fact, we have, I think, as we have in Saskatchewan, too many general practitioners. The more general 
practitioners you have the more work they certainly will have to generate if they work for fee-for-service 
in order to maintain their level of income. The problem we have is distribution, and that is to try and get 
doctors into rural Saskatchewan. Other provinces have similar difficulties, and have managed some 
success in our establishment grants in rural Saskatchewan. We are experiencing some success in that 
regard. 
 
I give Hudson Bay as an example. Hudson Bay has three young doctors now plus two that were already 
there, and from my conversations with the people there, they are very pleased with the doctors that they 
have. So we are experiencing some success. We do have some difficulties or some shortages in some 
specialities such as radiologists, anesthetists, and psychiatrists. Certainly we are experiencing some 
shortages in that 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1139 

area. But that’s not Saskatchewan alone. That problem is in Canada and generally speaking in North 
America. So we don’t have that problem just here. What we need to do is attract people to go into those 
short supply speciality areas. I suppose one way it to make the fee schedule or the income they receive 
more attractive, but it is a fact that in some areas it is very attractive and you still cannot attract people. 
They simply don’t want to go into that particular area. I don’t know how we will address ourselves to 
that problem. 
 
I will say to the member for Regina North-West, we have increased a number of positions of graduates 
in our training schools. The allotment has been increased. 
 
Now the difficult problem which he raised with me was, namely, would I be willing to take over more 
control in determining the quality or the standard of doctors in Saskatchewan and to determine how 
many doctors would be able to go into medical college as such. I will not give a categorical yes to that at 
this particular time. It is something which I have said I think the Hall report will address itself to. But I 
will tell the member (and it’s no secret) that we have had a number of meetings with the SMA and with 
the college of physicians and surgeons on numerous topics. We will be continuing our discussion in this 
particular area and I think it is essential that I, as minister, take into consideration the views of the 
doctors of this province. It doesn’t necessarily mean that I will always agree with their views, but I think 
they should have a significant input into the decision in that particular area. 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Minister, I think I was misunderstood there. The question should be clearly 
from the point of view of increasing the quality and not in terms of shedding an ill shadow on the quality 
of doctors that exist in the province now, but the quantity, along with the quality in terms of graduates 
for the specialities. If the government had more of a direct control over the college of physicians, could 
we not provide more openings in the faculty of medicine for students so that by increasing the quantity 
we would also come out with more specialists down the road when they were trained? Perhaps having 
officials looking at the spin-off programs which may be created to encourage graduates to go into 
specialties at the hospital level may be advantageous. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I think I should make a correction here. When I was referring to the 
SMA and the college of physicians and surgeons, certainly they would have to be involved. I should 
have referred to the college of medicine. It is the college of medicine, really, which determines the 
allocation of the number of people who will be in medicine. Also they determine who enters and who 
doesn’t. 
 
I think the member does make a point that one could control how many people you would want to 
graduate in a particular speciality. If you were the one who was determining who would go into the 
college and how many would go in. At this particular time I do not determine that. I think the question 
should be directed to the Minister of Continuing Education rather than to myself. I will say to the 
member that I would like to sit down with the Minster of Continuing Education and see if we can’t work 
out something that would be mutually agreeable to him and me and possibly the college of medicine. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — In response to the member for Arm River, Mr. Minister, you indicated that the 
province was in need of several classifications of specialists. I think you enumerated a couple of those: 
anesthetists, radiologists and psychiatrists. Is there any other speciality of which the province is also 
short or could use more? 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1140 

MR. ROLFES: — I think the only other one that we would probably add would be psychiatrist. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you have noticed a change let’s say in the last five years 
of the specialists being fewer and fewer in the four fields that you enumerated? Do you follow what I’m 
saying? Are you having more problems in the last three or four or five years attracting specialists to the 
province? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Generally speaking, the answer would be no. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The problem then would be that in particular specialties over a long period of time, 
that five years, we have experienced the same problem. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I would think that not only we have experienced some difficulties in that area. I’m 
simply saying it’s not just us. In some of these areas it’s simply that they’re not that attractive. An 
anesthetist, for example — administering anesthesia is not all that attractive and we have difficulty 
trying to get people in. We, I think, finally have come to the conclusion that we have to possibly use 
some other means of trying to attract people in that particular area and that’s why we have established 
the establishment grant. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I take it then Mr. Minister that — do other provinces, other jurisdictions pay 
approximately the same amount of money for an anesthetist let’s say, as the province of Saskatchewan 
or for a psychiatrist as does the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I can answer you for the anesthetists and our schedule is I think the best in the West. 
Our schedule for anesthetists is the best in the four western provinces so I can give you that answer right 
now. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — You’re telling me that you believe that an, additional $8,000 per year will attract, 
you are hoping, will attract those anesthetists? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — You are referring to the establishment grant? It’s a grant, not an income, so it’s tax 
free . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, and we’re hoping that that will help us in attracting more 
anesthetists. Right. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, you’ll recall about a year ago I 
brought the then Minister of Health to his knees in the interests of cleaning up the cancer-care program 
in Saskatchewan, and we did, in fact, bring in some cancer foundation legislation. Can you indicate to 
me at this time if both Blair clinic and Saskatoon clinic are operating with a full complement of medical 
professionals? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We just signalled one of the people to come down because it’s in her particular area 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . May not be a bad idea. Well, you see, the problem is I don’t want to go 
from memory. Well, I tell you, 99 per cent of the time I probably would be correct but it’s that 1 per cent 
that bothers me. We want to be absolutely correct on these . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, no, 
you’re talking to me now so you shouldn’t ask that question. We’ll have that answer for you right away. 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. You indicated in your response to a question of mine . . . 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1141 

MR. ROLFES: — I think the member for Souris-Cannington has . . . 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Can I ask one more question while you’re waiting? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — O.K. Sure. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Does the Saskatoon clinic yet have a permanent director? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased to tell the member that we have been very 
fortunate to attract from the province of Ontario a very noted oncologist who will be taking on his duties 
on April 1. He is probably the leading Canadian oncologist there is. He is a former Saskatchewanian. 
We’re very pleased that Dr. Klassen is coming back. As I indicated, he will be taking up his duties as 
medical director of the Saskatoon clinic April 1. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I commend you on your choice. I understand it was in fact the automony of the 
foundation that attracted him. Under the foundation legislation there was provision made, I think for a 
seven-made medical advisory board. Has that yet been appointed and approved or whatever? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I think the member probably is aware we do not appoint 
this advisory body — the foundation does. But the people on it are: Dr. Clayton Crosby, from Regina; 
Dr. Michael Poon, from Regina; Dr. Barclay from Saskatoon; Dr. Alexander from Saskatoon; Dr. 
MacRae from Regina; Dr. Moore from Regina; Dr. McSheffrey from Saskatoon; Dr. Twanow from 
Melfort; and there is a family physician from Swift Current. We don’t have the name of that individual 
at the moment. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Would you answer my original question which was the complement to various 
clinics? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Two vacancies in Saskatoon, none in Regina. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — How long have these vacancies existed? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Less than a year. They are presently filled by temporary people. We hope to have 
them filled by October. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — How many applicants have you had to fill these two positions, and what are the 
positions? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Medical oncologists, and probably about half a dozen. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I want to switch briefly (I’m finished with cancer) to one other thing. Seven 
hundred and fifty thousand dollars was in last year’s budget for a health research fund. Can you tell me 
how you spent that $750,000? What did you research? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The money has been given to the board. It was given to the board in November or 
December of 1979. The board has invested that money. They have received many applications. They 
expect to make allocations within two months. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1142 

MR. BERNTSON: — At the same treatment which the 750 in this budget are going to get? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think the member will appreciate that we did not have a board last year on the first 
day of the fiscal year. We certainly had to establish a board and had to do our consultations with various 
groups who were interested in it. I think it was worthwhile to make absolutely certain those 
consultations were done and were done correctly. In this fiscal year they will get their money on April 1, 
I believe. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Who is on that board, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Do you have another question while my officials are looking this up? 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — O.K. This again has to do with research. About a year ago Alberta announced a 
$300 million research centre, and I think it was funded by a $3 million grant each year thereafter out of 
the heritage fund. This is a rather sizeable contribution to health research in Alberta. Could you indicate 
whether or not we have to date lost any of our top-notch research people to the Alberta cause? Or even 
our less than top-notch research people? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Well, I don’t know about the less than top-notch. My officials indicate that we have 
not lost any top-notch research people. I do want to indicate to the member also that we are celebrating 
Celebrate Saskatchewan this year as Alberta is celebrating theirs. My understanding is that they have a 
fund for celebrating Alberta which is many times ours and I think we are getting a much bigger band for 
our buck than Alberta will be. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Chairman, I had some questions I intended to raise under item 35 — MCIC, 
but it seems to me that the slow pace of the opposition in getting through the estimates would mean that 
I would be retired by the time we got to it. So I would like to raise these questions now. 
 
You indicated, Mr. Minister, in your response to a question of mine Monday evening last regarding the 
current level of direct billing in Saskatchewan, that people of our province are better off than people in 
other provinces and that the level of direct billing is 4 per cent in Saskatchewan or a little less than 4 per 
cent. Also, in other provinces such as Alberta, which the opposition very frequently fondly refers to, 47 
per cent of the physicians are direct billing. Now I have two questions which are related to this: why is 
the rate of direct billing in other provinces so high? Secondly, to your knowledge, what have other 
provinces done to attempt to reduce direct billing in their provinces, if anything? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I hesitate to cut in on that very excellent question, but I think it is probably out 
of order. The Minister of Health for the province of Saskatchewan is not answerable for the policies of 
other governments. If he wants to give another out of order opinion I think I would probably let him do 
that, but I would like him to keep it very brief. 
 
State your point of order. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1143 

MR. BERNTSON: — I don’t think the minister is competent to answer on behalf of other governments 
in other provinces out of his jurisdiction. I hesitate to say he’s barely competent to answer in his own 
jurisdiction. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, as I said, I think the question was out of order but we’re waiting for an 
answer to your question so if you wanted to get a little caucus . . . You had another question? Ask 
another question. 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — I have a letter from Saskatchewan Medical Association which was directed, I 
believe, to all MLAs in Saskatchewan. There’s a paragraph I would like to read and ask a question in 
relation to, which is in my estimation relevant to the estimates. 
 

Some people have attempted to interpret such action by physicians (and I’m referring to extra 
billing) as an effort to destroy medicare. Such charges are totally unfounded. 

 
This is coming from the president of the SMA and I continue the quote: 
 

Physicians in Saskatchewan recognize that medicare is here to stay and are as willing as anyone 
to make it work. However, they are unwilling to accept the current insurance level of many of 
the insured services as payments in full. 

 
The resolution passed at the November New Democratic Party provincial convention in Saskatoon (the 
one to which I referred in my first question Monday evening) directed the provincial government to 
eliminate extra billing through negotiation with the physician’s representatives, that is, the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, but if that failed, to eliminate extra billing through legislation. If 
other provinces such as Alberta and Manitoba have substantially increased their fee schedules, and I 
believe they have (I have statistics to indicate that from various sources) what assurances are there, Mr. 
Minister, from the Saskatchewan Medical Association and/or the physicians they represent that if the 
MCIC fee schedules are substantially increased in Saskatchewan they will cease and extra billing in 
Saskatchewan of their patients? If there has not been any assurances, Mr. Minister, is it possible to 
obtain an assurance from them? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, just very quickly I think I would agree with the quote the member for 
Regina north-West has read. Generally speaking, I think most physicians are in support of medicare. I 
think that has been borne out in Saskatchewan. I think they have acted very responsibly. I would not 
want to leave the impression that the physicians of Saskatchewan, generally speaking, are not in support 
of it. In answer to your specific question, what assurances do I have extra billing would cease if more 
moneys would be pumped into the schedule. We have no assurances; neither did other provinces. My 
understanding is Alberta’s minister put in an additional $31 million and the percentage, I think, dropped 
very, very little. It’s still 40 per cent. He just simply did not get any assurances. The result of putting in 
many more dollars did not have the results he had anticipated when he made that offer. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think the relationship is good which we have established with the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, and the consultations that have taken 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1144 

place have borne fruit here in Saskatchewan. There’s no doubt about that. Our extra billing and direct 
billing are down considerably. It is one of the lowest in Canada of those provinces where doctors are 
extra billing. I would not want at this time to push any group into a corner by making some categorical 
statement here today which would not leave a way out for a resolution through consultation and 
negotiation. 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Minister, in light of the excessive percentage of direct billing or extra billing 
in other provinces you quoted Monday last — for example; 47 per cent of the positions in Alberta, and 
18 per cent of the positions in Ontario direct billing — has the minister raised this problem with the new 
federal Minister of Health and Welfare since the federal election has culminated, to arrange a prompt 
meeting of provincial ministers to attempt to resolve the urgent, seemingly national problems related to 
health care? And if the minister has not, would you do so soon? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, in quick response, I have contracted the new minister, the Hon. 
Monique Begin, by letter requesting an early meeting with her. I indicated to her that there were a 
number of items I wanted to discuss with her. Also my deputy last week met with the deputy minister of 
health and welfare of Canada here in Regina and he also requested an early meeting at that time. My 
response, therefore, is yes, I have been and I would hope that I would get an early response. However, if 
I do not get an early response, let’s say within a week or ten days, I will attempt to contact her again 
because I think it is imperative that we meet early and discuss some of the problems we’re facing in 
Canada vis-à-vis medicare. 
 
However, I do want to point out to the member that I think it would be somewhat unfair of me to push 
too hard for resolution at this particular time when the Hall committee is still meeting. I would like to 
wait for the Hall committee to report, and I must admit that I am fairly optimistic of the 
recommendations that will come out of the Hall report. I think that the hon. Mr. Hall has not mellowed 
in any of his views that he held in the ’60s vis-à-vis medicare, and the principles involved in medicare. 
At least I got that impression when I met with him in Saskatoon and presented the government’s brief. 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to give the names to the member for Souris-Cannington. 
The people on the research board: Dr. Stalwick from the U. of R.; Dr. Sibley from the universities 
commission; Dr. Bulton, Department of Health; Dr. Glynn of continuing education; Mrs. McNeil from 
Regina; Mrs. Scratch from Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Lay people on the board . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . .  
 
Could well be. I don’t know Miss Jean Innes from the college of nursing; Dr. Hawryluk from the college 
of medicine; Dr. Naylor from the college of arts and science; Dr. Ettinger from the college of medicine; 
and Dr. Groome is the chairperson — Agnes Groome. 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Minister, the Hall report on health care in Canada was to be made available 
in March or April of this year. I understand that it has been delayed. Would you know when the report is 
coming down and do you believe that the Hall report might influence the rapid settlement of the extra 
billing problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The information we have is that it will probably come down in June or July. I would 
simply be expressing my own opinion as to whether or not it will have any influence, and I think I 
would rather not comment on that. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1145 

MR. SOLOMON: — One final question if I may, Mr. Chairman. Would the minister ask his officials to 
consider conducting an in-depth study with regard to paying salaries to doctors, as 99 per cent of the 
people in this province now receive, as opposed to a fee-for-service? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think we would certainly look at that. I will make no 
commitment at this time as to how vigorously we would pursue that, but yes, we would discuss it. I’m 
just informed by my officials that Doctor Kendel, the present president of the SMA, has said that he 
would be in favor of that. I think he made a public statement on that and he has asked us to look into it 
with them. So yes, we will. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, when we were discussing, in estimates, the number of people on waiting 
lists for level 4 admissions, you gave us a figure of some 448 people. How many of those people have 
been moved off the waiting list in the last year and put into facilities in Regina? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That is the present waiting list. If they are on the waiting list they couldn’t have been 
removed. That is the present waiting list. 
 
MR. SWAN: — How many people have you moved off a waiting list, not necessarily the same 448? 
How many have you moved into facilities in Regina in the past year? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — About 70 per year are admitted to the Wascana Hospital? 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, how many extra level 4 beds were made available in the city of 
Regina in 1979? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Thirty-four last year and we’re aiming at 51 this year — 251, an additional 17. 
We’ve got 34 and we’re going up to 51. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Those are extra beds over and above what was already there, right? These 34 beds 
— were they filled with patients transferred from existing acute beds in the city of were they transferred 
from nursing homes in the city? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I really don’t have that answer. That’s the decision of the steering committee. They 
cold come from the home, they could come from the nursing home or they could come from the 
hospitals. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Could you get me those figures as to how many were transferred from nursing 
homes in Regina and the area or how many were transferred from acute hospital beds into a level 4 
facility? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — We’ll certainly try. We’d have to go back to the hospitals and find out from them .I 
think we can do that but it would take some time. I can’t give you that now. 
 
MR. LANE — There’s been a dispute between departments for some time as to who should have 
jurisdiction over levels 1, 2, and 3. Is it still your department’s positions that the jurisdiction for nursing 
home care in levels 1, 2 or 3 should be under the Department of Health? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — That I do remember clearly. I don’t think that dispute existed between the 
Department of Social Services and the Department of Health. That dispute, I think, existed between the 
member for Qu’Appelle and the former minister of social services. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1146 

MR. LANE — Who was that? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The present Minister of Health. 
 
MR. LANE — Is it your department’s position then that the responsibility for nursing home care in the 
province be under the Department of Health? I happen to subscribe to the view it should be but . . . 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I don’t want to repeat what I said the other night. There is a study going to be going 
on this year on the whole reclassification. I think we will have to determine which group at that time. If 
we go the Matthews classification, I’m not saying we are, but if we are and do away with the arbitrary 
classification we presently have, at that time a decision will have to be made which ones will go under 
social services and which ones will go under health or whether they all will go under one department or 
the other. That decision has been made. I can’t give you a definitive answer because I don’t know 
whether we will change the classification. I assume if we don’t change the classification then it will 
probably remain as is. 
 
MR. LANE — Will you have a report and would you make that report public? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I can’t answer that for the member right now. I don’t know. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, under Vote 24 for the alcohol commission there’s a substantial 
increase. I understand certain things out of social services are being transferred to the alcohol 
commission. Is that correct? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, I think I have to ask for your ruling here. We are still on subvote 1 
and the member is now referring to a specific subvote. I think we should wait until we get off subvote 1. 
The reason I’m saying that is because it’s difficult for my officials if we’re jumping all over the place. 
So if we have some order we can give you the answers much faster . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I wonder if we could handle it in this way. It’s been the practice in the 
past to ask relatively general questions under subvote 1 and if you have really specific itemized 
questions that you need the same type of answer for. If you could hold that off until that item is called, I 
think it might help the proceedings a little bit. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — I think we are finished with our general questions. We can begin perhaps to 
comply with your request for a scrutiny of the estimates. 
 
Under item 1, Mr. Minister, could you give me the number of department heads and their estimated 
salaries for 1980-81? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Could I ask the member to redirect the question. I have some difficulty? Could you 
clarify your question? 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Under personal positions how many are permanent positions? How many are 
classified as department heads? What is their estimated salary for 1980-81? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — One — $39,840 will be the salary. 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1147 

MRS. DUNCAN: — How many branch heads under item 1 — permanent positions and their estimated 
salaries for 1980-81? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — There is one branch head under item 1. That’s why I asked the member to clarify. I 
didn’t know what she wanted. If she wants the branch head under each subvote, then we have to go 
through those. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I asked for item 1. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, there’s one branch head. I think I gave you the wrong salary there, it’s $36,348. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — You indicated a while ago, under other personal services, there are 5.2 employees. 
Could you give me a breakdown in the number of temporary positions, the number of day labor, casual 
and part-time? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — 3.9 temporary and 1.3 casual. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Under subvote 1, other expenses, could you tell me what you estimate for medical, 
dental, optical, hospitalisation, burial, and allied services in 1980-81? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — About $300 for scientific supplies. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Before going off subvote 1, could you undertake to supply me within the next few 
days the branch head salaries, permanent positions, number and estimates salaries; temporary, number, 
and estimated salaries; casual — that type of thing as I just asked for each subvote. Then we can carry 
on. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Are you asking them for all employees of the Department of Health? Or simply the 
51 positions? 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Under the other subvotes. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — You want the branch heads of each subvote. Right? 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — The branch heads, the number of permanent positions and estimated salaries; the 
number of temporary positions, estimated salaries; number of day labor, casual, and part-time, and 
estimated salaries. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — I think the answer is yes, but I don’t think I can give it to you in two or three days. 
That’s a fairly major task . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? No, it includes about 2,200 or 
2,300 people and that’s a fairly major task. I just don’t want it to be the undertaking that you can have it 
in two or three days. The answer is, yes, we’ll do it. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Item 3 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1148 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Does this subvote include training of health personnel? Is this the subvote? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Bursaries, training allowances, and in-service training. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Are you still participating in the federal government’s professional training grant 
program? And if so, how much of the money expended was reimbursed from federal funds in 1979? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — My understanding is that it was bombed in probably March or April 1979 by the 
feds. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Items 4 to 6 agreed. 
 
Item 7 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, would you comment on the substantial drop in the number of 
employee in that department? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think the three main reasons are: there is an increase in the 
enrolment and a larger staff has reduced significantly the amount of travel time required by the dental 
nurse team, because of the increased enrolment they have to travel less; the treatment needs of enrolled 
children are much reduced after the first year in the dental plan, preventative dental health education and 
regular care greatly reduced tooth decay; and the number of experienced staff increases each year the 
dental plan is in operation. Experienced staff are able to work more quickly than inexperienced staff. 
Overall, I think that because of the dental plan tooth decay has decreased. We are more efficient because 
we have more people involved and less travel time. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, do you get many inquiries as to the quality of work done on some 
children throughout the province? 
] 
MR. ROLFES: — I think I’ve had one since I’ve been minister. I think I’ve had one. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — How do you go about resolving a dispute over quality of care? Do you have a 
board? Do you have an independent person check the child or how do you resolve the matter with the 
parent? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, my officials tell me that as far as they can recall they’ve only had 
five complaints since last October. In ever case, the dental director has been involved and sometimes a 
private dentist has been involved in discussions with the parents. They have been able to resolve all of 
those to the agreement of the parent. Just hold on. That shouldn’t be quite so categorical — not all the 
items in those five or six cases were always to the satisfaction of the parents, but we feel generally 
speaking, that things were resolved . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not yet. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 
Item 8 



 
March 26, 1980 

 

 
1149 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Policy research and management services — policy research — does that mean if 
you decided to bring in a policy or want to bring a specific policy within the health field, they do 
research for you to see how it will be accepted or the cost of it? Do they research the cost of funding for 
a particular program, things like that? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — This particular branch works out policy. They do some research and they also give 
us some of the implications, alternatives and cost implications, of course. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:00 p.m. 
 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Provincial Auditor’s Salary
	PC Federal Pioneer Spill
	Increased Licence Fees
	Gasoline Tax
	Sales of Farms
	Handicapped Drivers
	Higher Tuition Fees for Foreign Students
	Delays in Payments on Hog Shipments
	Death of Archbishop Romero
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — VOTE 32
	Item 1 Continued
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	Committee of Finance Continued
	Item 3
	MRS. DUNCAN: — Does this subvote include training of health personnel? Is this the subvote?
	Item 7
	Item 8
	MRS. DUNCAN: — Policy research and management services — policy research — does that mean if you decided to bring in a policy or want to bring a specific policy within the health field, they do research for you to see how it will be accepted or the c...


