






















































Hansard: May 12, 1980


2905 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 12, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the House, the Hon. Jim Fleming, Canada’s Minister of State for 
Multiculturalism. I believe he is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
He is of Celtic origin, born and raised in Kitchener, Ontario. He was educated there and at the University of 
Toronto. He spent a number of years as a journalist in the print and broadcast media; he worked for the 
Toronto Star, the CTV national news and at several Toronto radio stations. He worked as an executive 
assistant to the Leader of the Opposition in Ontario before successfully winning his York West riding in the 
1972 federal general election. He has been successfully re-elected in 1974, 1979 and 1980. With Mr. 
Fleming are Miss Susan Scott and Andrew Cardoza. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask those people to rise to be acknowledged and ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce to the Assembly, on 
behalf of the member for Regina South, Mr. Rousseau, who will be in a little later this afternoon, some 52 
students from Dr. A.E. Perry School in Regina. They are accompanied by Mr. Byron Kimble and Mrs. 
Joanne Friesen. I hope they find the afternoon interesting and informative. I look forward to meeting with 
them after question period to ask if they have any questions. I hope all members will join with me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member for the 
constituency of Cumberland, I want to welcome to the Speaker’s gallery this afternoon some constituents of 
his from the community of Kinoosao, or Co-op Point as it was earlier known. There are seven adult students 
who are attending this afternoon an upgrading community program and are here in the legislature, I 
understand, with Mr. Vandrewal, who is their teacher. We welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Your member of the Legislative Assembly, the Hon. Mr. MacAuley, is away on Canadian Parliamentary 
Association business in London and that is why he is not here this afternoon. I am sure he would want me, 
on his behalf, to welcome you to the Assembly. I trust, Mr. Speaker, other members of the House welcome 
these adult students here this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 12, 1980 

2906 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Committee Subsidy Program 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. During the drought conditions which prevailed in 1977, at the urging of this opposition, your 
department implemented a drought committee and provided transportation subsidies for hauling feed and the 
relocation of cattle in some areas of the province. Would your department consider implementing a similar 
program to help alleviate the pressures being experienced by some of the stockmen in our province today? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Maple Creek 
will recall that program was a joint federal-provincial program. My understanding is that discussions are 
about to get under way at the deputy ministerial level with Agriculture Canada, and likely will involve not 
only Saskatchewan’s department but also the departments in Manitoba and Alberta because the whole West 
is facing similar drought conditions. 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister aware 
that due to these severe conditions many livestock producers are being cut back re allocations in community 
pastures and many do not have the alternate grazing facilities, thereby forcing them to place their produce on 
a less than break even market? Does your government have any immediate plans for alternate grazing for 
these producers before it reaches a disaster stage? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the hon. member, my reports are that the staff of 
community pastures is discouraging bringing the cattle in as long as possible so that the available pasture on 
the farm is used up before coming into the community pasture. To my knowledge there hasn’t been any 
farmer, who was set to come into the pastures with his livestock, cut back. I asked for a report, Mr. Speaker, 
and I report this to the hon. members opposite and members here; in the northwest part of the province the 
conditions are somewhat better than they are in the remainder of the province. Indications are that there will 
be available to us possibly 2,000 head to be moved into that area. That is being examined and perhaps some 
action can be taken to that extent. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Securing adequate feed supplies and adequate water sources have always caused 
recurring problems in the livestock industry in Saskatchewan, especially in the southern regions. What 
long-term programs are available to stockmen through your government to help stabilize the feed and water 
supply problems which continually face these operators? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t recite to the hon. member the ongoing long-term programs of 
either the Department of Agriculture of Saskatchewan or PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act) or the 
federal government. The hon. member will know there is a pumping program in place within the department 
right now. I think one of the problems faced, of course, is that there isn’t water to pump. Therefore, the 
contact with the federal government . . . I assume that one of the items which will be discussed is the 
emergency well program which was in place, I recall, three years ago as a program to be pursued under the 
emergency situation. 
 

Drilling of Deep Wells 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2907 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. The programs which now exist as they relate to well drilling offer grants for each well 
regardless of cost of the well. Now in the most severely drought-stricken areas of our province the water is 
deep water from 700 feet to 1,400 feet. Now, would the minister not agree that there should be some 
program to encourage people to drill deep wells in these areas? I am talking specifically of the Southwest. 
Dr. Meneley, formerly of the Saskatchewan Research Council, in 1977 in a report to the Saskatchewan 
Research Council said: 
 

Water supply problems that will arise can be resolved for the most part by providing incentives for 
developing deeper wells that are less affected by drought. 

 
Would the minister not agree that the time was in 1977 and earlier but it wasn’t done? Shouldn’t we now, 
since it wasn’t done, offer some incentive to drill these deep well? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I am not sure of my 
recollection being accurate but I believe that there is an ongoing program in PFRA for wells for individual 
farmers. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. The program that you alluded to is a 
fixed grant for each well and not a percentage of cost. These deep wells cost upwards of $100,000 apiece. 
My question is, we do have a serious problem facing us in the Southwest if rain doesn’t come in a hurry, 
would the minister consider cataloguing all feed supplies in the province, particularly dehydrated alfalfa, the 
stocks they have available at these plants, and what projected supplies they might have available for the 
summer or into fall, and making this information available to the stock growers in our province? — because 
quite frankly there is a serious problem with feed. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I should report to the hon. member and to the Assembly that these 
are the same kinds of questions the federal Minister of Agriculture faced today in the House of Commons. 
And I think he indicated his efforts at his end to co-operate with the western provinces on dealing with this 
issue at the deputy minister’s level. One of the first things that happened as I recall three years ago was the 
cataloguing of available feed supplies. Part of my answer earlier (relating to the pasture situation in 
northwestern Saskatchewan), would be part of that cataloguing process. I suspect that that will be taking 
place and once it’s complete I can provide it to all hon. members, particularly in the southwestern part of the 
province. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll just take this opportunity to say to the Leader of the Opposition that I don’t 
understand how a cataloguing of feed supplies is a supplementary to the grants for digging deep wells. I 
think it’s not a supplementary. I would be prepared to allow the member to have a supplementary to the 
original question that was asked. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The questions relate to a drought, not particularly to feed or 
water but to both. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a water and feed-related question. Would the minister not agree 
that since we have about 0.5 million irrigable acres not irrigated in the province around Diefenbaker Lake, 
and since we haven’t developed our deep-water aquifers in the province, it’s time now to channel our efforts 
in this direction and that this would in fact stabilize the feed and water problems in the Southwest? 



 
May 12, 1980 

2908 
 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I can report to the hon. member that developing further irrigation 
projects in the Outlook area is a proposal that’s under consideration by the government and that the policy 
related thereto will be announced in due course. 
 

Computer Office Equipment 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the minister responsible for Sask Tel. Mr. Minister, I 
have been advised by members of the computer industry that Sask Tel has plans to become or is 
contemplating becoming involved in computer office equipment and in particular in word processors. Can 
the minister advise this Assembly if in fact Sask Tel is planning such moves in that field? 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, it certainly is an area which is under 
consideration. There’s no question about that. Let’s face the fact that word processing is something that one 
can term in communications; as a result of that we consider everything in communications and that is one of 
the areas we are considering. No real final decision has been made in that regard, but if and when there is a 
final decision made I can certainly advise the member. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary to that, Mr. Minister. The plans you have in mind right now, do they 
entail the selling of computer hardware as well as providing computer services, etc.? 
 
MR. CODY: — Yes. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister I was under the impression that Sask Tel by and large was to deal in the 
telephone and that type of field. It seems to me that you are going quite a ways afield when you go into the 
whole computer field. Number one, you have a computer corporation that is doing that. But number two, is it 
your intention that the telephone should be a monopoly situation and for various reasons (so you can spread 
the cost through rural Saskatchewan), is it your intention as well to take the computer thing into a monopoly 
situation for Sask Tel? 
 
MR. CODY: — No. 
 

Buy Canadian Labelling 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — I would like to direct a question to the Premier. Welcome back to 
western Canada, Mr. Premier. I note last week, probably in your absence, the CTV network presented an 
extensive program on the Buy Canadian policy of the federal government. It was discovered by CTV that the 
Buy Canadian labels were being manufactured in the U.S. Would you not agree that this is a bit of a sham, or 
a small indication of our dependence upon the United States? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, so far as I am aware the labels were not manufactured 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. I want to assure the hon. member that any Buy Saskatchewan labels we 
may acquire would not be manufactured outside Canada. I want to assure hon. members that whatever the 
federal government may have done in this regard, on which I am not informed, the Government of 
Saskatchewan does not favor the policy of buying labels which, say Buy Canada, and acquiring those labels 
outside Canada. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2909 

Restaurant Association re Two Successive Days Off 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour. The Minister of Labour has had 
representation from the Saskatchewan Restaurant and Food Services Association. I believe the Hotels 
Association of Saskatchewan is expressing some concern over legislation to establish and guarantee two 
successive days off. The restaurant association, of course, is concerned because their two important days (the 
most profitable days) are Saturday and Sunday. It would work an extreme hardship on that industry. Would 
the minister be prepared to commit himself today to exempt from that legislation the restaurant association? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Well, I’ll tell the hon. member for Qu’Appelle there has 
been an overture made to my departmental officials by Mr. Freestone of the restaurant association. I think 
obviously there will be some problems, particularly in an industry such as the food and restaurant industry 
where a large portion of its business is done on a busy weekend. 
 
What is being contemplated at the present time, I believe, is to have a House amendment to The Labour 
Standards Act in order to provide for section 13 of the act (which is the two consecutive days) to come into 
force on proclamation. That will give us the opportunity over the next number of weeks to listen to 
representations from a variety of people. One of those, of curse, will be the restaurant association. 
 
I’m not prepared at this moment to indicate what blanket exemptions will be provided. I think judgment will 
have to be made in keeping with the kinds of representations that are made to us. We’ll be looking very 
carefully at those exemptions without attempting to detract in large measure from the general thrust of 
providing two consecutive days off for employees. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the Minister. I have a 1980 survey of wages and working conditions 
which has been sent to members of the restaurant association, sponsored and sent out by the Saskatchewan 
Department of Labour. Given the fact that the Department of Labour is belatedly attempting to survey this 
particular industry, and your comment admitting that perhaps the legislation is going to cause some hardship, 
do you not believe the Department of Labour has really been ill-prepared for this legislation, that it should 
have consulted the service industries to be affected by this bill before implementation, and that is’ not really 
a proper way of proceeding to bring in blanket legislation and then find out how it’s going to hurt people 
after? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think I indicated to the member that it’s not intended that that section of the act come 
into force on the date of assent. It will provide an opportunity for consultation of a large number of people. I 
expect there are some industries which could be given blanket exemptions. I’m thinking, most assuredly, of 
those industries such as nursing homes and hospitals which I think without question can be covered by the 
two consecutive days off and I think in most circumstances are, but to provide that one of those days shall be 
a Sunday obviously will cause some difficulties. We are prepared to take into consideration all those 
circumstances surrounding individual cases, and will be governed by the kinds of representation presented to 
us and the kinds of judgments we will draw from that. 
 

Administration of Federal Food and Drug Act 



 
May 12, 1980 

2910 
 

MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Attorney General. Mr. 
Attorney General, about a week ago I raised a question with you in this Assembly regarding a supreme court 
decision which appears to render most federal standards under the Food and Drug Act unconstitutional. At 
that time I suggested to you that in effect nobody was minding the store, and nobody was regulating purity 
and food content at that time. 
 
You suggest in reply that your people and your department did not agree with this assessment, and that you 
would get back to me on it. About a week has gone by and my question to you is, are you prepared to 
acknowledge today that no one at this point in time is administering the Food and Drug Act as to the purity 
and content of food products in Canada? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I can only essentially reiterate what I told 
the hon. member a few days ago. The advice of my legal officers does not go to the same extent as the hon. 
member’s legal advice. There is a committee established on an interprovincial basis which is looking at this 
particular problem involving the jurisdiction of food and drug. 
 
We may or may not need some legislation, either provincial or federally, but I’m not getting the advice yet 
that we need to move at this particular time. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Attorney General, also during that 
question I raised the point that virtually all charges or all matters before the courts, particularly several which 
received a great deal of publicity last fall regarding the misuse of beef product by a very prominent Ontario 
supermarket chain, were being dropped by the federal food and drug. Would the Attorney General promise 
also to verify this, and would he be prepared to confirm today that his people have told him that this is true, 
which is further proof that at this point in time nobody, federal or provincial, is administering the laws of 
food purity in Canada and in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm that today. I have not yet received a report from my 
officials as to that aspect of the question. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since about one week has gone by and this 
matter is not really a joke, may I ask the Attorney General if he has consulted with or plans to consult with 
the Minister of Health and the Department of Health in the hope that if the feds aren’t going to do it, at least 
somebody in this province is going to examine what sort of foods are being sold through the fast-food outlets 
or on the supermarket shelves, so the people of Saskatchewan can have some assurance that food labels 
contain what they say they do? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member’s question is based on the assumption that in fact 
there is no underlying legal basis for the inspection and examination of standards and quality with respect to 
food. I simply don’t accept that assumption at the present time. I have indicated to the hon. member that this 
is a complex legal matter which is being reviewed by my officials and officials in other provinces. It may 
very well be that some form of legislation or other action is required, but at the present time my advice is, as 
I have indicated to the member, that no necessary legal action is required and standards are being protected 
and are still in force. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2911 

Delay in Completion of Lampman Senior Citizens’ Home. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — I would like to ask this question of the minister of SGI, and possibly the 
minister of Sask Housing. The contractor working on the senior citizen’s home at Lampman has once again 
pulled out of this job. These 16 senior citizens’ homes are approximately one and one-half years behind 
schedule. They have just been sitting there. Because of disagreement with CMHC (Central Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation) and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), the contractor has now left his job. I 
wonder if you could tell us what state this is in, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — Mr. Speaker, I will have to take 
it as notice because I am not familiar with it other than the fact that I thought the Lampman one had been 
cleared away. It’s possible the minister in charge of Sask Housing may have some information for you. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would you take it as notice then, Mr. Minister, that it is a 
disagreement with CMHC and SGI; how far is SGI going to go on the settlement of the poor work done by 
Manor Homes? In many cases they have found the pilings aren’t even under the footings and it’s just a 
botched up job. I wonder if you would check into this. The people of Lampman and the town council there 
are very discouraged with this. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, we can assure the member we will check into it further and report back to 
him. 
 

Canada’s Constitution 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the Premier. I realize you’re 
just back, Mr. Premier, but you may have had an opportunity to read in the Glove and Mail the comments by 
Mr. Stuart Smith, the Leader of the Opposition in the Ontario legislature in which he stated it was agreed by 
all members of that Assembly that the people of the province of Ontario, with reference to the constitution in 
Canada, wished to maintain the status quo. Would the Premier agree with Mr. Smiths’ comments? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity on Saturday morning to read 
both the Globe and Mail and the Toronto Star outlining their reports of the debate which took place in the 
Ontario provincial parliament and I did not gain the impression that the hon. member for Nipawin did. My 
impression of the outcome of that debate was the resolution, which was unanimously passed, expressed the 
view that all members agreed we in Canada should pursue renewed federalism and that this would involve 
substantial changes in the constitution, in short a substantial departure from the status quo. That is the 
understanding I have of the position taken certainly by Premier Davis and certainly by Mr. Cassidy and as I 
understood it, also by the Liberal Party since the motion was, again as I understood it, passed unanimously. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier will be aware that Mr. Broadbent, 
the Leader of the NDP in Canada, has not yet taken a position as to whether or not he supports the Quebec 
referendum or is opposed to the Quebec referendum. The Premier will also be aware that Mr. Smith and 
other members of the legislature in that debate stated unequivocally that the people of Ontario would prefer 
to maintain the status quo and that only leadership would enable the people of Ontario to change their minds 
from the status quo. My question to the Premier is quite simply 



 
May 12, 1980 

2912 
 

this: does the Premier believe the present leadership in Canada is the leadership that will lead Canadians 
toward a united country? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is substantially yes but not with all the present 
leaders in their present leadership position. A comparatively small change among the current leadership but 
into different offices would I think put the country in a position where we could proceed with the speed and 
with the conviction that we would move to a renewed federalism which would be accepted by all. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — My final supplementary is quite simply this: given the fact that Mr. Broadbent has 
refused to take a position as to whether he supports the Quebec referendum or not and given the fact that the 
Premier (obviously from his comments) would prefer to see Mr. Broadbent in the position of Mr. Trudeau, 
does the Premier believe that Mr. Broadbent could better lead Canada and unite Canada than can Mr. 
Trudeau? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not accept the preliminary statement of fact by the member for 
Nipawin; he does not state Mr. Broadbent’s position, as I understand Mr. Broadbent’s position. With that 
qualification I say yes indeed, I would like to see Mr. Broadbent as the Prime Minister of Canada. I would 
feel very much more assured than I am now or than I would be if Mr. Clark were Prime Minister. 
 

Grain Car Co-ordinator 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — A question to the Premier. Press reports out of 
Lethbridge, immediately following the four western premiers conference, indicated the four premiers 
endorsed the extension of the powers of the grain car co-ordinator to facilitate the movement of grain in the 
Prairies. I wonder if you could explain to this House how that squares with the contradictory offering of the 
Minister of Agriculture, during the grain car debate the other day, in which he said, we do not agree with the 
terms of the co-ordinator, we didn’t agree with him when he was appointed. It is not appropriate that the 
co-ordinator should take the power . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 

FIRST READING 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I wonder if I could get, under your direction, Mr. Speaker, 
the page girls to distribute proposed Bill No. 112. I don’t know if that is quite in order. Let me explain to the 
House my situation. I am asking leave of the Assembly to introduce first, second, committee of the whole, 
and third reading of an amendment to Friday’s Bill No. 111, the back-to-work legislation, so-called, for the 
dairy workers. The amendment adds one additional union local which was not included in the description of 
unions covered by the bill and should have been. Accordingly I will ask leave to introduce and move for the 
first time, An Act to amend The Maintenance of Operations of Dairy Producers Co-operative Limited and 
Palm Dairies Limited Act. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yu have heard the proposal by the Attorney General. Leave is required. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a first time. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2913 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Attorney General has requested leave to proceed with second reading of Bill No. 
112. I understand the bill will be around shortly, as soon as the number can be stamped on it. Does the 
Attorney General have leave? Carried. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 112 — An Act to amend The 
Maintenance of Operations of Dairy Producers Co-operative Limited and Palm Dairies Limited Act. 
 
He said: I will just give a brief explanatory, if I can. Mr. Speaker, this is a very short one sentence 
amendment. The amendment includes in the definition of union local no. P-241-4 of the United Food and 
Commercial Workers, which local union was inadvertently omitted from Bill 111 passed on May 9, 1980. I 
am advised by Department of Labour officials that there was a local P-241-4 registered and certified for a 
couple of the locals in Wynyard (and one other rural area which escapes me for the time being), and then was 
subsequently in effect unregistered as a trade union. That is the basis on which the bill was drafted. On a 
closer check of the registers we now find that this local has resurfaced just recently and been certified in 
Saskatoon, and that accordingly it needs to be included within the work-to-order legislation. It deals with the 
local of dairy workers in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, that is the explanation and with those brief words, I move 
second reading of An Act to amend the Resumption of Operations of Dairy Producers Co-operative Limited 
and Palm Dairies Limited Act. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I think one simply has to read into the record the question on Friday, 
May 9. The first question I asked the Attorney General: 
 

My first question (and out of abundant caution) would the Attorney General give the assurance that in the 
definition section, the definitions of employer and union, include all of the parties affected by the strike? 

 
The answer was: 
 

Mr. Chairman, I take the responsibility, I guess. I am advised by the deputy minister of labour on whose 
advice we rely here, that definition . . . 

 
In fact the opposition did ask the Attorney General at the time, because of the pressure of the legislation, that 
some effort be made by Department of Labour officials obviously to be a little cautious and certain because 
an error in something like this could have had some rather devastating consequences. The matter was raised 
at the time. I hope the Attorney General has brought to the Department of Labour’s attention the fact that 
they were asleep at the switch. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — I think it is incumbent upon me as well to alert the Attorney General 
to the question period and to the debate on Thursday of last week. At the time it was presented by all 
members of the opposition that the Attorney General should bring in this kind of delay legislation the day 
before, in order that an appropriate analysis of the provisions of the bill could be put forward by this 
Assembly prior to its being passed. The problem on Friday, of curse, was that the members were all 
pressured to get home on Friday afternoon since we sat late, and the Attorney General would be aware that 
that did not lend itself to an accurate bill. I would sincerely hope 



 
May 12, 1980 

2914 
 

the Attorney General will make note and give the assurance to the Assembly that in future legislation will 
not even, though it is suggested by the opposition, be brought in in such a slipshod fashion as this. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I take full responsibility for the omission. I simply would advise the 
members of the House that the bill was drafted in a rather quick fashion for circumstances which I think are 
well known. This was an error which I think is understandable under the circumstances, namely that all the 
records indicate that the union had in fact been decertified or was at least no longer operative. Also, it is a 
union which is honoring the general intent and spirit of the bill which was passed on Friday, so no hardship 
or harm was done in that regard. I think we want to limit these occasions but on occasion it will be 
inevitable. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 112 — An Act to amend The Maintenance of Operations of Dairy Producers Co-operative 

Limited and Palm Dairies Limited Act. 
 
Sections 1 to 3 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 112 — An Act to amend The Maintenance of Operation of the Dairy Producers 
Co-operative Limited and Palm Dairies Limited Act. 

 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I should simply advise the House that we 
are expecting His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor, to come sometime later during the afternoon to give 
royal assent to this bill. With that word, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 109 — An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to propose the amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Farm Ownership Act. These amendments will further limit the ownership of agricultural land in 
Saskatchewan by individuals who do not reside in the province. They will also restrict the involvement of 
corporations that are not in the business of farming and not owned and controlled by Saskatchewan farmers. 
This additional protection is essential to ensure that Saskatchewan farmland is owned and controlled by 
Saskatchewan people both now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next to our people, our rich and abundant supply of agricultural land is Saskatchewan’s most 
important resource. It is the basis of our province’s most 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2915 

important industry. The use of land and the development of the agricultural industry has been responsible in 
large part for the prosperity we enjoy in this province today. The land has been very good to the people of the 
province, and will continue to provide prosperity in the future. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan will not stand idly by and watch the ownership and 
control of our agricultural land shift into the hands of individuals and companies that do not reside in the 
province. 
 
The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act is one of those government long-tem commitments to rural 
Saskatchewan, and the people of the province. It is a commitment to ensure that Saskatchewan farmland 
does not become a speculative commodity to be bought and sold at the whim of real estate brokers, corporate 
speculations, or foreign investor. 
 
Members will recall the special committee on the ownership of agricultural land which was established by 
this Assembly May 4, 1972. The committee’s job was to investigate the effects of the purchase and 
ownership of agricultural land by non-resident foreign and corporate persons. The committee consisted of 11 
members on both sides of the Assembly. It was chaired by the hon. member for Melville, Mr. Kowalchuk, 
who is still in the Assembly and vice-chaired by the then hon. member for Cannington, Mr. Weatherald. 
 
The committee held 13 public hearing throughout Saskatchewan and travelled into the United States. The 
committee surveyed rural municipalities and gathered information as to existing regulations throughout 
Canada and the U.S. The committee submitted its report in the spring of 1973 recommending in essence that 
legislation be enacted to restrict ownership of farms in Saskatchewan to family farm-operations, and to 
co-operatives. 
 
Two minority reports were submitted — one concerned with how stringent the divestment requirements 
were in the committee’s recommendations, and the other proposing that restrictions be placed on 
non-Canadians rather than on non-residents. The fact that there were two minority reports on an 11 member 
committee gives an indication of the emotion that existed concerning that issue even at that time. 
 
In April 1974, the then minister of agriculture, the hon. member for Kelsey-Tisdale, introduced the 
Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act, restricting non-resident individuals to a maximum of $15,000 in 
assessed value of land as calculated for municipal taxation purposes. Under the 1974 act, non-agricultural 
corporations were invited to a holding of 160 acres with the added provision that those corporations already 
holding in excess of 160 acres were to reduce their holding to 160 acres by January 1, 1994. 
 
To ensure that Saskatchewan farmers could maintain their farmland and pass these lands on to their children 
and relatives, an exemption provision was provided. Additionally, in order not to discourage potential 
residents who wished to come to Saskatchewan to live and farm, the farm ownership board was given the 
authority to grant three year exemptions to potential residents. Farmers living outside of Saskatchewan but 
within 20 miles of the border were exempt form the act to permit them to carry on operations on both sides 
of the border. The 1974 legislation made provision for the farm ownership board of not less than three 
members to oversee the legislation. 



 
May 12, 1980 

2916 
 

The Farm Ownership Act of 1974 was a bold innovative step. Prince Edward Island was the only other 
province in Canada which had legislation restricting non-resident ownership. Their legislation was upheld by 
the Supreme Court of Canada, which judged that a province did in fact have the constitutional authority to 
legislate with respect to ownership and control of land by non-residents. 
 
The 1974 legislation was well received by the people of the province. We discovered, however, that the 
imposed limitations by that act did not provide an effective deterrent for non-residents. Individuals and 
companies continued to circumvent the spirit of the legislation. Large land purchases, for example, the 
purchase near Cupar, made it clear that groups of non-resident could come into an area and gobble up a large 
tract of land in spite of the legislation which was designed to prevent hat very occurrence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1976 calendar years, non-residents of this province acquired title to almost 150,000 acres 
of Saskatchewan farmland, of which 40,000 acres were purchased by foreign interests. In 1977, non-resident 
purchases totalled almost 140,000 acres of which 50,000 acres were purchased by foreign interests. 
 
The people of rural Saskatchewan called for further limitations on non-resident activity in the farmland 
market. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the United 
Grain Growers, the National Farmers’ Union and the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture all demanded 
further restrictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government responded to hose demands by amending The Farm Ownership Act. Effective 
September 15, 1977 the $15,000 assessed value limitations on non-residents were lowered to 150 acres. The 
amendment reduce the limit from approximately seven quarters of average assessed land down to one 
quarter. One hundred and sixty acres was the consensus as to an effective lower limit below which there 
would be little incentive to purchase. The 1977 legislation was a deterrent to an extent, but the demand for 
land in Saskatchewan increased and the techniques were found to circumvent the act by those who were 
intent upon just doing so. 
 
In the 1978 calendar years non-resident acquired title to an additional 120,00 acres. In 1979, purchases were 
almost 110,000 acres. In the last three years, in 15 municipalities in the Regina, Weyburn and Indian Head 
areas, foreign individuals had acquired 53,000 acres of some of the most productive grain land in the 
province. Foreign controlled corporations acquired title to an additional 10,000 acres in the area. 
 
The farm ownership board was powerless to do anything. In a number of cases, these corporations were 
incorporated outside of the province, which resulted in the board having no power of investigation. It was 
little wonder that the people of Saskatchewan became concerned. It was little wonder that young 
Saskatchewan farmers were frustrated as they watched prices escalate beyond their reach and as they saw 
title after title to neighboring lands transferred at high prices to faceless names or to numbered corporations. 
 
Delegates to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities annual convention (I suspect the larges 
on record) were almost unanimous in calling for the complete elimination of foreign interests from the 
Saskatchewan farmland market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments before the Assembly came in response to the plea from rural Saskatchewan to 
remove non-resident and non-agricultural corporate 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2917 

purchasers from the Saskatchewan farmland market. Let me now outline the proposed amendments in some 
detail. The amendment to section 2(b) of the act will reduce the proportion of the shares which must be 
owned by non-residents to a simple majority, i.e. 51 per cent from the previous 60 per cent. This is to ensure 
that a Saskatchewan farmer using the corporate approach to farming may transfer shares in his farming 
company to family members who may be neither farmers nor Saskatchewan residents. The control, however, 
will remain in the hands of the Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
A new section 2(c.1) has been added to provide for a clear definition of ‘farmer’ should that prove necessary. 
‘Resident person’ as defined in the present act has been changed in order to exclude farmers living outside of 
Saskatchewan but within 20 miles of the Saskatchewan border. In future, these farmers carrying on farming 
operations on both sides of the border will require the permission of the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership 
Board in order to own or control additional landholdings in Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed amendment in section 7 of this act is for the purpose of conformity with the limitation of 10 
acres to be established under the new section 8.2. 
 
Section 8.2 of the act will impose a limitation of 10 acres upon those who do not reside for more than 
one-half of the year in Saskatchewan, where such a landholding is acquired on or after May 6, 1980. 
Non-residents who acquired more than 10 acres before May 6, 1980 will not be required to dispose of their 
holding since they can only hold the land during their lifetime, in contrast to corporations which can exist in 
perpetuity. 
 
The amendment to section 9 of the act will ensure that non-residents who acquire landholdings in excess of 
10 acres through a will or the operation of The Intestate Succession Act, after May 6, 1980, will have five 
years to dispose of those holdings exceeding 10 acres. 
 
Section 10 continues the policy of permitting Saskatchewan farmers to transfer their landholdings to close 
relatives who may live outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
The proposed amendment to section 11 will limit non-agricultural corporations to a landholding in the 
province not exceeding 10 acres. Those corporations acquiring land in excess of 10 acres will require the 
written consent of the farm ownership board. 
 
The change in section 12 of the present act will require all non-agricultural corporations to educe their 
landholdings to 10 acres by January 1, 1994. Additionally, agricultural corporations will be given a one-years 
period during which they must conform with this act. 
 
The new section 13.1 establishes an offence for a resident person to acquire a landholding on behalf of a 
non-resident person or a non-agricultural corporation where such an acquisition contravenes the act. 



 
May 12, 1980 

2918 
 

Section 14(1) is amended in order to require that non-agricultural corporations with holdings in excess of 10 
acres submit a yearly disclosure statement to the board. This continues a policy established in the original 
act. 
 
The amendment to section 15 will provide the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board with the authority to 
grant exemptions to non-resident individuals in circumstances where such an exemption is justified (for 
example potential residents of the province or farmers farming land on both sides of the border). 
 
The changes in section 16 are in order to establish penalties for violation of the new provisions of the act. 
The level of penalties remains unchanged from the present act. 
 
Should clarification of ‘farmer’ be required for purposes of the act, the amendment to section 24(a.1) will 
grant the Lieutenant-Governor in Council such authority. 
 
The final provision deals with retroactivity. The proposed amendments will come into force retroactively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is of fundamental importance to the continued prosperity of our province. 
 
In Alberta, the Agricultural and Recreational Ownership Act limits non-Canadians to the purchase and 
ownership of 20 acres of agricultural land in Alberta. 
 
In Manitoba, the Farm Lands Protection Act limits non-Canadians to the purchase and ownership of 20 aces 
of agriculture and in both provinces, however, the restriction it should be noted is on non-Canadians. There 
is no restriction on non-residents. In Quebec, recent legislation limits non-residents of Quebec, to the 
acquisition of not more than four hectares or 10 acres of agricultural land without the authorization of the 
commission for the protection of agricultural land in Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are the custodians of a rich and abundant supply of agricultural 
land, land which will generate food production for the world now and in the future. The land has provided 
prosperity. It will continue to do so. We must therefore, Mr. Speaker, care for this resource to ensure that it is 
not abused. We must also protect this resource for future generations of Saskatchewan people and ensure 
that our sons and our daughters do not become tenants in their own land to absentee and corporate landlords. 
I urge members on both sides of this Assembly to support this act — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Farm Ownership Act — and I am pleased to move second reading of the act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I recall when The Farm Ownership Act was initially 
brought into this legislature; at that time I had some remarks to make about the problems that would ensue as 
a result of that act. Mr. Speaker, I want to make eminently clear to members of this legislature before 
commencing any remarks that I am not in any way objecting to the intent of this act. The intent of the act is 
to enable Saskatchewan people to own Saskatchewan farmland and with that intent I could not agree more. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2919 

However prohibitive land ownership legislation does not work in Prince Edward Island, does not work in 
Manitoba, does not work in Alberta, does not work in Saskatchewan and will not work with these 
amendments. It won’t work because when you prohibit by law there will be intelligent seekers to thwart that 
law. Intelligent lawyers will attempt to find loopholes in that law. There have been lawyers who have 
suggested over the years that for every law passed by the Government of Saskatchewan, with intelligent 
study at least 10 loopholes can be found. Prohibitive legislation is not the solution. 
 
In 1977 when this act was passed initially, I suggested in this legislature (and I’m going to suggest again in 
this legislature) that the way to accomplish the aim is not to prohibit but to tax non-resident owners, and tax 
them to such an extent that it will not be profitable for non-resident owners to own land in Saskatchewan. 
Only in that way will there not be loopholes found in the legislation. Now, Mr. Speaker, you will recall in 
1977 I stated that there would be loopholes found in the act and that it would not work. The minister, by his 
own admission today, has stated that thousands and thousands of acres were purchased by non-residents in 
1978 and were purchased by non-residents in 1979. The point is that this kind of prohibitive legislation just 
simply doesn’t work. It doesn’t accomplish the aim; now that’s if the aim is to enable Saskatchewan citizens 
to own Saskatchewan farmland. 
 
On the other hand, if the aim is to make all private ownership of land in Saskatchewan difficult, if the aim is 
to create another means by which the land bank commission and other organizations can continue to acquire 
government lands, the perhaps this law might work. But it certainly will not work to the aims stated by the 
minister today. Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal more to say on this subject and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. G. MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 100 — An Act 
to provide for the Establishment of the Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to propose second reading of a bill to establish a perpetual trust fund, the 
income from which will be utilized under the direction of an appointed board to further the culture and 
heritage of the Doukhobors of Canada. The Christian Community of Universal Brotherhood Limited 
(commonly known as the CCUB) was a federally incorporated company whose directors were Doukhobors. 
 
In 1925 the company borrowed money and issued bonds which were secured by a mortgage or property held 
by the company mainly in the provinces of British Columbia and Saskatchewan. In 1938 the National Trust 
Company Limited as trustee for the bondholders had the assets of the company placed in receivership. In 
1945 by order of the Court of Queen’s Bench, Regina, the Toronto General Trust Company was appointed 
receiver and was succeeded by the Canada Permanent Trust which held surplus funds from the liquidations, 
until they were placed in the hands of the Court of Queen’s Bench, Saskatchewan, on February 14, 1973 
through an action by the Attorney General of this province (the present Attorney General, of course) Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is aware of the interest which the Doukhobors of Canada have with 
respect to the final disposition of the proceeds and has had extensive 



 
May 12, 1980 

2920 
 

discussions with the major Doukhobor societies of the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and 
Saskatchewan. I might just point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are really three groups in the three provinces. 
There’s the major Doukhobor group in British Columbia, the Union of Spiritual Communities of Christ, 
which is headed by John Veregin and has the support of about 7,500 orthodox Doukhobors. The major 
Doukhobor society in Alberta is the United Doukhobors of Alberta at Cowley, Alberta. And Saskatchewan, 
of course, has a number of Doukhobor societies in areas of the province. The large concentration of course, 
is at Veregin and Kamsack with Canora and Pelly areas thrown in, also at Saskatoon, Blaine Lake, Kylemore 
and Arran. So we have quite an interesting distribution of Doukhobor people throughout the province. 
Discussions took place with these various societies across Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia and 
also discussions involved with governments of the other two provinces as well. 
 
As a result of the discussions and the negotiations, the Doukhobors of Canada, CCUB Trust Fund Act is 
being submitted for approval of this legislature. This bill will require the Minister of Finance to establish a 
perpetual trust fund from the principal sum paid into the Court of Queen’s Bench in February 1973, in the 
amount of $222,078 plus interest accrued to the date of the transfer to the Minister of Finance and the 
proclamation of the bill. The trust fund will be managed by appointed representatives of established 
Doukhobor societies in the three provinces concerned, under guidelines set out in the bill and in regulations. 
The fund will be retained in perpetuity with interest earnings only being utilized for grant purposes to further 
the cultural heritage of the Doukhobors of Canada under the direction of the fund board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased, after years of struggle by various individual Doukhobors and groups of 
Doukhobors, to resolved the complex issue of distribution of the remaining funds held by the receiver. The 
Government of Saskatchewan is instrumental in having these funds paid into the Court of Queen’s Bench 
and in subsequently obtaining agreement from the main Doukhobor representatives in the provinces to 
establish the trust fund (which the proposed bill will, in fact, establish). The establishment of the fund in 
question will without doubt have the effect of uniting the Doukhobors of Canada. It will further their cultural 
ties, assist in making the citizens of this country aware of the important role played by Doukhobors in the 
development of Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. I want to put on record, Mr. Speaker, our 
strong feelings about the effort by former deputy minister of municipal affairs Ted Walters in getting this bill 
in place and also in travelling to the other provinces, talking with the governments, and talking with the 
society. I also extend a thank you to Mr. Fred Bloudoff of Veregin who accompanied Mr. Walters in the 
negotiations. I think it’s their efforts that we want to pay tribute to today as we move this bill through second 
reading, which I in fact do now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Would the minister accept a question before he takes his place? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Would the minister permit a question? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — If I can answer it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I listened to the list of organizations and trustees. Did you include in that the Sons of 
Freedom side group of the Doukhobor sect, or not? 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2921 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I’ll have to check that. I didn’t include them (I don’t think) in my remarks, but I 
will check for the hon. member. I will report to him that Mr. Walters and Mr. Bloudoff did have discussion 
with the Sons of Freedom. They were in British Columbia and met with them, and got approval from them 
for this approach. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Just a couple of short points, Mr. Speaker. The official opposition 
will be supporting this bill. I join with the Minister of agriculture in congratulating Mr. Walters. This was a 
difficult problem to resolve, to find a proper structure so that all people in the Doukhobor movement were 
properly represented and felt properly represented within this trust committee, so they can get on with 
spending or investing what amounts to their money. For that reason, I think he is to be commended and I 
trust that what comes out of this legislation will in fact serve its purpose. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would hope to received that information before . . . Oh, can we 
have that information before committee of the whole for the bill? If the minister would give me that 
assurance, that would be fine. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — AS soon as I get the information I’ll send it across to the hon. member. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me this afternoon 
to introduce to you and to other members of this Assembly, a Benedictine monk from St. Peter’s Abbey at 
Muenster, Saskatchewan, Father Andrew Britt, who is in the west gallery. St Peter’s is known by most 
people in western Canada for its newspaper, the Prairie Messenger, which many of us read regularly. It’s also 
known as an outstanding educational institution. In fact, I was educated at St. Peter’s College. I would ask all 
hon. members not to judge St. Peter’s educational process on the basis of what it has done for the member 
for Rosemont, but I would point out that the Hon. Minister of Health was also educated at St. Peter’s College 
at Muenster. I think we should probably judge the institution on the fine job it did for Mr. Rolfes. I’m sure 
all hon. members, Mr. Speaker, will want to join with me in welcoming Father Andrew to our midst this 
afternoon and to ask him to extend to all the other monks at St. Peter’s the very best wishes of the 
Saskatchewan legislature. Father, would you like to stand up? 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. MR. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones) moved second reading of Bill No. 90 — An Act to 
amend The Residential Tenancies Act. 
 
He said, Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise today on second reading of Bill No. 90, An Act to amend 
The Residential Tenancies Act. It is a pleasure because it is a piece of legislation which shows this 
government’s ability to keep in touch with the needs of people and also our ability to listen and act on the 
concerns of those people. 



 
May 12, 1980 

2922 
 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan through the rentalsman and the mediation board have, at very 
little expense, been able to capably resolve hundreds of disputes which previously tied up our courts and 
more times than not, did not provide an adequate solution for these folks. Mr. Speaker, at a time when our 
sister western provinces are doing away with this type of program, we are standing alone and moving to 
improve upon its operations. I ask the question, why? Of course, it’s very simple; it’s because this 
government is listening — listening to people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, I have met with landlords not only to explain the program, but also to get 
them to give us their indications as to what we can do to improve the program. I’ve also met and heard from 
many tenants and obtained ideas from them as well, Mr. Speaker. I would like to reaffirm the decision to 
maintain rent controls in Regina and Saskatoon as it seems a number of rumor have been started lately to the 
contrary. The reason for such a continuation is the economic pressures now present, as a direct result of 
consecutive federal government decisions to have interest rates at what I term near ridiculously high levels. 
This means a larger demand for rental accommodations and an extremely low level of vacant apartments 
available to meet the demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six and possibly seven of our other nine provinces have rent review or rent control legislation 
in place in varying forms. Alberta and Manitoba have indicated at this point in time that they will be 
completely out of rent control and rent review in a short time. The balance of the provinces would appear to 
be moving in the same direction as Saskatchewan with the development of landlord-tenant relations under 
one act which would include appeals of one sort or another concerning rent increase to a rent review board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly point out an example for the benefit of the hon. members. I have in my 
possession a copy of an ordinance order from the city of Palm Springs passed last fall which limits rents on 
residential units for three-quarters of the increase in the cost of living, as indicated in the consumer price 
index for the city of Los Angeles. I mention this, Mr. Speaker, because it is the type of material we receive 
from various sources. This particular piece, I must say, we received from a landlord in the city of Regina. 
 
Now turning to the specific amendments. Mr. Speaker, the bill before us is, for the most part, housekeeping. 
It is also consistent with our government’s program to decontrol, implemented in October 1977. As you are 
aware, The Residential Tenancies Act does much more than simply control rent increases. In fact, Office of 
the Rentalsman statistics indicate that 60 per cent of its workload consisted of disputes between landlords 
and tenants regarding rent arrears, damages incurred to premises, disturbances with other tenants, disposition 
of abandoned property and so on. 
 
The first amendment, subclause 2(j)(vii) and 2(j)(viii) provide for the benefits of The Residential Tenancies 
Act to apply to premises which had preciously been under The Landlord and Tenant Act. At the present time 
the benefits of the act are only available to the large scale landlord, not however, to those who need it most, 
specifically the landlords who rent out a single premise. 
 
The provincial mediation board has experienced a significant increase in the number of requests for 
mediation of disputes between landlords and tenants in single-dwelling 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2923 

premises. For example, statistics show that in 1977-78 there were 231 cases recorded, while in 1978-79 there 
were 488 cases; 1970-80 saw 688 cases being handled. Furthermore, The Landlord and Tenant Act provides 
very little protection for either party in disputes. For example, it could take up to three months for a landlord 
to evict a tenant for damages to that premises. To aggravate the situation, follow-up would require legal 
counsel, and the need to proceed through the district court system. This would further increase costs to a 
landlord who may have already suffered considerable expense due to the damage done to his property. 
 
A second example of this lack of protection would be when a tenant is in arrears of rent. The landlord would 
wait two months before proceeding with action to evict that tenant under the act. Again, any action would 
involve legal assistance and the court system, creating further delay and expertise to the landlord. This is an 
unsatisfactory situation. If you compare this to The Residential Tenancies Act, we note that in the case of 
landlords suffering damage to their property, under the act, the rentalsman can grant immediate possession to 
the landlord. 
 
Regarding the matter of rent arrears, action can be taken against the tenant if he becomes 15 days in arrears 
of rent. Both the examples I have cited point out the inadequacies of the present legislation in dealing with a 
very serious problem. We have documented evidence by way of photography to illustrate evidence of the 
severity of this problem. 
 
By this change, I want to stress the point that the premises we are discussing specifically single-dwelling 
premises, would be exempt, as they are today, from rent control and rent review. 
 
With respect to the amending of section 7, this is consistent with the decontrol program implemented by our 
government in October 1977. It established a decontrol program and a rent review program. Under rent 
review, as you are aware, tenants must appeal a rent increase if they feel it is not justifiable. Placing 
administration of The Residential Tenancies Act under the provincial mediation board makes for a smoothly 
co-ordinated running operation as the mediation board handles rent review. 
 
As you are aware, landlord and tenant relations have historically been the responsibility of the provincial 
mediation board. It was only when the federal government introduced rent control under the price and wage 
control program that the Office of the Rentalsman was formed. At the inception of the Office of the 
Rentalsman, it was only intended to be a short-term solution to a very severe problem. As has been pointed 
out, the control of rents is a major responsibility for both the Office of the Rentalsman and the provincial 
mediation board. 
 
Statistics show that in the fiscal years, 1979-80, 1,950 cases of landlord-tenant relations were handled by the 
rentalsman and the mediation board combined. The board is responsible for section 35 covering the damage 
deposit area, and part 2 covering the rent review section of The Residential Tenancies Act. The amendment 
to section 46 is an attempt to provide for applications for rent increases that were received by the Office of 
the Rentalsman, although he had not dealt with it prior to the decontrol date. The effect of this amendment 
would be to make the application for increase which must be served on the tenant a notice of increase which 
the tenant could use to apply for a rent review. This removes the need for a landlord to serve another notice 
and create a further delay of three months. 



 
May 12, 1980 

2924 
 

In proposing the appeal of subsection 5 and 6 of section 78, we find that the present provisions are unclear 
and appear to create difficulties for both landlords and tenants regarding the question of possession. The 
effect of this amendment would be that if a tenant does not vacate pursuant to a landlord’s notice to vacate, 
the landlord may apply to the Office of the Rentalsman for an order of possession. Following a hearing the 
rentalsman shall make an order which he considers just and equitable under the circumstances. 
 
What seems to be the required protection for the tenant in this type of dispute is already provided for under 
part 1 of The Residential Tenancies Act, making it unnecessary for this provision in part 2 of the act. 
 
Regarding the amendment to section 80.1 — this will remove the problem which presently exists where 
similar suites have different rent levels assessed by appeals from tenants. It is the experience of the rent 
review board that landlords prefer to keep rents standard in each building. It is also important to recognize 
that when the rent review board is hearing an appeal the landlord is concerned with his revenue and expenses 
on a total block and not just on a specific suite. The amendment means that when over 25 per cent of the 
tenants appeal, the decision of the rent review board will apply to all similar suites within a block. 
 
Regarding the amendment to section 81, we feel that that appeal procedures should be allowed for persons 
who disagree with the decision of the rent review board. Basically speaking, we now have appeal procedures 
under the rent control section. We will now have appeal procedures under rent review as well. That has been 
a right and we do not feel we should remove this right at this particular time. As we gain experience in rent 
review, further consideration may be given to the part of the act. 
 
The amendments to sections 20, 57, 60 and 75 are housekeeping amendments, Mr. Speaker, correcting 
printing errors made in the statute revision process. 
 
With these short explanations, I move second reading of Bill No. 90. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural)) moved second reading of Bill No. 99 — 
An Act to establish the Department of Rural Affairs Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 99, a bill to establish the 
Saskatchewan Department of Rural Affairs. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, much of the activity of local government was centred around the physical 
development of rural and urban communities. Rural municipalities, until recently, were largely concerned 
with the development of an adequate system of roads and bridges and with the administration of limited 
agricultural, social and recreational programs. Financial questions and balance sheets were the major items 
of concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these were and still are serious matters of concern to local governments. However, as our 
society becomes more sophisticated and complex, local governments 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2925 

are faced with new challenges which in many respects overshadow the more mundane day-to-day problems. 
Many of the new challenges which they fact today are social and economic in nature. More and more often 
they are challenges which require a more dramatic rural-urban interface. These challenges, Mr. Speaker, deal 
with such diverse concerns as providing better opportunities and services for disadvantaged people, to 
housing, to community planning, regional planning, or industrial and country residential development. Many 
of these problems demand an active role by the provincial government, and more often than not participation 
by both rural and urban local governments. 
 
The more complex these interrelationships become the more important it is that there be an adequate and 
timely co-operation between all of the affected senior and local government bodies. 
 
As the complexities of local government increased, Mr. Speaker, so did the pressure to create separate roles 
for the rural and urban components of local government to ensure that each component was adequately 
represented at the departmental and the ministerial levels. The result, Mr. Speaker, has been the 
establishment of two ministries, one for rural and one for urban affairs. 
 
There are those who have said that this could be a step backward rather than co-operation between the two 
service areas. This, Mr. Speaker, is because they have not seen fit to listen to what is being said by local 
governments in Saskatchewan. In fact, they have not listened to the points being made on this subject by the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Association of Urban 
Municipalities — two of Saskatchewan’s most important organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of this government know that rural and urban governments must be heard. The 
members of this government know there must be co-operation between provincial and municipal 
governments. The members of this government know that the legitimate aspirations and concerns of both 
rural and urban municipalities must be fairly met. Because of the very close interrelationships between local 
government and provincial government, close co-ordination at all levels is of utmost importance. The 
Department of Rural Affairs act now before us will ensure this co-ordination and co-operation in all 
municipal matters, particularly those involving both rural and urban municipalities. 
 
This bill, Mr. Speaker, clearly establishes the terms of reference and the authorities of the Department of 
Rural Affairs. As a result, the program capability of my department will be strengthened in several areas. 
The legislation authorizes a community planning branch within the Department of Rural Affairs. It’s a 
program which has been requested in the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and 
its member municipalities. It’s a program which will address the complex problems of rural planning and 
which will provide the requested services to rural municipalities. Assisting rural municipalities with zoning 
and zoning by-laws will be an important aspect of the community planning program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me assure you that the importance of rural-urban co-operation and co-ordination has 
been seriously considered. A cross reference system has been worked out with the Department of Urban 
Affairs. This system ensures that both rural and urban departments will be fully involved in all matters which 
concern their respective jurisdictions. Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, procedures are spelled out for 
resolving differences which may develop from time to time. 



 
May 12, 1980 

2926 
 

We will also be increasing our research and planning staff to enable the department to do a better job of 
keeping policy and program development closely aligned with the changing needs of rural municipalities. 
We will, Mr. Speaker, listen to the recommendations of rural municipalities for improvement of program, for 
new programs, and for sport services, to ensure effective local government. A research branch will devote its 
attention to the recommendations of rural municipalities and in this way programs will keep pace with their 
changing needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under authority of this legislation now before you, this department will provide a full range of 
advisory and financial management services to rural municipalities. 
 
As circumstances in rural areas change, it can be expected that additional responsibilities will be added to 
this department. Industrial and mineral developments are having a substantial impact on the rural 
community. Expansions in the heavy oil area are creating pressures in those areas. Rail line abandonments 
create changes in traffic and shipping patterns, which result in realignments of road systems. As more and 
more urban people exercise their desire for a more rural lifestyle, the problems of assessment and taxation of 
small holding are becoming a major concern in rural municipalities. This government’s determination in 
further developing the Department of Rural Affairs in the areas of community planning, research and policy 
development and advisory services as related to municipal management and finance will enable my 
department to service the needs of rural municipalities more effectively and more efficiently in the future. 
 
In respect to the matter of close co-ordination between the Department of Rural Affairs and the Department 
of Urban Affairs, Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize again that we have worked very closely together with my 
colleague the Minister of Urban Affairs in development of a co-ordinated package of legislation to enable us 
to efficiently serve local government in Saskatchewan. 
 
I am pleased to advise the members of this legislature that the legislation now before you provides for a 
department of the Government of Saskatchewan which will devote its full and undivided attention to 
providing services which are now being requested by rural municipalities in this province. 
 
These priorities, as presented to us by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and by rural 
municipalities include: first, the completion of an agreed upon designated system of municipal roads. This 
system includes 18,400 miles of main farm access roads, 10,000 miles of grid and 5,200 miles of primary 
grid. By the end of the 1986 construction season, we hope the construction program will be basically 
complete except for a little over 3,000 miles of primary grid. 
 
Second is the provision of community planning services through the Department of Rural Affairs community 
planning branch. This service will assist rural municipalities in establishing municipal land-use policy 
through zone and controls. 
 
Third is the provision of full municipal management and finance advisory services. This will include: (a) a 
financial management service to rural municipalities, including review of financial statements, budgets, 
accounting procedures and authorization of accounting forms; (b) processing tax cancellations and by-laws 
for approval including 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2927 

the certificate of validity for debenture by-laws after compliance with local government board regulations; 
(c) drafting proposed legislative amendments and advising municipal officials as to the interpretations of 
statute law; (d) ensuring the proper bonding of rural municipal secretary-treasurers; (e) the municipal 
on-the-job training program and approval of all grants under this program to municipalities; (f) issuing 
permits to rural municipalities employing unqualified person as secretary-treasurers and processing 
applications for certificates of qualification for persons employed in rural municipalities; (g) the preparation 
of hamlet directory and hamlet organization; (h) collecting statistical reports and municipal directory 
information for rural municipalities; and lastly, generally acting as an advisory and a consultative service to 
rural municipalities. 
 
These are the programs, Mr. Speaker, which will be covered by my department in the initial stages. I urge all 
members of the legislature to support this bill to establish a Saskatchewan Department of Rural Affairs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on Bill No. 99, a bill to 
establish a Department of Rural Affairs. I should like to take a few moments at the outset to discuss the 
concerns expressed by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities in conjunction with this bill. 
 
First of all this government created a Department of Rural Affairs that was seemingly not functional because 
it was originally lacking various essential branches. Then when the rural municipalities pointed out this fact, 
the government turned around and set up these branches before Bill No. 99, or in fact any bill had passed the 
Legislative Assembly authorizing such action. In both cases, Mr. Speaker, this government was wrong in its 
actions. This government has taken a shoddy and haphazard way of setting up a department much to the 
detriment of the rural municipalities. Mr. Speaker, some time ago, I labelled the Minister of Rural Affairs the 
‘minister of nothing’, because his department still does not legally exist and in actual fact until Bill No. 99 
passes this Assembly and receives royal assent, he still is the ‘minister of nothing.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, over one year ago there was a call for the immediate establishment of a Department of Rural 
Affairs but the present administration ignored the request. It is only now they are taking the necessary action 
for the creation of this department. For the record, I should like to read a letter I have received from a Mr. 
Jeff Corfield which was addressed to the deputy ministers of urban and rural affairs. That letter expresses 
some of the concerns being voiced by rural councillors. It says: 
 

Dear Sirs: 
 

I was very pleased to received your formal notification of the establishment of a community planning 
branch within the Department of Rural Affairs effective April 1, 1980. To me it makes a lot of sense to 
split municipal affairs into urban and rural. After all we’re the first province in Canada to take this bold 
and innovative move and that says a lot about our competence in these matters. I see the new rural branch 
will have a director and senior planner, now being recruited. This is logical as what we need in 
Saskatchewan is more top level executive types in Saskatoon and Regina. 

 
Why hire junior staff who would go out and work with the municipalities. Our 



 
May 12, 1980 

2928 
 

resources can be better utilized than that. Why go to all the trouble of putting an office in Swift Current 
when you can simply send somebody out in a government car from Regina. Couldn’t agree more. 

 
A new perspective in rural Saskatchewan was just what the doctor ordered. It’s not urban resources which 
are causing planning problems in rural areas; it’s larger farms and new technologies. Urban impact causing 
land subdivisions and the need for zoning controls just don’t hold a stick to the land use problems posed 
by two R.M.’s by industrialized farming. Why didn’t we think of this earlier? I quite agree. It just makes 
good common sense to use municipal boundaries to determine areas of responsibility. After all, why send 
one man to Battleford to talk to the town and R.M. in the same office building when you could send two? 

 
As a taxpayer, I would violently object to any government who would try to implement a system which did 
not uphold the values of duplicating services and creating inefficiency. Well done chaps. Your automatic 
referral system in co-ordinating committees sounds just the answer to me to get urban and rural planning 
problems solved in an effective manner, without a complicated bureaucracy. Why send out one man to talk 
to an urban municipality and its rural neighbor when you can send two and have them meet in a 
co-ordinating committee through an automatic referral system? Brilliant! 

 
I am pleased to see each of you entrenched, each in his own office building. That is just the type of 
thinking we need to get urban and rural municipalities working together. Now that you have set the 
example, you will no doubt be severely reprimanding all those urban and rural municipalities which 
presently share the same building and administration staff. In time perhaps they will begin to see the error 
of their ways and follow your lead in the name of efficiency and effectiveness. Good on you both. 

 
Yours very gratifyingly. 
Jeff Corfield 
Lloydminster 

 
Mr. Speaker, we, on this side of the House, take the position that while this creation of the Department of 
Rural Affairs recognizes the special needs of rural communities in Saskatchewan, we do seriously question 
the method of establishment. We share the concerns of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities that this new department might not be functional. Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that 
the minister took a step in the right direction when he announced on April 23, 1980 that a planning branch 
would be set up in rural affairs. 
 
We, on this side of the Assembly, welcome such a move and feel it is a step in the right direction — late 
perhaps but still a positive step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I serve notice that we in the official opposition will carefully scrutinize every aspect of the 
Department of Rural Affairs to make sure the best interests of the rural municipalities are being served by 
this new department. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 97 — An Act to 
amend The Education Act. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2929 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to this Assembly Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend 
The Education Act. While these amendments as proposed in Bill No. 97 are relatively minor in nature, they 
do further improve legislation which is already regarded as exemplary in the field of school aw in Canada. 
 
I sat last fall at the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association and listened with pride 
as I heard the president of the Canadian School Trustees’ Association describe The Education Act in 
Saskatchewan as the most progressive legislation dealing with education anywhere in Canada. He pointed 
out the degree to which this legislation provides responsible governing authority to local school boards n our 
province, and pointed out that no other legislature in Canada has seen fit to give that kind of responsibility 
and authority to school boards within their provincial areas. 
 
This education act, Mr. Speaker, became law on January 1, 1979. It reflects our constitutional and political 
heritage and embodies the aspirations and expectations of our citizens for our children and their future. It 
emphasizes democratic practice in the shaping and governance of the educational system, and offers a new 
focus and emphasis for the rights of pupils as well as for the rights of their parents. It defines in clear and 
straightforward terms the role of governing authorities, educators, teachers, parents and members of the local 
community, so that each sector is better able to accomplish its particular educational goals. 
 
The Education Act as it now stands recognises the right of all young people to an education appropriate to 
their particular needs and abilities, in order that each and every young person in our educational system will 
develop to the full extent of his or her potential. It recognizes, Mr. Speaker, the responsibilities of school 
boards to provide such an education to our young people. 
 
I should mention, in order to bring into context these amendments, that The Education Act in addition has 
rationalized the role of the province in local government affairs by eliminating many of the old statutory 
limitations and previously required ministerial approvals in departmental regulations relating to school board 
operations. It heralded the creation of the school division and the board of education for each school division 
as a replacement for the many different types of school districts and boards previously existent. The act also 
inaugurated triennial school board elections and local school board advisory committees in urban divisions. 
It saw the abandonment of the concept of the ratepayer and burgess in favor of the concept of elector, who 
among other things is now eligible to vote on money bylaws. 
 
The Education Act as it now stands gives strength to the policy making and legislative roles of boards of 
education and makes specific provision for locally employed directors or superintendents as the executive 
arm of the board. In matters of school attendance and discipline, The Education Act has shifted the focus 
away from enforcement toward the treatment of symptoms and the handling of diagnostic and remedial 
approaches in an effort to remove the causes of such problems. The responsible participation of the pupil and 
the parent, as well as the school is fostered in this approach. 
 
Turning now specifically to Bill No. 97, Mr. Speaker, and looking at the sections, clause 7(c) in the existing 
education act is repealed and a new subsection 7(1) is proposed to empower the Minister of Education to 
provide for payments of various miscellaneous grants not exceeding $10,000, rather than requiring approval 
for these from the 



 
May 12, 1980 

2930 
 

Lieutenant-Governor in Council as is currently the case. I should point out that with these amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, grants in excess of $10,000 will still require an order in council as authorization for payment. This 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, will reduce by about one-half from about 50 to 25, the annual number of grants 
requiring order in council for payment. I should add, however, that such grants will still continue to require 
the authorization of treasury board and the approval of this Legislative Assembly during the consideration of 
estimates. 
 
Also proposed in Bill No. 97, Mr. Speaker, is a substitution of a new section 43 for the existing section to 
clarify the intent of this particular section. The intent of section 43 was to permit a non-resident of a school 
division to be a candidate for election as a member of a board of education, provided that he or she, in 
addition to age and citizenship qualifications was the owner of assessable property in the division which he 
or she sought election to the board. 
 
It was not intended that such a candidate be exempt from the age and citizenship requirement which applies 
to electors who reside within the division for the prescribed time prior to the vote. However, it is possible to 
interpret the present section 43 to mean that a person may qualify for nomination solely on the basis of 
ownership of property in the division, and may or may not be a Saskatchewan resident or meet the age in 
citizenship requirements imposed on the electors. 
 
The proposed amendment contained in this bill is intended to remove this ambiguity and make it clear that 
all candidates must comply with age, citizenship and residency requirements. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, amended clause 105(1)(b) as it is in this bill empowers boards t delegate responsibility 
by resolution for certifying accounts on behalf of the chairman to other members or officials of the board and 
thus expedite the processing of payments of accounts passed by the board. Currently, the board chairmen 
must themselves certify all accounts before payment can be made. 
 
The proposed amendment to section 238 essentially broadens the avenues of choice available to parties of 
the collective bargaining process in the event of a dispute during this process. At present, mediation service 
is available to the parties where the arbitration process, which is one of the routes for handling collective 
bargaining negotiations, has been chosen under section 235 as a process for settlement. But it is not available 
where the conciliation process has been selected unless the education relations board on its own initiative 
provides for mediation services. It is felt that because mediation services have been significant contributors 
in solving disputes, the availability of mediation services should become an option guaranteed by law when 
the conciliation process has been selected. 
 
The amendments proposed for section 238 would give effect to this recommendation and result in access to 
mediation irrespective of whether arbitration or conciliation have been elected pursuant to section 234. 
 
Section 246, concerning the establishment of a conciliation board, is also amended, simply to reflect the 
proposed amendments to section 238 and is not designed to alter the meaning of intent of the presentation 
section. 
 
Proposed amendments to sections 239, 240 and 243 of the present act are designed 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2931 

to eliminate the avoidable delays in the implementation of the arbitration process and in the rendering of a 
decision when this method is chosen during the collective bargaining process in order to resolve agreement 
disputes. 
 
Also, the amendment to section 249 is intended to expedite the conciliation process when chosen by parties 
of collective bargaining disputes. The proposed amendment to section 249 is intended simply to expedite the 
exchange of information between the bargaining committees when a conciliation board is being established. 
 
I should mention for the information of the members of the House that the sections of the bill to which I 
have been referring, dealing with collective bargaining, have been agreed to by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation (STF) and the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association (SSTA) through their representatives 
of the education relations board. 
 
The final amendment of note to which I would like to draw your attention is the amendment of section 314. 
The intent of section 314 in the existing act is to enable boards of education to borrow for current 
expenditures by hypothecation of the tax levy and, as necessary, future grants payable particularly in the first 
four or five months of the fiscal years when tax collections are low and grant payments are generally 
deferred until the legislative grant appropriation is available. Traditionally borrowing on the security of the 
tax levy has been sufficient for 90 per cent to 95 per cent of the boards. 
 
In the current year, however, about 20 per cent of the boards have elected to borrow simultaneously on the 
security of taxes and grants apparently upon the assumption that section 314 may be interpreted to give them 
the option of borrowing on either or both. In effect credit has been set, in most cases, far in excess of actual 
borrowing requirements. The object of the proposed amendment to section 314 is to remove any possible 
ambiguity in subsection (1) and to discourage commitment of grants except where necessary. 
 
The amendments generally make it necessary for boards to assess their borrowing requirements in relation to 
revenue from all sources, and to make it clear that borrowing on the security of future legislative grants 
should be undertaken only when borrowing on the security of the tax levy is insufficient to meet 
requirements of the board. 
 
It is also proposed that section 314(2) be amended so that when a board borrows using the security of 
legislative grants payable to the division, notification of this fact to the Minister of Finance will only be 
necessary if the board is requested to do so by the person making the loan. The intent of this amendment is to 
reduce both at the local and the provincial government departments, the workload associated with this 
borrowing option. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am sure that all members, upon reviewing these proposed amendments to our 
education act, will find that they are indeed, while not major, significant improvements to the current act. I 
am sure these amendments will be supported by all members of this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — I just wanted to say a few words. I am a little bit concerned w hen 
I see bill after bill being introduced giving the minister the authority to make $10,000 grants. The way the 
education grants are structured — you tell me it is 



 
May 12, 1980 

2932 
 

the best grant program when I ask you questions in question period. To establish a $10,000 grant by which 
you can bypass the grant program, I don’t think is really consistent with what you have been telling me. So I 
am opposed to that particular portion of the bill. 
 
I think many of the other changes are changes which will be perhaps beneficial to the operation of the 
education system. The member for Indian Head-Wolseley is unavoidably absent today. I would expect that 
he may have some comments and perhaps some amendments which he would like to make to this bill in 
committee of the whole. But we will be basically supporting the intent of the bill in second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 96 
— An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Ed Tchorzewski, on March 13, presented a balanced budget to this House 
with very minor increased in taxation. Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act provides for 
one of the minor increases in tax effective on and after March 14. This bill increases the tax on cigarettes to 
1.2 cents per cigarette or 30 cents per package of 25. The previous rate was 27 cents per package of 25. 
 
The member for Kindersley will be interested in this. The tax rate on every cigar (I have seen him smoking 
the odd cigar recently), having a retail value of more than 20 cents will now be 12 cents. I am sure the 
member for Kindersley wouldn’t smoke cheap cigars. This is an increase of 1 cent per cigar. However, the 
tax rate on the two categories of cigars, having retail values of up to 10 cents or between 10 cents and 20 
cents, does not increase at this time. This may influence his buying habits in cigars. I don’t know whether it 
will or not. 
 
The tax on fine cut tobacco and pipe tobacco is increased from 11 cents to 12 cents per 25 grams. If you 
want that in imperial measure, it’s 10 ounces. These modest increases in tax are expected to yield additional 
revenue in the rage of $2.5 million to $3 million in the fiscal years ending March 31 next. These new rates of 
tax announced in the budget have not resulted in any objections from smokers. No one has contacted me 
critical of the tax. Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I fear the tax increases will not induce many smokers 
to cease or desist from partaking in what is a very dangerous habit. 
 
Saskatchewan now has the same tax rate, and I hope members opposite will note this, as Quebec and 
Ontario, a slightly higher rate than British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Prince 
Edward Island and Newfoundland have considerably higher rates than we do in Saskatchewan. Alberta has a 
significantly lower rate and that has come problems for us, obviously, with Alberta being located right next 
door. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time on division. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2933 

HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 85 
— An Act to amend The Queen’s Printer’s Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this particular bill serves two purposes. Firstly, it includes some housekeeping 
amendments to clarify the intent of some sections of this act and simplify their administration. Secondly, it 
moves authority for print procurement and for the office services agency from The Queen’s Printer’s Act. 
Print procurement, a buying function, will be handled by the purchasing agency and it is provided for in that 
particular act. An amendment to The Department of Revenue, Supply and Services Act this session will 
provide authority for the office services agency in that particular act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I simply point out to the members of the legislature that these legislative changes 
reflect organizational changes in the department intended to improve efficiency. It will give the Queen’s 
Printer the time required to oversee the publication and distribution of provincial statutes and the 
Saskatchewan Gazette and to research the viability of a central agency to distribute all government 
publications. Mr. Speaker, I therefore take pleasure in moving second reading of Bill No. 85 — An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Printer’s Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, my good friend and colleague, the 
member for Regina South, has some serious concerns with this particular bill. At the moment he is enjoying 
the hospitality of the Hon. Ned Shillington and the Hon. James Fleming, MP, at a new conference and 
reception at the Hotel Saskatchewan Blueroom. I’m sure you would all agree his words should be hard in 
this Legislative Assembly, but since he’s unavoidably not here I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services) moved second reading of Bill No. 84 
— An Act to amend The Department of Revenue, Supply and Services Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Deputy Speaker, this bill essentially does two things. Firstly, it transfers the legislative authority 
for the office services agency and the distribution of statutes from The Queen’s Printers Act which was 
mentioned in my comments on the previous bill. As with the amendments to The Queen’s Printer Act, these 
changes are intended to reflect reorganization in the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services. 
 
Secondly, it removes the requirement that all costs of the service provided by an advance account must be 
recovered from the recipient of that service. It is the intention of the government that this provision will only 
be applied to the executive aircraft. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I should have a word of explanation with respect to this particular matter. The 
Department of Revenue, Supply and Service Act was drafted when the department was established in the 
year 1977. At that time it was intended that all costs of services provided by an advance account should be 
recovered from the identifiable or direct recipient of that service. For example, when a CVA vehicle is leased 
to a public agency, all costs attributable to that specific vehicle are recovered from that public agency. 
 
However, I wish to stress, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the executive aircraft is a different 



 
May 12, 1980 

2934 
 

kind of service. It is a central government service that must be available for use at all times. It is not utilized 
by one specific department or agency. As with some other resources, the aircraft incur fixed costs whether 
they are used or not. However, what is different with the aircraft is that the fixed costs represent a 
significantly high proportion of the total costs, in fact, the major costs. They cannot reasonably be identified 
as the responsibility of one user or another. We believe, therefore, that the fixed costs should not be passed 
directly on to the user. 
 
We are aware of the fact the opposition, or some members of the opposition, will probably view this 
legislation as an attempt to present it to the pubic as an attempt to hide the real cost of the aircraft. That is 
simply not true. It is clearly definable in the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services in a subvote, what 
the total fixed costs are — last year $595,380. The full costs of the aircraft are revealed each and every year. 
 
The opposition may view this legislation as something new and irregular in regard to advance accounts. They 
will be wrong again. It has been an accepted practice for a very long time that the fixed costs of providing 
space for advance account operations are not passed on to the client. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are aware that some opposition members may construe the legislation as a means to 
authorize and encourage misuse or abuse of the government aircraft. That is simply not true. Once a 
commitment is made to acquire a resource it is incumbent upon the government to make practical and 
efficient use of their resource. We are convinced that charging the variable costs of the aircraft to the user 
will encourage proper usage of the aircraft. The more the aircraft is used, the more cost efficient it is. Mr. 
Speaker, efficient use of government resources is something this government always pursues in spite of 
some of the criticism we receive from the opposition with respect to varied items. I therefore move second 
reading of Bill No. 84 — An Act to amend the Revenue, Supply, and Services Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A couple of points, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s interesting to me that 
the minister brings in this amendment, and talks about the difficulty of accounting. Up until this year there 
appeared to be no problem with accounting. The costs, both fixed and variable, were swung onto the various 
departments. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has no trouble in assigning its fixed and variable 
costs to the various departments, but lo and behold, once the executive use of aircraft was brought to light, 
and it was brought to light in the sense that several members of the Executive Council were using that 
aircraft for what I suggest were personal and political reasons, suddenly there are some accounting problems 
and the minister, in fact last year, went against the regulations, against the rules, and failed to assign the 
fixed costs to the various departments. So it is very difficult for me, Mr. Minister, to believe you when you 
say, we aren’t trying to hide anything. That is precisely what you are trying to do. You are trying to get away 
from the problem that the Minister of Mineral Resources took 38 trips to the town of Tisdale at the expense 
of the people of Saskatchewan, for personal and political uses which cost the people of Saskatchewan 
thousands and thousands of dollars. But you don’t want that to show on the public accounts of the province 
of Saskatchewan. Somehow you want to hide it under CVA and that’s exactly what you’re trying to do. 
 
Now I say to the member that the opposition does not object to the executive use of 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2935 

aircraft. That’s what they are there for. Every government uses them. But what I do say to you, Mr. Minister, 
is that there should be some rules set down. Each year you should present to this legislature a set of logs 
showing who used the government aircraft, not only the person who signed for it but all the other members 
(whether they be members of your staff, your research staff, or members of your party). Have their names 
down as well so that we can see who is using that aircraft. That money should be recovered if it is not being 
used for government purposes. So I say, you show us the log and tell us who is using the aircraft, not only 
the person who signs but everyone who uses it, and have them sign in as to where they are leaving from and 
where they are going. Clearly we can accept that, provided it is used for government purposes and not, as in 
the past, where it was being used for personal and political purposes. I say that is wrong, and for that reason I 
will be voting against this bill. 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — I have further comments to make on this bill, Mr. Speaker. I beg 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 105 — An Act to amend 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
He said: This bill follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on my bill to amend The Cemeteries Act. This piece of 
legislation has already received a great deal of public discussion outside of the legislature. Certainly I 
personally have received several representations from persons within my constituency on the matters dealt 
with in this bill. I feel confident that other members have found similar reactions from their constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. I feel confident that this bill has the support of the vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan. 
There are however some, including the two members opposite, who are suggesting that somehow this bill 
muzzles certain members of the legislature. I wish, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to state strongly that I do not 
believe this to be the case. 
 
I was interested in looking at a copy of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of Friday, May 9, an editorial entitled, 
New Bill a Just One, and I will quote briefly from it: 
 

New regulations tabled this week in the legislature requiring that a third party be registered in the last 
general election to qualify for provincial funding will likely receive wide public support. Given that these 
amendments uphold the very important principle that a political party’s members must be elected before 
that party is entitled to public money, such support would be appropriate. 

 
It goes on further to say: 
 

It is entirely possible that those who framed the original regulations governing these matters in the 
legislature did not foresee any such manoeuvre in Saskatchewan politics. In any event it’s fitting that the 
new provisions now be put in place. It is important too to remember that while the new regulations will 
deny the Unionest Party certain public funds, they will in no way ‘muzzle’ its members as has been 
suggested by Mr. Collver. He and Dennis Ham will still receive their normal MLA pay and will be free to 
promote the aims of their party. 

 
In the first place, Mr. Speaker, this bill does not restrict the democratic right of 



 
May 12, 1980 

2936 
 

members of this House to form parties and to sit in the House as member of their new party. The member for 
Nipawin and Swift Current can advocate whatever they wish and call themselves whatever they wish. 
 
This bill does not restrict the rights of members to sit in this House, receive their salaries and indemnities, 
receive research grants to which members are entitled, and to receive expenses for funds expended in serving 
their constituencies. 
 
What this bill does deal with is the recognition of a third party in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I believe that 
all members of the Assembly would agree that when the present act was passed last years, a circumstance 
such as the one we are now faced with was not contemplated. Indeed, had it been, I feel confident the 
proposed amendments would have been included in the original bill. Indeed, one need only look at the 
companion piece of legislation, The Election Act, to see how the Assembly views members or candidates as 
separate from parties. 
 
Under The Election Act there are two sets of rules, one for candidates and one for parties. For a candidate to 
receive reimbursement for election expenses, that candidate need only comply with the rules and receive 15 
per cent of the votes cast in the constituency. However, for that candidate to have his party affiliation on the 
ballot the party must be registered and must be running a minimum number of candidates in the election. For 
the party to receive reimbursement for part of its expenditures it must receive 15 per cent of the votes cast in 
the province and comply with the reporting provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear to me, at least, that there are two sets of conditions in The Election Act, one for 
candidates and one for parties. Similarly, this bill proposed that parties meet certain minimum conditions to 
be recognized as a third party in this Assembly. It does not change the right of members to sit as members of 
a certain party or to advocate particular positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if members of the Unionest Party far the need for the public funds in such a 
significant way, and if they think waiting until the next provincial election is too long, we will attempt to 
accommodate them. When the House meets in committee of the whole, I will propose a House amendment 
to clause 2(1)(d). It will provide that the two members opposite need only have the endorsement of their 
particular party in the general election or by-election in which at least two of them were elected as members. 
 
I therefore challenge, Mr. Speaker, the members for Nipawin and Swift Current, if they are really interested 
in pursuing this matter, to resign their seats and ask their constituents to endorse them as Unionests. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — If they follow that course of action and if they are successful and return to this House, 
then the two members would be eligible for the third party grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to comment briefly on some of the other sections of the bill. 
 
The amendment to subsection 3(2) will permit various salaries, allowances, and grants provided for by this 
act to be rounded off to the next lowest dollar. This will be of 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2937 

greatest assistance to those who must administer the act and calculate the various salaries, grants, and 
allowances. I’m sure all members will find this a reasonable measure. 
 
The amendment in section 4 deals with both benefits under the act and appointments to various offices from 
and under the Crown. 
 
The new section 11 updated to take into account positions now held by members will make it clear that the 
acceptance of any of these offices, or the entitlement to any benefits does not disqualify a member from 
sitting and voting in the Assembly. 
 
Section 5 amends section 63 to ensure that grants and allowances payable to the third party are not 
retroactive to a time before a group achieves third party status or to a time before a member becomes the 
leader of the third party. 
 
The amendment in section 6 takes into account the new departments of rural and urban affairs. The 
amendment to section 77 as provided for by section 7 of this bill will permit regulations for ministers 
travelling and other expenses to be made retroactive to January 1, 1979. These regulations have already been 
passed but the counsel to the special committee has pointed out a special problem with respect to these 
regulations. This amendment will make it possible to correct that defect. 
 
Section 8 cures an error in section 89 of the act. Subsection 89(1) should have been subject to subsections 
89(2) and 89(3) of the original act. Section 9 will ensure that the defects in the act cured by the amending bill 
will be cured from the time the original act took effect. Subsection 9(4) provides that the amendments to 
clause 2.1(d) in section 63 take effect from the date of the last provincial election, October 18, 1978. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me reiterate. The bill in my view does not impair the freedom of speech or 
the right to form political parties. This bill ensures that public moneys will only go to those parties two 
members of which have the endorsement of the electorate. This bill, with the House amendment I will 
propose, would permit the members of the Unionest Party, if they seek re-election in their constituency as 
Unionests, to receive third party grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not ready for the question. Before I attempt to 
get started on my opening remarks in this debate, I’d like to make a couple of comments with reference to 
what the hon. member for Biggar has just said. 
 
First of all, he is attempting, and so have other members of his party, to place the emphasis in this bill on 
money and grants. But Mr. Speaker, this act does more than that. This act negates the standing of a political 
party in this Assembly. It doesn’t relate to grants only and I would only refer the hon. member for Biggar to 
the comments by the Premier of Saskatchewan on Saturday, April 25, 1980 in which he said he was 
disappointed but no surprised at the new development. I quote: 
 

The political system doesn’t accommodate independence all that well and I 



 
May 12, 1980 

2938 
 

am not surprised he (Collver) is attempting to put forward some organization. 
 
The reason for the creation of a political party in this Legislative Assembly is to put forward the ideas of that 
party in the best way possible. The government of the province of Saskatchewan decided in its wisdom last 
year to create The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act in a way which recognized political 
parties in the province of Saskatchewan — the Unionest Party has complied with every single stipulation. 
We are recognized as a political party under The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. We are, 
for the information of the member for Biggar, recognized as a political party under The Election Act. We are 
not only recognized as a political party under The Election Act, but we are duly elected members of this 
legislature. The act contemplated all of that. The act contemplated that members shall have rights to speak as 
they see fit, have rights to think as they see fit and have rights to associate as they see fit. 
 
All of the members opposite are not unintelligent. They know history. They know that in 1917, without 
going to the electorate, the Unionist Party of Canada was formed. Sir Robert Bordon was the prime minister; 
he was succeeded by Sir Arthur Meighen. In 1921, as the Unionist Party under another name they were 
defeated. But he knows that members of parliament got together in 1917 and created a party without going to 
the electorate. So he’s going against history. He throws forward a facetious challenge about a by-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1975 I was elected in this legislature for the first time. In that same year the NDP, all of the 
members of the NDP without ever, ever having presented the case to the people of Saskatchewan, introduced 
the most far-reaching legislation that has appeared in this Assembly or in Saskatchewan in almost its history; 
that was nationalizing the potash mines without ever having gone to the people, without ever having 
presented the idea to the people. 
 
So to suggest that government or members should have to seek re-election because of a change in their stand 
or a change in their position or a change in circumstances, is the most unworthy of arguments that the 
minister of members could ever put forward. Every single day in this Legislative Chamber, members change 
their minds from positions that they have taken at the last election. And if they did not do that they would be 
ill serving their constituents. 
 
If for example, four or five or two members of the NDP decided, instead of taking the chicken way out and 
accepting the tradition of the NDP to sit in their place when an important vote is coming up, to stand up for 
what they believed in, said they would create the Marxist-Leninist Party in the province of Saskatchewan, 
complied with The Election Act, complied with The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, then 
they should be recognized in this Assembly as a party as this legislation contemplated last year when it was 
made. The members know the lessons of history as well as I do. They know that to establish new precedents 
in this legislature is totally and completely against the rights of every single member of this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very, very disappointed today that when legislation with the impact of this bill is 
presented to this Chamber, the Premier of Saskatchewan refuses to be here. I am not disappointed, Mr. 
Speaker, I am appalled — and the member laughs. The member thinks that’s funny. He thinks it is funny that 
a government may bring in a piece of legislation which withdraws the rights of members of this Chamber to 
do their job to the best of their ability. 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2939 

He laughs because he thinks that by doing this the government can prove to any other citizen of 
Saskatchewan who is desirous of formulating an idea, or formulating a political party, that he can be 
blackmailed into subservience. I say, Mr. Speaker, this party will not be blackmailed into subservience. With 
or without this legislation our party will present its views to the people. 
 
No matter what any of you think of my cause, no matter what any of you think we may be doing or what you 
think of the road we may be leading ourselves on, my right to have those ideas, my right to associate with 
others with those ideas and my right to present them to the people as an alternative is written in blood in this 
country. 
 
Far better speakers than I have said words to this effect before. They have said, I don’t agree with what you 
say but I’ll defend to the death your right to say it. And I won’t allow governments to blackmail people into 
not having ideas because they don’t happen to coincide with the ideas of the majority. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Edmund Burke! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Edmund Burke, 1774, for what it is worth, to the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundamental principles of democracy are at stake here. The fundamental rights of members 
of this Legislative Chamber are at stake here. I wonder if members to my right have considered all the 
implication of this bill. Those who were here in 1973 and 1974 when the Progressive Conservative Party 
represented 2 per cent and 4 per cent of the popular support will remember the majority was desirous of 
eliminating the PCs from the scene. I wonder if they would like to have been blackmailed from the scene as 
this bill is attempting to do to the Unionest Party? 
 
It is unacceptable to any free-thinking person to remove the rights of any group within a Legislative 
Chamber, while that Chamber is in session. This action is detrimental to those members and can be likened 
to the blackest, most repressive kind of legislation ever introduced in Canada or the United Kingdom or the 
United States of America. 
 
I wonder if the members are aware of the comments made on a recent radio program by the constitutional 
legal expert at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Howard McConnell. Now if the members are not aware 
of Mr. McConnell’s remarks, I am going to read them into the record because I think it is important that you 
understand what constitutional experts say about this bill. They are not, by the way, editorial writers for the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of the Regina Leader-Post, but people who are concerned about the preservation of 
freedom in this country and the preservation of democratic rights. 
 
Mr. Miller said, Professor McConnell, how does this bill represent censorship? McConnell says, well, I think 
Dick (and he was referring to Dick Miller, not Dick Collver.) I think, I think Dick, if Messrs. Collver and 
Ham had perhaps joined a more popular political movement, if they had say, formed themselves into a 
Liberal or a Social Credit Party in the legislature, they would have been much more likely to have received 
the financial support which the government is now denying them. I think the fact they represent an unpopular 
and what some people might call a fringe minority is exposing them to the represent attack by all parties in 
the legislature, to take away the funding they 



 
May 12, 1980 

2940 
 

would otherwise receive. Miller said this brings up what I think to be a rather important point, and that’s the 
right of the majority. There was a CBC poll on this program a few days ago showing that 60 per cent was in 
favor of the government’s move to limit that funding. Now that’s a majority rule! Isn’t that how this country 
is run? McConnell replied, (and I want the members to listen to this and pay attention to this) majority rule is 
important, Dick, but there is nothing more special in a liberal or social democratic system than the rights of 
the minority. 
 
Our problem is really, how are we going to protect the rights of the minority? The most unpopular minorities 
are needless to say the ones who need the protection the most. Now, how are we going to protect the rights 
and freedom of expression or freedom of political association from being violated by an insensitive 
majority? Because that’s where the danger comes from — two civil liberties. Miller says, I guess then that 
must be the true test of democracy. McConnell replied as John Stewart Mill once said, right! 
 
Is there any kind of precedent in Canada or North America for a bill of this nature? McConnell says, not 
recently that I know of, Dick. I think perhaps during the American Civil War certain legislators in the border 
sates who had southern sympathies were deprived of their political rights in circumstances of emergency. 
Now of course that is an extreme case. But once you introduce the principles that the legislature can 
retroactively derogate from the rights of a party, by introducing legislation, where is it going to end? It is just 
a question of degree. 
 
Miller goes on, you said this could help Mr. Collver. In what way? McConnell said, I think if nothing had 
been done, Messrs. Collver and Ham according to your own CBC survey would not enjoy very much 
support. This will give publicity to the Unionest Party. It will arouse sympathy for the Unionest Party. It will 
give them a veneer of martyrdom. It could very well convert what appeared to be a losing cause into one 
with some prospect, although I wouldn’t want to overrate the prospects. 
 
Miller says, what do you think the government should do? Should they withdraw the bill or would that put 
them in an even more difficult position? McConnell says, I think withdrawing the bill would show a great 
respect for the rights of dissenting minorities. I sometimes wonder though if you took a hypothetical critic of 
the left, looking at what is being done here, would he not say, what about your much-vaunted 
liberal-democratic multiparty system? It’s all right; the parties can exist as long as they don’t challenge the 
underlying functions the other parties share. Once they go a little bit outside of them, then they are no longer 
members of the club. So really, your multiparty system is a sham! You know, I would be afraid of this 
criticism being made. I think it might even be made effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the comments of the constitutional legal expert, Professor Howard McConnell, at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been said in this Assembly and outside this Assembly about Canada and about 
what’s happening in Canada, whether you agree or not that an option should be presented to the people of 
western Canada, an option which says either make Canada work or seek union with the United States of 
America. It is an option which, whether you agree with it or not, is totally irrelevant to this question. Totally! 
If every member of the Legislative Chamber believes Canada can survive, and wants to go outsides this 
legislature with the Canadian flag and wave it 24 hours a day, that is his right and privilege. But if you want 
a free country, if you want a country which cares about the rights of minorities, if the Attorney General wants 
the Ukrainian people 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2941 

protected because they are a minority, and if the member for Saskatoon Centre wants the rights of the 
minorities maintained, then you must defeat this bill. Because once a government can take hold of the 
minority and try to blackmail and coerce them into thinking the same as the majority, then, Mr. Speaker, our 
democracy is finished. I intend, during the course of this debate, Mr. Speaker, to move the following motion, 
and I’ll be doing so at the conclusion of my remarks that all the words after ‘that’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: this House declines to give second reading to Bill No. 105, An Act to amend 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act because — 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to the rules and principles of this legislature in that it removes the rights 
of a legitimate and legal political party, as defined by the laws of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to fundamental human rights. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to the Canadian Bill of Rights by which free speech and free political 
association are guaranteed. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights by which free speech and free 
political association are guaranteed. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to the principles of equity since, although not directly mentioned, its 
provisions are designed to remove the rights of the Unionest Party in this legislature, even though the 
Unionest Party has complied with all of the laws of the province of Saskatchewan pertaining to political 
parties. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to accepted principles of natural justice by which citizens can expect to 
rely on laws passed by this legislature, and not have them reversed retroactively. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to one of the fundamental principles of democracy by which laws are 
made prospectively and not after events have occurred. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to the most basic tenet of all social democratic societies, and that is that 
the tyranny of the majority may never be used to thwart the rights of minorities. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to the traditions and precedents of all parliaments, including the mother 
of parliament in Britain, and is contrary to the traditions and precedents of legislatures in other free societies. 
 
The principle of the bill is contrary to the rights of individual members of this Legislative Assembly to 
associate freely and could be used as a precedent to remove the rights of all opposition to governmental 
actions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, over the past few days, I have made these views clear to as many people as I could. The 
Premier of Saskatchewan knows I consider this bill to be a serious, serious affront to this Legislative 
Assembly. Why isn’t he here? Why isn’t he in this Assembly to participate in the debate and to find out why 
I believe these things? Surely, Mr. Speaker, surely we are entitled to at least that, to at least a fair hearing. 
The Attorney General and the House Leader for this House, decides on the order of debate in this House. We 
don’t decide when the bill is coming in. Now, for what must be 



 
May 12, 1980 

2942 
 

obvious political reasons (and I don’t think anybody is going to deny the Attorney General and the House 
Leader that right), a number of other bills are put before this one to attempt to ensure the press are all off 
writing their stories some place instead of being here when the bill is presented. Because normally at this 
time of the day, that’s true. Normally at this time of the day the press are not going to be here because they 
are too busy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is, it is the Attorney General who decides in this debate. Now I can tell you what he is 
going to try to do. He is going to try to continue to bring this bill before this Legislative Chamber, time after 
time, before the other business of the people is determined, knowing (because I have told him in advance and 
so have other people) that I intend to speak for as long as physically possible in opposition to this bill. As 
long as I am physically capable, I intend to speak in this Legislative Chamber against this bill because ladies 
and gentlemen of this legislature, you are making a mistake. You are making a mistake against yourselves 
and every citizen whom you present and every citizen who votes for whatever political party. You are 
making a dreadful error. 
 
It is going to be the Attorney General’s attempt or ploy to try to show, because I continue to speak on this 
legislation, that I am holding up the business of the people of Saskatchewan. I want everyone to know, I am 
holding up nothing. Bring forward the other measures, Mr. Attorney General, and you will see how quickly 
they will go through this House, as quickly as the members of the opposition can handle them. But don’t try 
to attempt to fool the people into believing that I, because I am opposed to the fundamental tenets of this bill, 
am holding up the natural and legitimate business of the people of Saskatchewan, because it won’t wash. 
You are the one who decides what we talk about. You are the one who decides what time we talk about it. 
Mr. Speaker, it just quite simply won’t wash. The people of this province know better. 
 
The people of the province of Saskatchewan know this legislation is wrong, that the majority must never be 
allowed to step on the rights of the minorities, whatever those minorities might believe. You know, it is 
interesting to note (I made special note of it today because I thought perhaps this bill was coming forward) 
that the Minister of Agriculture stated his government was bringing forward legislation to establish a trust 
fund by which the Doukhobors of western Canada would receive the money to which they were entitled. He 
further stated it was his opinion that the Sons of Freedom sect of that religion were in fact included in the 
bill. If that’s true, I commend the Minister of Agriculture and his department because most of you will 
remember what the Sons of Freedom sect stood for in western Canada. You will remember they stated they 
would not obey the laws of our land. You will remember they paraded nude because they would not accept 
the roles of the laws of our land because, Mr. Speaker, it was against their religious convictions. 
 
You will remember Mr. Speaker, that sect was reviled in western Canada, was attacked in western Canada. 
Yet this government has enough social conscience to make certain their rights as individuals are looked after. 
Here’s an organization that says it wants to work within the laws of Saskatchewan. We want to work within 
the laws of Canada. We want to present an option, however. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mistake every member of this legislature makes if he supports this bill is, if you pass this 
legislation, more people than you can even imagine are going to join the Unionest Party because they know 
that in the United States of America, those rights are protected. If you pass this bill, they’ll say where is our 
free country? Where is our free society? I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this bill is an affront to the dignity of this 
House. It 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2943 

should never have been brought here. Never! The bill should never have come before this Chamber because 
just last year this same legislation was passed and it contemplated history. 
 
Is the member for Biggar attempting to say, Mr. Speaker, that he didn’t know about Canadian history and the 
formation of the Unionist Party in federal parliament? Is he trying to say that the Attorney General or the 
Premier didn’t know about it? That somehow you could pass a bill that would slip by because it seems 
logical? 
 
I can just see it now, Mr. Speaker, I can just see the discussion. We announced the formation of a Unionest 
Party and the NDP caucus is sitting around. All of a sudden the first reaction is holy smoke, are the 
constituents ever against them! Wowee! The senior citizens and the legion are totally against them. I have 
constituents coming up tome and saying hang them! I have, as one member said, the Hon. Mr. Shillington, 
some women in his constituency saying, turf them out of the legislature. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the attitude and the NDP are sitting around. They say, well we can’t turf them out 
of the legislature. That’s impossible. We just couldn’t make that step. So let’s figure out some way to pick 
up on all that wonderful anti-Collver, anti-Unionest Party feeling out there. Let’s show people that we are 
doing something. But they didn’t think, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t think about the ramifications for 
themselves as individual members. 
 
What’s next? If a member like the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland stands in his place (he is not here 
today), but he says to the absolute amazement of every member of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
support this bill. My constituents told me not to support it. But in the tradition of the NDP, I’m going to 
abstain. If every member in this legislature accepted that principle of democracy, then why have an 
opposition at all? As a matter of fact, why have individual members at all? Why not just have a Premier and 
he appoints all the cabinet? Why not just run one guy? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s the American system! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, someone from across the ways said, that’s the American system. What 
nonsense! What absolute and utter nonsense! Over the course of this debate, the member will hear about the 
American system and will hear that only on the administrative side (not the legislative side) one man is 
elected and the rest of the administration is appointed. The legislative side — well the executive side for the 
benefit of the very proper member for Biggar, he’s quite right — is elected there in the body of one person. 
The legislative branch, however, who take their jobs very seriously are elected, and they . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, someone in Saskatchewan is going to tell some of those members opposite that 
it is not the United States of America which is on the verge of breaking up; it is Canada which is on the 
verge of breaking up. It is not in the United States of America that people can’t agree on a constitution. The 
people in the United States of American agree that their constitution is the best in the world. It’s not the 
people in the United States. Mr. Speaker, it is not they who are having to fight against a government that 
would bring in a bill which is this repressive. It is we who are here in the province of Saskatchewan who 
have to fight against this kind of legislation. And fight we will, Mr. Speaker, because if the government 
members believe that just by accepting the will of the majority that’s democracy, then they forget everything 
they ever learned at school, business, law or in government. 



 
May 12, 1980 

2944 
 

I have even heard some members opposite talk about the rights of minorities and I intend to refer to those 
rights from time to time over the course of this debate. I have hard them talk about the rights of native 
Indians; they do have right — individual and fundamental rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I go into the main body of what I want to say, I’d like to read for the members 
opposite, because I don’t think they have really read it — an act, just a portion of it. I intend to draw the 
attention of members to all of this act, because it’s a good act, it’s a good piece of legislation and it’s 
legislation the NDP themselves brought into this Assembly — an action respecting the Saskatchewan code 
of human rights and its administration. I just want to read one clause form this act. As I said, during the 
course of this debate I intend to draw to your attention the entire act because this entire act pertains to the 
rights of individuals. 
 
Clause 4, page 339 — under part 1 of The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act, passed by your very own 
government: 
 

Every person and every class of person shall enjoy the right to freedom of conscience, opinion and belief, 
and freedom of religious association teaching, practice and worship. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how can anyone have a freedom of conscience, opinion and belief if government actions can be 
used to blackmail them into attempting to think the way the majority does. How can it be? How is it 
possible? You have a law that says, Mr. Speaker, the Unionest Party (this legislature’s law) is entitled to 
certain rights and privileges in this Assembly. It has the rights to a certain number of members on the 
committees. Ah, the members forget that. This law removes that right. No, I’m not kidding; it removes that 
right. That means the Unionest Party may not present members to the committees as the other parties do. We 
must approach the committees as individual independent MLAs. That’s your law. 
 
You remove the rights of the members of the Unionest Party to appropriate research and secretarial help that 
other parties in this legislature enjoy. According to the laws of Saskatchewan, even if you pass this bill, you 
could not remove the fact we are a legal party in Saskatchewan, legally recognized under The Elections Act 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
So don’t try to hide, Mr. Speaker. Don’t have the members try to hide behind the money issue. Let them talk 
first of all about what in reality they are trying to do. That’s on the one hand thwart opinions that don’t 
happen to fall into their understanding of the situation; and number two, remove the recognition of the 
Unionest Party because they are afraid of me. I didn’t say that. The member for Regina Centre laughs. You 
know who said that, Mr. Member for Regina Rosemont, your leader, Allan Blakeney, and y our deputy 
leader, Roy Romanow. You see. Now why, Mr. Speaker, just because they’re afraid? Of what? Of an idea? 
Are you afraid of the future? We all should be you know. What are you afraid of? Are you rising, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If the member would permit me to have the Administrator come to the House before I 
call it 5 o’clock? I understand the Administrator is about and is prepared to give royal assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 



 
May 12, 1980 

 
2945 

At 4:57 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, having entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the 
throne and gave royal assent to the bill presented to him. 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 4:59 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


