






















































Hansard: April 15, 1980


1761 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
April 15, 1980. 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to introduce to you and 
through you and to the other members of the House a group of 41 students from Jonas Samson Jr. High 
School in Meadow Lake where I ply my trade when I’m not here. We have Grade 8 students and special 
education students. This is a first group of three groups of Grade 8 students who will be visiting the 
legislature over the next week. This is a special Celebrate Saskatchewan project by the staff and the 
students of that school. They will be visiting in Saskatoon a Hutterite colony and the Western 
Development Museum, I believe the RCMP Museum here and of course the legislature today. I hope all 
members will join me in welcoming them here and wishing them an informative afternoon and a safe 
trip back home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you a group of 23 students seated in the east gallery. They are Grade 7 and Grade 8 students 
from the Gladmar School. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, Stan Meredyk, parents, 
Myrna Bendickson and Allan Fettes and their bus driver, Cary Bendickson. I will be meeting with them 
immediately following question period for pictures and refreshments. I hope they enjoy their visit here 
and find it informative and educational. I hope all members will join with me wishing them a safe trip 
home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Regina Lakeview): — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you and to 
the members of this Assembly 20 senior high school students sitting in the west gallery from Sheldon 
Williams Collegiate here in Regina. They are accompanied by their teacher, Miss Toth. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that these students are in a class known as Law 30 which is a law 
program, an elective course we now have in our high school system, one of the many options now 
available to students in the Saskatchewan system and a very important area of study. I’m certainly 
hopeful at least that in observing the proceedings this afternoon they will gain or develop further respect 
for rule of law and rules in society as exhibited by the members of the Assembly. I look forward to 
meeting with the students after question period for a further discussion. I hope they do find their visit a 
useful part of their studies here this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

TV SIGNAL 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1762 

MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of Sask Tel. Mr. 
Minister, I ask my question in light of a statement made by your chief executive officer, Mr. Arnold 
Nelson, today saying that an order to scramble came from the minister himself. Yesterday in this House, 
Mr. Minister, you stated the decision was made by the officials at Sask Tel. Now, Mr. Minister, who is 
telling the truth to the people of Saskatchewan regarding the scrambling of the message put out by 
Telecable channel 8 in Saskatoon yesterday? I would like to know who it is? Are you telling the truth or 
is your executive official officer, Mr. Nelson, telling the truth? Please advise us. 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess if the hon. gentleman 
knew anything about government at all, which he obviously never will, he would know how decisions 
and policies are made. Obviously broad policy is made by the government and by the board of directors 
in the case of a Crown corporation and that broad policy is carried out by the officials. In this particular 
case, we have a broad policy with regard to signal and its transmission. The broad policy is being 
followed and naturally is carried out by the chief executive officer, the executive members and by the 
Sask Tel staff. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. I asked you quite pointedly and quite simply who 
made the decision? There is no point in saying the officer on anything else. The officer says that you 
made the decision; you are saying it was made by the corporation. Did you make it, or did he make it? 
Who made the decision, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, let’s be honest. The policy is made by the board of directors of Sask Tel. When 
you have a policy you have officials who would obviously want to follow that policy. In this particular 
case our policy simply is, in Sask Tel, that we will deliver a signal from a satellite to an earth station to 
be used by the cable television operators. That signal was going to be brought to the people of Saskatoon 
by another means which was not within our contract and as a result the decision was made. If you really 
want to know who makes the decisions, I can tell you who makes the decisions. The recommendations 
are made by the chief executive officer or the executives and they come and discuss them with us and as 
a result of that the decision is made. And it was made that way. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. This morning in Crown corporations committee you 
wouldn’t give us a copy of the contract between Sask Tel and Saskatoon Telecable. My question to you 
is, will you tell us what section of that contract you viewed in order to make the decision to scramble 
that signal? What section of the contract? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well of course I won’t tell the hon. gentleman what section it is because after all I told 
him this morning in Crown corporations I would not divulge any information which is contained within 
that contract. I don’t think it is right the hon. gentleman would ask me to divulge a contract which we 
have in Sask Tel (a Crown corporation) with another individual, or a group of individuals. I don’t think 
it is right. As a result, if I gave you now some of the details within that contract it would be just as bad. I 
am sure if the hon. gentleman would like to have information from that contract, possibly the people he 
is talking for now maybe want to give it to him. That’s his prerogative. That makes no difference to me. 
But as far as I am concerned, I will not be the person to be responsible for giving a contract which we 
have with another person, be that a private person, a public person or a co-operative, or you name it. I 
just don’t think it is right. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1763 

RIGHT TO SUPPRESS INFORMATION 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what gave you, or your 
department officials, the moral right to suppress the information which should be provided to the people 
of Saskatchewan and is this just an example of what is going to happen if and when Bill No. 13 — An 
Act to amend The Telecommunications Act is ever passed in this Chamber? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is pretty obvious the individual does not know how signals get 
from a satellite to an earth station. If the hon. gentleman would check his facts he would find that the 
House of Commons’ live debates are now ready for transmission in Saskatoon. All that is necessary is 
for the telecable operator in Saskatoon to come to us, ask us, and in one minute he can have that 
information for his people. That, in my view, is not suppressing any information from people in 
Saskatoon. It is there to be had. All they have to do is ask to turn it on. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I do know how it is projected from one 
place to the other. But, Mr. Minister, Telecable, channel 8, Saskatoon is a shareholder in Canadian 
Satellite Network. Canadian Satellite Network leases a channel with Telesat which your company owns 
and you told us that in Crown corporation meeting this morning. Now they have a licence to operate 
their ground station. Mr. Minister, my question is, why did you cut it off? Telecable Saskatoon, has the 
right, through Canadian Satellite Network, to receive the picture from that satellite you own part in, 
projected down to the earth station and through their media system. They have the right, Mr. Minister, 
and why did your department go over top of the right of the CRTTC, or any other federal department, 
and especially overruling Canadian Satellite Network (CSN) when Telecable Saskatoon had the right to 
do it? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, the fact of the matter is I don’t agree that CSN has a lease with Telesat because I 
know it doesn’t. What it has is a temporary permit to place on Telesat identical programming to CBC. 
That’s what it has, CSN, of course then, has the opportunity, once it has its programming up on Anik, to 
take it to a ground station. However, the contract which we have with Telecable Saskatoon indicates that 
the signal which is delivered will be delivered by Sask Tel. As a result CSN did not have that 
opportunity to do so, because we have a contract which does not allow it. As a result the signal was 
jammed and it will remain jammed until such time as they come to us and ask us for the signal which is 
now in place. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — I’ll direct a supplementary question, if I may, to the minister 
responsible. Mr. Minister it seems to me, and I would suggest and ask if you would not agree, that in 
fact what you have done is used your sweeping powers through this supposed broad policy to cut off the 
people of Saskatchewan from viewing the Speech from the Throne, and used that power to further your 
argument and your battle with the private cable . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take a new question. 
 

SCRAMBLING OF TELECABLE 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — A question for the Minister of Sask Tel. You keep 
referring to a contract between you and the cable corporation — the cable company. Isn’t it in fact not a 
contract but a part of your rules and regulations of your tariffs that 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1764 

allowed you to scramble the signal yesterday? 
 
MR. CODY: — It is not. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, not it is not. Is it then a contract or an agreement that you 
have between the corporation and Sask Tel? 
 
MR. CODY: — I indicated to the hon. member just a minute ago that we have an agreement or a 
contract if you want to call it that — use whichever terminology you wish — but we have an agreement 
with each telecable operator, whether that be the Regina Cable co-operative, Prairie Co-Ax in Moose 
Jaw or Saskatoon Telecable. We have a contract with those people to deliver certain things for them to 
broadcast. And that happens to be one of them. 
 

METHOD OF SIGNAL REMOVAL 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the Minister of Telephones. Did you in your 
department consider moving by way of injunction rather than moving by way of jamming the signal? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, as I indicated to someone yesterday, that certainly was considered but the 
consideration was very little, and as a result we decided that taking the signal off was the better route. 
 

CREDIT UNION CAPITAL 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I’ll direct a new question to the minister since we obviously are not going to get 
an answer regarding his battle with the private operators. Yes, I’m going to ask my question, Mr. 
Speaker. In view of the fact that over half the population of the province are members of credit unions, 
and in view of the fact that inflation and high interest rates are adversely affecting the economic viability 
of not only the credit union themselves but each individual member, would the minister responsible for 
co-operative development be in support of a representation by Credit Union Central requesting sufficient 
capital through government assistance to allow Central Union Central requesting sufficient capital 
through government assistance to allow Central and its member organizations to undertake 
developments seen as necessary by them, for example, to ease the people of Saskatchewan with 
reference to high interest rates, the farmers, the businessmen, and of course, the home-owners? 
 
MR. CODY: — No, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House and the Government of Saskatchewan 
are always willing to have representations made to us by any group of people, whether that be the 
National Farmers’ Union or the co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan., or the labour unions. 
You name them. We don’t mind having submissions made to us; we get them all the time. I met with 
people in the credit union system not all that long ago. We talked about finances; we talked about 
inflation and interest rates. You name it. Certainly I am willing to listen to any kind of proposal which 
anyone would like to make. After we have the proposal we will then look at its merits to see what can 
possibly be done with it. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I asked you, Mr. Minister, if you would be in 
support of such a proposal as presented by Credit Union Central, yes or no? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, I certainly can’t say that I will be in support of anything until I see what the thing 
is. It is pretty difficult for me to say that I am going to be in support of 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1765 

something when I do not have the proposal before me. After all, you have to be reasonable that I, as an 
individual, do not commit this government to any financial expenditures. Obviously I don’t. But if there 
is a proposal which comes forward I would be more than happy to look at it. If it has merit and I think it 
has merit, I would even be more than happy to recommend it; certainly I don’t make those decisions 
alone. We have a body of people, the treasury benches, who make those kinds of decisions. I know that 
all of them are happy to see Credit Union people at any time that they want to see us. 
 

QUEBEC REFERENDUM 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — I would direct a question to the Premier. Welcome back to 
western Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAM: —Press reports yesterday and today indicate that the referendum date will be announced, 
has been announced or is being announced today. Are you or any members of your government 
intending to spend any more time in central Canada campaigning on behalf of the federation? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I believe as I was just coming to the office I 
heard that the referendum date had been announced. I think it is May 20 as I recall. The campaign will 
be on almost immediately and we are dealing with the 35-day period or so between now and the election 
date. It is not my current intention to accept any speaking engagements in Quebec with respect to the 
referendum. That idea may change, but as I now view it, it would be counterproductive during the actual 
campaign. There will be a feeling of Quebec people that people from outside perhaps should not 
intervene. There is also a problem with respect to whether or not one can campaign in there and pay any 
bills (hotel bills and travel bills and the like) without running the risk of being in contravention of the 
Quebec law which controls expenses during the campaign. 
 
For those reasons I have no present intentions and as far as I am aware, none of the ministers has any 
present intention of accepting speaking engagements in Quebec with respect to this matter. This will not 
mean that we will not be very possibly dealing with the referendum in speaking engagements elsewhere 
in Canada. I would anticipate that is likely to be the case. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, do you believe that your presentation in 
central Canada had any impact on the Quebec referendum vote? Was your trip really designed, in part, 
to deal with problems which emanate from Ontario and the federal government? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I frankly don’t know whether it’s helpful to take speaking 
engagements in Quebec or in Ottawa to deal with the matter of the referendum. I believe it is. I feel very 
strongly that I would like to see Canada survive in a united form. I see the referendum as a key part of 
the decisions — one of the key decisions which will decide this issue over the next year or two. I think it 
is my role as 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1766 

head of provincial government to try to voice what I take to be the opinions of the people of 
Saskatchewan on that issue. In general people in Saskatchewan support the idea that the Premier or 
some other spokesman of the government should be making a statement in this regard. Accordingly, I 
will continue to make statements offering our views on the referendum attempting to put tacts which I 
believe may assist the Quebec people to reach a conclusion, and the conclusion which I would wish 
them to reach —a no vote. When the referendum is over I will continue to make statements on the 
general issue of Canadian unity so as to attempt to persuade Quebec people that they can find a future in 
Canada; to attempt to persuade Ontario people that they can find a future in Canada; westerners, and as 
the case may be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

TERMS OF CIC CONTRACT WITH MR. BUCK 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Yesterday in question period, Mr. 
Minister, you indicated there were significant differences between the employment of Frank Buck and 
the employment contract. Would you now be prepared to advise this Assembly what the significant 
differences are? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I indicated yesterday I was 
the vice-chairman of Crown investments corporation. I did not know whether the chairperson would be 
able to articulate better than I would the differences in the contractual arrangement with Mr. Buck and 
his employment previously. I indicated that the large concern was the continuation of secretarial services 
to some of the major corporations that Mr. Buck served as secretary, an opportunity to seek out another 
person to fill that position and also hopefully to have some guidance from Mr. Buck respecting the 
duties those corporations demanded of that service. Those are primarily the duties Mr. Buck will be 
given and certainly some of the ongoing responsibilities he retained when fully employed as an 
employee of CIC would not be within the contractual interpretation between CIC and himself. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary. Would it be a fair statement to say that what he is in fact doing 
now under contract is precisely the same kind of work, only maybe for a lesser amount of time, than he 
did previously as an employee? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, Mr. Speaker, that is the member’s interpretation of it and not necessarily ours. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister be prepared to table in the 
Assembly the contract now between CIC and Mr. Buck? 
 
MR. MESSER: — I will take the question under advisement, Mr. Speaker. 
 

NATURAL GAS SERVICE 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — A question to the minister in charge of Sask Power. In light 
of the $40 million profit for Sask Power and taking into consideration the serious need for natural gas on 
Saskatchewan farms and urban centres which many have been petitioning for, is the minister prepared to 
assure this House he will take the necessary action to use the profit, or at least part of the profit, of Sask 
Power to develop and supply natural gas to farms and urban centres? 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1767 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, we have always looked at our ability to serve, especially urban centres, 
with natural gas at reasonable costs. We have, in certain instances, been able to provide individual farms 
with the service of natural gas as well. But to propose a blanket coverage of natural gas service to all 
urban communities in Saskatchewan and to all farmers in Saskatchewan is simply not economical. It is 
also misleading the consumers who look to natural gas as a source of cheaper energy than they now have 
available to them. Most of those people rely on either electricity or heating oil. We know, as we talk 
about adjustments in energy costs, that costs will relate to BTU rather than just simply a source of 
energy and there will be an averaging of costs in relation to the unit of heat that comes from any 
particularly quantity of energy. Natural gas now is cheaper than any other source of energy, but all 
people who are knowledgeable about what will be taking place in the way of pricing energy in the future 
will convey to you that that will not be the situation in the future. There will be more marked increases 
in gas than in other energies. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: —Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, there have been two petitions come 
in in the past from the Elbow-Outlook line. In light of the fact that a petition from the Outlook-Elbow 
line in my constituency will be forthcoming requesting natural gas, an area in rural Saskatchewan, I 
should like to ask the minister if he would be willing to take into consideration a change in Sask Power 
policy to the effect that the government will pay for the building of the line, as was the policy under the 
last government. Can the minister assure us that he will consider this? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me firstly say that Sask Power has always, in constructing 
such lines for service, paid for the construction of that line. We obviously attain some compensation for 
that cost through the sale of energy, not necessarily in all instances the sale of natural gas. Any policy is 
subject to review. That has historically been the position of this government and if we have briefs 
coming to us to change or alter today’s policies, it is the practice of the government to give fair and due 
consideration to these briefs. And we will do it in this particular instance, as we have in the past. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — A final supplementary. Would the minister inform this House how many miles 
of natural gas lines you have put into this province since you have been in power? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, I wish, Mr. Speaker, I could answer that. We have put in extensive natural gas 
lines since this government has come into power, and I see the Leader of the Opposition holding up his 
hand indicating zero; that is absolute utter nonsense and it shows his understanding of the service this 
government has given to communities and farmers in Saskatchewan in providing them with power and 
natural gas. Mr. Speaker, I will take the question under advisement and I will convey to this House 
tomorrow, the mileage that has been put in place by this government. It far outstrips any mileage of any 
others. 
 

DISCONNECTING CUSTOMER POWER SERVICE 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for Sask power. Last week, 
on April 9, when the temperature dipped to minus 3 degrees Celsius, SPC cut off a customer’s power 
service because of a small delinquent account, Mr. Minister, what is your policy with respect to cutting 
off a customer’s power service? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, in general terms, it is one that has to prove the account is 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1768 

extremely delinquent in outstanding payment, and that all recourses of collection have failed. The power 
will not be cut off unless the person is personally contacted, or else he has or she has picked up a 
registered letter indicating the power is going to be disconnected at a predetermined time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I will provide the minister with any 
documentation he is interested in receiving. Mr. Minister, in this particular case, the customer had been 
making payments — two payments within the last month. The customer is a divorcee with a four-year 
old child. Now what kind of inhumane policy, Mr. Speaker, could you possibly have that would cut off a 
person’s heat, lights, cooking facilities, with a four-year old child in the house, when that person 
attempting to pay a small account that was delinquent, had made $60 in payments within the last 60 
days? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, I hear the member will provide me with the information after he attempts to 
do the grandstanding here now. It shouldn’t come as a surprise, Mr. Speaker, that I’m not 
knowledgeable about the disconnection of one customer of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. What he 
conveys to this Legislative Assembly appear to be an unfortunate set of circumstances, but he doesn’t 
listen very well. The policy of the corporation is that those people will be contacted, and if that has not 
been the case in this particular instance, then there will be some action taken with respect to that. I will 
take this question under advisement and research it so I can give a more proper answer tomorrow. But I 
am disgusted with the member trying first to grandstand to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I am also very disgusted with the way you handled this customer. Mr. Minister, 
will you consider reimbursement of this customer’s expenses because of the error in your corporation? 
 
MR. MESSER: — I have taken the question under advisement, Mr. Speaker. 
 

REPLY TO QUESTION RE SGEA EMPLOYEES 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — On April 8, the member for Rosthern asked a 
question with regard to the SGEA and whether the SGEA had asked for the dismissal of certain 
employees regarding the SGEA strike and that is those who attended work (and I am quoting his 
question). I said I was not aware of any such request, that I hadn’t received one and that I would check 
with the public service commission to ask whether they had or had not. The answer to the member’s 
question, Mr. Speaker, is no there has not been such a request. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will take one question. The member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, are you saying you will just take the initial 
question and no supplementaries? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I won’t ask it. 
 

MOTION 
 

WITHDRAWAL OF BILL NO. 23 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1769 

HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I think I have to do this by 
leave and I have spoken to the members opposite about this, but I would like to move seconded by the 
Hon. Minister of Telephones, Mr. Cody, that the order for second reading of Bill No. 23, An Act to 
amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act be discharged and the bill withdrawn. 
 
Motion agreed and bill withdrawn. 
 

POINT OF ORDER ON QUESTION PERIOD 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would like to raise a 
point of order with reference to the question period. 
 
Today during the question period the minister responsible for co-operation and co-op development and 
Sask Tel, of course, was responding to questions from the opposition and Mr. Speaker, he was 
attempting to indicate, in answer to the questions, that in fact he was hiding behind a broad umbrella . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! If the member wishes to raise a point of order he cannot raise an 
omnibus point of order, he must be specific. He must say what rule has been abridged and what member 
has done it and on what question. He can’t just generalize about the question period because I can’t 
respond to that. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, then in raising my point of order I was only attempting to indicate 
to you, as Speaker of the House, why I had asked the question of the minister. I had prefaced my 
question with, Mr. Minister, would you agree with this suggestion? I outlined it right at the very 
beginning the suggestion being that he was in fact hiding behind a departmental policy and as minister 
he was furthering the confrontation attitude with the private operators at the unnecessary expense of the 
people of Saskatchewan. I had prefaced my remarks with, would the minister not agree with this 
suggestion? That was a question and you cut me off, Mr. Speaker, when I was trying to finish my 
question and I want to know why? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have the member’s question. It was the third question asked today. The rules are 
very clear about this matter. I will refer the member to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 
Fourth Edition, chapter 5(d): 
 

Questions must be stated without preamble or speech, or be in the nature of debate. 
 

I listened to the member’s comments very closely at the beginning of his, what appeared to be, 
preamble. To me, it prepared to be debate and argument and consequently I ruled it out of order. 
 
I think the members should adhere to the rule that there is no provision for preamble; there is no 
provision for debate. Now I have recognized a few words of preamble which will establish the context in 
which the question is asked. I think I’ve done that all the time but I hasten to add the members must 
make way immediately to an interrogative such as who, what, where, when, why and deal with the 
matter. But an examination of the record I think will substantiate that the member was putting forward 
argument in debate and I can’t permit that in question period. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, may I raise a new point of order? 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1770 

MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — As a new point of order, I would ask you and ask you very respectively, Mr. 
Speaker, to check the record and bring back a ruling tomorrow before orders of the day. And you will 
see very clearly there wasn’t any more than an eight or nine . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The member is now getting into a debate and attempting to involve 
me in the debate and I can’t allow that to continue. I take it the member’s point of order is that he wants 
me to examine the records. I will examine the record and if my decision is any different from the 
decision I’ve given now I will return to the House. If necessary, if I am wrong I will make a correction. 
If the member is wrong, we’ll assume the decision I’ve made at this time is correct. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 496 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 496 showing: 
 

As of March 1, 1980, the total number of employees in the milk control board: (1) the number of 
permanent employees, (2) the number of casual or seasonal employees, (3) the number that are on 
contract, who they are, and the nature of their contracts, (4) the number that are out-of-scope 
employees, who they are, and the nature of their jobs. 

 
HON. R.M. ROMANOW (Attorney-General): — Mr. Speaker, this is a proposed order for return 
which is similar to the ones which we’ve been dealing with now for the last two or three — well I guess 
the last two private members’ days. I think we’re somewhere about halfway through the hon. members’ 
questions — no, I think we’re nearing the end of them. But the amendment here which I’ll tender is the 
same as I’ve tendered in the past and I therefore move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources 
(Mr. Messer) that all the words after the word ‘employees’ in the first line be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

employed by the milk control board who were: (1) permanent, (2) casual or seasonal, (3) on contract 
and the nature of the contract, (4) permanent out-of-scope and their names and positions. 

 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I have to draw to the attention of this 
Assembly again (and I think I’ve done this repeatedly on each day and yesterday in the question period) 
that I still fail to understand why the Attorney General insists on not providing whom they have 
contracts with, why the opposition and the people of this province can’t find this out. I took the time to 
do a little research on this topic. Looking back into past history, it would seem to me that there is a 
precedent that these kinds of things have been asked before and these questions are quite in order. I’d 
like to state two or three of them, Mr. Speaker, to indicate my point. I go back in time here to questions 
that were asked on February 15, 1966 by the present Premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Blakeney, who said 
the following: 
 

To move an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 9 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1771 

whether the government has authorized or licensed any company or any companies to build gas lines 
(familiar topic) into northern Saskatchewan and, if so, for each such company what are the names, the 
origin and terminus of the mine, the delivered price of gas to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 
There he was wanting to know the names of any companies. 
 
Another one, by a present member of the government, in the same year, was Mr. Smishek, who put forth 
the following questions: 
 

To move that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 28 showing: 
 
Each department and agency which has entered into a contract, or on whose behalf a contract has been 
concluded by the central vehicle agency, with a commercial service station or garage in Regina, for 
servicing and supplying government vehicles; a copy of such contract or an agreement (that seems to 
be what we are often asking for on this side of the House); and in each case the cost per gallon of (a) 
premium, (b) regular gasoline, to the department or agency as of February 1, 1966. 

 
Lastly, I have one other which I think would be interesting. Again that was on February 17, 1966, when 
a past cabinet minister of the government opposite, Mr. Whelan, who I believe is in the insurance 
business now, asked the government the following question: 
 

Were any firefighting services provided to the Department of Natural Resources by private airplane 
contractors from April 1, 1965 to December 31, 1965, and if so, what were the names of the 
contractors, and what were the amounts paid to each for such services, including any stand-by 
charges? 

 
Now it seems to me that those questions asked by the members opposite in the year 1966, by the present 
Premier of this province, by the Minister of Urban Affairs of this province, and by a past cabinet 
minister of the government opposite, are very similar in nature to the questions we are asking here 
today, and which we have been asking for the past two or three weeks. Now we have seen the Attorney 
General drag these questions out, slow them down. We have been wanting to know these contractors. 
Tonight I know that the government opposite wants to get out early to meet with some of their 
executives. 
 
I wonder what type of co-operation we have been receiving when any contract we ask for or any name 
we have asked for has been refused. The Attorney General has (and you saw it, Mr. Speaker, as well as I 
did) dragged and dragged and dragged these questions out, time after time. I don’t know if he was 
grandstanding or playing for the crowd or what he thought he was doing; whether he is getting tired or 
he’s getting old or what his problem is. Then today he wants out early. Now, Mr. Attorney General, 
we’re big enough on this side of the House, we want answers to questions and that’s why we put the 
questions forward. Let’s see us proceed today with the business of getting on to these questions. Mr. 
Attorney General, don’t be so arrogant to think that because we want to know the names of your 
contractors that we are wrong and you, the almighty NDP, in 1966 were totally right to ask the same 
thing. 
 
Those are the concerns I have. Let’s go on with the questions so we can co-operate 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1772 

with you and get the business of this House rolling. You can then go to your meeting you want to have 
tonight. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — I want to make a short comment with regard to the amendment 
proposed by the Attorney General. Throughout all these motions, as he indicated from his place today, 
he has moved this same amendment. I think what we have seen in the last few days in question period 
perhaps does shed some light on why these amendments are being passed. He does not want the 
Assembly, obviously, to know about the contracts with the likes of Frank Buck . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The question before the House is with regard to notice of motion for order 
for Return No. 496 — the milk control board. On this particular resolution I have to confine the debate 
to the resolution which is before us. If I allow the debate to range over the question period, other 
questions that have been answered or asked or not answered, we get into a general debate about 
everything that’s happened. That’s not the purpose of this debate. The purpose of this debate is to 
explain the reasons why you are for or against the motion or the amendment. I think the members must 
confine themselves to that. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Just briefly in that regard, Mr. Speaker, is the general question of contracts. 
Obviously this government has contracts with employees on the one hand and employees on the other 
hand. Now, you know, clearly, that information should be made available to the opposition and should 
be made available to the public because I suggest that perhaps what the government is doing with these 
contract employees or employment contracts is somehow circumventing the rules, somehow 
circumventing the requirements of various pieces of legislation, both provincially and federally, so that 
these particular employees (in quotes if you like) can incorporate a company, can carry on the same type 
of work. They then exclude themselves from having to pay unemployment insurance premiums, Canada 
Pension Fund premiums, income tax on a by-weekly or monthly basis. More importantly, if it’s a limited 
company, they can be paying at a flat 26 per cent rate rather than a progressive rate of tax. I think every 
member of this Assembly supports a progressive rate of income tax. 
 
It seems to me that what people are able to do is circumvent this. The type of information the opposition 
is inquiring about and it would hope to find, is the information as to exactly what these people are doing, 
who these people are. I think once that information is presented to this Assembly, then we will be able to 
read from that whether or not there is a trend developing in government to try to avoid the rules of 
employment, to avoid the rules that apply to all other employees both in this province and in the rest of 
this country and in so doing, to circumvent the moral spirit of that law and of those rules. For that 
reason, I see no reason why this government is unprepared. They hide behind, well, it’s a contractual 
relation, as if by contract was something else. 
 
Now, clearly, the situation where you’re hiring an engineer to do a specific job and traditionally the 
engineer works on a contract basis — nobody objects to that — but when you take a situation where you 
happen to move an employee from a position of employment to a position of contract, then I think we 
have every right to know and I think the people of Saskatchewan have every right to know because I 
think that is wrong. 
 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1773 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 503 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 503 showing: 
 

The names of all nursing homes that have approached the Department of Health during the fiscal year 
1978-79 for additional funds and in each case: (1) the amount of money asked for, (2) the reasons 
given for the necessity of additional funds, (3) whether the request was accepted or rejected, (4) if 
rejected, the reasons. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to be very careful how I word this for fear of offending 
somebody’s sensitivities, but I feel I’m obligated, Mr. Speaker, to point out to the House that this 
allegation of members that we are not providing information, that all they are doing is seeking 
information . . . If that were our true purpose, Mr. Speaker, I suppose what we could do is agree to 
answer the question as asked and simply table the answer immediately as nil, since nursing homes deal 
with social services not health. The question from our new, aggressive, fighting, hard-hitting opposition 
is misdirected and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, we could have done it as nil. I suppose that will offend all 
kinds of sensitivities and we’ll see another hurricane blast of bluster and bluff for the next three or four 
hours, but I think I have to point that out to the members of the House. 
 
I also have to point out to the members of the House that even with the amendment (and this is the tenor 
of the questions which we were asked throughout the piece) I think the taxpayers will be very interested 
in knowing not only the answer to his question, but as I pointed out in the past, they will be very 
interested in knowing at sometime in the future the cost for getting answers — answers, Mr. Speaker, 
which can be fairly simply, in the majority of cases, uncovered by just a little bit of research by any 
individual who would care to research it by going to an annual report or going to some other 
documentation to uncover this. 
 
The amendment must of necessity, because of the volume involved, limit the written requests regarding 
renovation or construction grants, quite obviously, Mr. Speaker, because the Department of Social 
Services (which is another amendment we have to effect for the opposition) has no way of knowing how 
many requests there might have been for operational grants such as for increases in subsidies. Without it 
being in writing, how else would we have a proper record of it? I think members on all sides would 
understand that, and I would have thought the question would have been worded that way in order to 
reflect that basic fact. And even with the new wording, Mr. Speaker, it means that each special-care 
home file — I draw this to the attention of you, Sir, in particular — has to be researched and the 
estimate is, from the appropriate officials, it may take one person a month to provide this answer alone. 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are obligated to answer, which we are going to do, but I have to amend it in order 
to put it in an answerable form, which ahs been the purpose of this exercise for the past four or five 
Tuesdays. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1774 

I move, therefor, seconded by the hon. member for Regina Centre, the Minister of Culture and Youth 
(Mr. Shillington), that with respect to proposed order for Return No. 503, that all the words after the 
words ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The names of all licensed special-care homes that submitted a written request to the Department of 
Social Services during the fiscal year 1978-79 for grants for renovations or construction, an din each 
case: (1) the amount of money asked for, (2) the reasons for the necessity of additional funds, (3) 
whether the request was accepted or rejected, and (4) if rejected, the reasons. 

 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few very brief comments with reference 
to the Attorney General’s preface to his amendment to this particular motion before the House. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we on this side very much appreciate the adjective used by the Attorney 
General describing the opposition as fighting and hard-hitting. We appreciate that compliment coming 
from the Attorney General. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could just go somewhat further, the amendment the Attorney General has offered is 
very much appreciated by the opposition as well. Because in fact what it does is tighten up the motion a 
little. The government would know better than we would as opposition how they could answer the 
questions that we’re asking efficiently. I think that’s basically all the amendment does. It’s going to 
provide us and the member for Rosetown-Elrose with the information he is seeking. In the amendments 
formed, basically all it will request, as a request from opposition at least, is that they just check their 
files. Now they would have a record of all letters that come in and all letters that go out. All they have to 
do is check their files to see what letters were received from these nursing homes. The information we’re 
asking would be in the letter sent to the department. Therefore, you just pull the letter out of the file. 
Now the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, is making a lot of noise over nothing. I would just like to ask 
the Attorney General a question, if he would agree to it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Anything you want to ask. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K. Mr. Attorney General, are you in fact hiring any extra personnel in order to 
answer the questions that have been put from the opposition to the government? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who are they and how much? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have no vehicle whereby I can allow the Attorney General to answer that. Order. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — The answer is absolutely yes. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t taken my seat yet. I never sat down. Thank you. The 
Attorney General has answered yes. He has said that they are hiring extra personnel to answer these 
questions and now he says he thinks so. Not I think that’s pretty inconsistent, Mr. Speaker, coming from 
the Attorney General. He says yes and now he says, I think so. I think he should make up his mind. I 
think he should check with his ministers to see what kind of personnel they have. Have they not got a 
secretary who 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1775 

can pull a file and say, we received a letter from say, the nursing home in Moosomin and they requested 
such and such in their letter at such and such a date? That doesn’t seem too complicated to me. 
 
For the Attorney General to suggest to me that the ministers have to hire extra personnel to get those 
kinds of information is absolutely unnecessary and totally misleading to the House. I think if he means 
they are hiring extra personnel, the next question that’s going to be on this order form is how many 
people are they hiring to answer the questions from the opposition and can they prove they are hiring 
them because the opposition is asking the questions? We would welcome the expense sheet that we’re 
causing your government to answer these kinds of questions. I can guarantee you the answers that we 
get from these questions are going to save the people of Saskatchewan a whole lot more than it costs to 
get the answers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 504 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 504 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level for all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing 
Service in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
Mr. Speaker, before I move my motion I would like to make a few comments and hopefully I can get the 
attention of the Attorney General. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Oh, my undivided attention Ralph. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, as you are aware, the fiscal year of the government and the year of 
business for many Crown corporations is quite different but to be able to compare the answers that I am 
looking for, my questions are all put to the fiscal year. There is a reason for that Mr. Attorney General. I 
know it may make it a little more difficult for you to answer the questions and that’s why I cannot use 
the Crown corporations’ reports to find some of my answers. All my questions on the first series are 
based on the fiscal year. There is no way if I were to stick with the year of each of the corporations or 
the budget year, I would get the answer I am looking for to be able to compare some of the statements 
that have been made by cabinet ministers and members of the government. Therefore, I have asked them 
all under the fiscal year so the Attorney General understands that reason for all of them. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Attorney General, I realize many of the answers will be nil. I would suppose about half of 
them will be nil as you are replying. The only way to compare the statements your ministers are making, 
to get the number that you claim are new jobs created within the government, is to ask all the 
departments. Because their annual reporting year and the fiscal year are not the same, I had to choose 
one of two evils and I have gone with the fiscal year because it’s the only way you can run them all at 
one date and find an answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1776 

Well, Mr. Minister, if you are suggesting it’s the wrong choice from your seat, I suggest there is no 
reason you can’t answer them just the way they are. 
 
I so move. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I will be proposing amendments for the whole series of 155 or how many there 
are of these which are the same thrust, put forward by the member for Rosthern, into two categories. 
One amendment will deal with Crown corporations (I am viewing the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing 
Service as such). Another amendment will deal with the question of the request for information as it 
relates to the employees in a department area. 
 
Speaking, Mr. Speaker, to the question related here in the Crown corporations area, we do have some 
difficulties with the way the question is asked again. I want to say this quite objectively; the motion as 
presented, Mr. Speaker, is particularly difficult to interpret in the Crown corporation sector as opposed 
to say the departmental sector. The obvious reason for this is apparent to everyone. In the Crown 
corporation sector the positions are of necessity influenced to a large extent by the market place or the 
other Crown corporations or businesses with whom the comparison has to be carried out. Now that kind 
of job description, or salary descriptions and the like, are quite often (almost invariably) different vis-à-
vis the public service and the public service commission for which there is a different kind of 
mechanism for standardization. Now there are different mechanics utilized in approving positions and in 
reclassifications and substitutions in the Crown corporations. It is obviously not identical to the public 
service commission-budget bureau-treasury board process which applies for ordinary department 
functions. 
 
I think another problem deals very frequently with revisions of titles. We could, for example, interpret 
the question, if we were not to amend it, in a very narrow way, which might mean including vice-
presidents and presidents as new positions. But in reality they are not new positions, they are simply 
new titles. The people are there — a general manager retitled now to president. Now what do we do in a 
situation of that nature? 
 
I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that total employment in the Crown corporation sector has already been 
provided to the office of the Leader of the Opposition — that’s another problem, not a major problem, 
but the information is there. 
 
Finally, the hon. member for Rosthern does guess right with respect to the way the question is worded 
— namely, fiscal year ’78-’79. With respect to Crown corporations this is technically incorrect for a 
very large number of our corporations, Mr. Speaker, especially those which we are dealing with here 
and which have as their year-end, not the fiscal year, but the calendar year — December 31, 1979. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last comment I would like to make with respect to this question is that the general 
policy with respect to Crown corporations, subject to amendments or specific instances in Crown 
corporations committee, is not to make a blanket revelation with respect to salary levels. For obvious 
reasons there, we are in the job hunting field with, very frequently, private operators. SMDC is an 
example, also the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, where questions related to salary and other 
matters of employment put the PCS in a competitive position with other actors in the market place. In 
order to utilize whatever advantages may be consistent there in order to get the best personnel available, 
on a blanket basis the revelation of salaries would obviously be undesirable. In Crown corporations, as 
members will know, from time to 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1777 

time there is revelation of salaries on specific instances depending upon the nature of the job and 
circumstances surrounding it. But I am afraid that on a holus-bolus basis that kind of question with 
respect to Crown corporations needs an amendment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that explanation and small reservation which I have, we will be tendering an 
amendment. I don’t intend to speak on any of the other motions related to Crown corporations. I will 
simply introduce the amendments which are the same. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development — and the minister in charge of Sask Tel and the defence of Sask Tel and the defence of 
Canadian culture through Sask Tel — Mr. Cody, that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service in 
the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
I think that should be O.K. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, before the member takes his seat, may I ask him a question? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Will the member accept a question? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Only if I can answer it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I am not able to tell at this point whether you’ll be able to answer the question. 
Will the member for Rosthern guarantee he can answer it? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I think he can. Mr. Minister, I said earlier in my introduction I can accept your 
motion but when you’re amending these could you leave them all in one period of time frame, both sides 
. . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — all those for 1979 are all the same. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — And are you going to leave the department of governments all in the year 1979? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, governments will be 1978-79. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Can’t compare. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, you can’t. That’s why I’m making the amendments. You can’t compare 
them and that’s my point. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 505 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 505 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1778 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 506 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 506 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Government 
Printing Company in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer) that all the 
words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Government Printing 
Company in the fiscal year ended during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 507 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 507 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources 
(Mr. Messer) with respect to the proposed order for Return No. 507, that all words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in 
the fiscal year ended during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1779 

RETURN NO. 508 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 508 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, just a word about Return No. 508. One moment please, to make 
sure I’ve got my place here. Yes, this is the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, and we are (I’m 
sure the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley will be pleased to hear) additional information to the 
request by the opposition in this matter — all in the spirit of co-operation of course. 
 
What we’re doing here is also adding ‘and all permanent positions deleted’ with respect to all of these as 
well, because I’m sure the hon. opposition would like to know the information in that regard. Other 
comments I don’t think need to be made about the form of the question at this stage of the game. But I 
think one should know that is what we are doing and therefore I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 509 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 509 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Land Bank 
Commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on the land bank, I would like to inform the Attorney General that I write my own 
questions and my own speeches. I know he has a speech writer but I don’t have that benefit. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission (and a great 
commission it is too, Mr. Speaker). 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1780 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 510 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 510 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 510, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 511 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 511 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in Saskatchewan Minerals in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 511, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation in 
the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 512 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 512 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1781 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation in 
the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 513 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 513 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Police Commission 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Police Commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 514 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 514 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 514, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permits issued and created in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in the 
fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1782 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 515 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 515 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the proposed order for Return No. 515, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Securities Commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 516 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly to issue for Return No. 516 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in Sask Tel in the fiscal year 1978-79. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 516, I’m citing the 
order of the return number, Mr. Speaker, because I may need the help of Clerk or the Assistant Clerk. 
I’ve got so many amendments here I sometimes tend to get confused which one I’m amending so if you 
wouldn’t mind just keeping a little check to make sure I’m on the right one. I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer) that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in Sask Tel in the fiscal year ending during 
1979. 

 
And a great corporation it is too. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 517 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 517 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1783 

showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure this amendment will meet with the pleasure of the 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley. I move, seconded by the Minister of mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer) that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 518 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 518 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Water Supply 
Board in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 518, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer) that all the words after the word ‘showing’ 
be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board in the 
fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 519 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 519 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the SaskMedia Authority in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 519, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the SaskMedia Authority. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1784 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 520 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 510 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the SaskMedia Corporation in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed Return No. 520, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the SaskMedia Corporation in the fiscal year 
ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 521 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 521 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the social planning secretariat in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the social planning secretariat. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 522 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 522 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Social Services in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1785 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Social Services. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 523 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 523 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the surface rights arbitration board in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions created 
and all permanent positions deleted in the surface rights arbitration board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 524 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 524 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Arts Board in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1786 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 525 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 525 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Assessment 
Commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), with respect to Return No. 525, that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position, and salary of range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 527 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 527 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Community Legal 
Services Commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words — this is Return No. 527 — after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Community Legal Services 
Commission. 

 
One of the great advancements of this government. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 528 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 528 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1787 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Computer Utility 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Computer Utility 
Corporation in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of the Assembly students from the Indian Head High School. They are 
students from Grades 11 and 12. They are accompanied by a good friend of mine and a colleague of 
teaching for many years, Mr. Dave McCall. 
 
It is particularly nice to see the Indian Head students here. I am sure you fellows on the other side are all 
aware of the fine town of Indian Head. One of its claims to fame in the most recent year as a hockey 
playoff. My colleague sitting beside me, the member for Wilkie, brought a team down to play against 
the Indian Head Combines in the provincial playoff. Unfortunately Wilkie was a little better than Indian 
Head that time around. But I see some of the people up in the stands there who are the future stars of the 
Indian Head Combines — I think some of them were on the roster but were suffering from a bit of injury 
that night, Mr. Member for Wilkie, or else the tally may have been a little different. 
 
What we are doing in the House right now is motions for return, debatable. As you see the member for 
Rosthern is asking questions, the Attorney General is amending these, and we hope we will be getting 
some written answers to these questions in the most prompt time possible. It is a little quieter in here — 
mostly during oral question period it is a little livelier than it is right now. But I hope you enjoy what is 
going on. I will meet you in a little while and we will get our pictures taken and we will have a little 
refreshment. I hope you enjoy your whole tour of Regina and certainly have a safe trip home. I will be 
around to your school to present a lovely book to you, the Pictorial History of Saskatchewan, in the near 
future. So thanks for coming in today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I want to as well welcome the students from Indian 
Head — not that I know any of them or their teacher, but I want to recognize them because of why they 
are here today. They are here today on behalf of a co-operative tour. Of course the Department of Co-
operation and Co-operative Development has in this year, Celebrate Saskatchewan, decided to sponsor 
and bring to the city of Regina about 50 tours of students who want to learn something about co-
operatives and the co-operative way of life. I know the member for Indian Head is extremely interested 
in co-operatives; at least with the questions he has been asking me about co-operative material in the 
schools lately, he must be. Therefore, I am sure 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1788 

everyone in the Assembly would want to welcome them because of the fact they are here on behalf of 
and on sponsorship from some of the co-operatives in the area. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (CONTINUED) 
 

RETURN NO. 529 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 529 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 529, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 530 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 530 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Development Fund 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 530, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Development Fund 
Corporation in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 531 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor),that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 531 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1789 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 531, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 532 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 532 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan FarmStart 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 532, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan FarmStart Corporation in 
the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 533 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 533 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to Return No. 533, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1790 

RETURN NO. 534 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 534 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the provincial mediation board in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the provincial planning appeals board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 535 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 535 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the provincial planning appeals board 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the provincial planning appeals board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 536 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 536 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the office of the Provincial Secretary 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that with respect to Return No. 536, that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and 
the following be substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1791 

permanent positions created, and all permanent positions deleted in the office of the Provincial 
Secretary. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 537 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 537 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the private and public rights board in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor, with respect to 
Return No. 537; 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created, and all permanent positions deleted in the public and private rights board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 538 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 538 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the public employees’ superannuation 
plan in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and 
Services (Mr. Robbins), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created, and all permanent positions deleted in the public employees’ superannuation plan. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 539 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 539 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the public 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1792 

service commission in the fiscal years 1978-79. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and 
Services (Mr. Robbins) with respect to order for Return No. 539 that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services. 

 
Amendment agreed. 

 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 540 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 540 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the public service superannuation 
board in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and 
Services (Mr. Robbins) with respect to order for Return No. 540 all the words after the word ‘showing’ 
be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the public service superannuation board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 

 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 541 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 541 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Revenue, Supply 
and Services in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services (Mr. 
Robbins), that with respect to Return No. 541 all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1793 

RETURN NO. 543 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 543 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the Saskatchewan Archives Board in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to Return No. 543, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services (Mr. Robbins), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and al permanent positions deleted in the Saskatchewan Archives Board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 544 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 544 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the minimum wage board in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services (Mr. 
Robbins), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the minimum wage board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 545 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 545 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the municipal employees’ 
superannuation commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and 
Services (Mr. Robbins), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1794 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the municipal employees’ superannuation commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 546 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 546 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the municipal financing corporation in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer) that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the municipal financing corporation in the 
fiscal year ending during 1979. 
 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 547 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 547 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the municipal water assistance board 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the municipal water assistance board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 548 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 548 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1795 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Office of the Ombudsman in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Office of the Ombudsman. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 549 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 549 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Office of the Rentalsman in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Office of the Ombudsman. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 551 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 551 showing: 
 

The number position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Office of the Provincial Auditor in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Office of the Provincial Auditor. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1796 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 552 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 552 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Provincial Library in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position, and salary range of all the permanent positions created 
and all permanent positions deleted in the Provincial Library. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 553 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 553 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 554 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 554 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the highway traffic board in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1797 

following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the highway traffic board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 555 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 555 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Industry and 
Commerce in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Industry and Commerce. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 556 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 556 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Intergovernmental 
Affairs in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 557 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1798 

McLeod), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 557 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Labour in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number position and salary range of all new permanent positions created 
and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Labour. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 558 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 558 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the liquor board in the fiscal year 
1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the liquor board in the fiscal year ending 
during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 559 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 559 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the liquor licensing commission in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the liquor licensing commission in the fiscal 
year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1799 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 560 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 560 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the local government board in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move an amendment to Return No. 560, seconded by the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the local government board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 561 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 561 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Mineral Resources 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to Return No. 561, seconded by the Minister 
of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Mineral Resources. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 562 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 562 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the milk control board in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all 
of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1800 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the milk control board in the fiscal year 
ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 563 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 563 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Co-operation and 
Co-operative Development in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to Return No. 563, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that al of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created, and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. 

 
And a great department is too, Sir. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 564 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 564 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to Return No. 564, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan in the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 565 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1801 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 565 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the cultural policy secretariat in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 565, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the cultural policy secretariat. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 566 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 566 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Culture and Youth 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to Return No. 566, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Culture and Youth. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 567 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 567 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Education in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to this proposed order for Return No. 567, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Education. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1802 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 568 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 568 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of the Environment in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that with 
respect to Return No. 568, that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of the Environment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 569 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 469 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Executive Council in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that with respect to Return No. 569, all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Executive Council. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 570 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 570 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Finance in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1803 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), with respect to Return No. 570 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Finance. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 571 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 571 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Government 
Services in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 571, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Government Services. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 572 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 572 showing: 
 

The number, position and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Health and the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move with respect to proposed order for Return No. 572, 
seconded by the Minister of Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Health. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 573 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1804 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 573 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the agricultural development 
corporation in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 573, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in the agricultural development corporation in 
the fiscal year ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 574 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 574 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Agriculture in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 574, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Agriculture. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 575 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 575 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the alcoholism commission in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 575, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that al of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1805 

alcoholism commission. 
 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 576 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 576 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Attorney General’s department in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 576, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79 the number, position and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Attorney General’s department. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 577 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 577 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the board of examiners in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the board of examiners. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 578 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 578 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the board of revenue commissioners 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1806 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the board of revenue commissioners. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 579 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 579 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in Celebrate Saskatchewan in the fiscal 
year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

The number of additional permanent positions created in Celebrate Saskatchewan in the fiscal year 
ending during 1979. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 580 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 580 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the communications secretariat in the 
fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted in proposed Return No. 580 and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year, 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the communications secretariat. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 581 
 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1807 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 581 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Consumer Affairs 
in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 582 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson), that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 582 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Continuing 
Education in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Continuing Education. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 583 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Bengough-Milestone (Mr. 
Pickering), that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 583 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the teachers’ superannuation 
commission in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor with respect to 
proposed order for Return No. 583: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1808 

permanent positions created and all permanent positions deleted in the teachers’ superannuation 
commission. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 584 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 584 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), with respect to Return No. 584 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 585 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 585 showing: 
 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the Transportation Agency of 
Saskatchewan in the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), with respect to proposed Return No. 585 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the Transportation Agency of Saskatchewan. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 588 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 588 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1809 

The number, position, and salary level of all new jobs created in the workers’ compensation board in 
the fiscal year 1978-79. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed Return No. 588, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year 1978-79, the number, position, and salary range of all new permanent positions 
created and all permanent positions deleted in the workers’ compensation board. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 594 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 594 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay for 
purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 595 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 595 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Police 
Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) 
the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1810 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year, the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Police Commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, or (b) union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 596 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 596 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) The number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Oil and 
Gas Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move with respect to proposed order for Return No. 596, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Oil 
and Gas Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial pay for 
purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of the regular salary received while on pay. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 597 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 597 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff peers of the Department of Saskatchewan 
Mineral that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer) with respect to Return No. 597 that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following be substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Minerals Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay 
for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1811 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I think you ruled this type of question out of order the other day, 
because this department doesn’t exist. I just wanted to see if the Attorney General was on his toes or not. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — That’s wrong Ralph. Not this time around. It exists. It was ruled out of order 
because the answer was given twice. Saskatchewan Minerals is what you want. You want the 
Department of Saskatchewan Minerals . . . 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — That’s right, I said department, therefore it’s out of order. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I don’t care, drop it, as far as I’m concerned. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 598 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 598 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, 
(b) on union leave with partial pay, (2) the mount of remuneration agreed to by the government and 
each employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 599 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 599 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Land 
Bank Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. We’re getting quite a bit of undercurrent here, and I don’t know whether 
it’s the psychological effect of coming to 600 very soon. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1812 

MR. ROMANOW: — Sir, it’s my pleasure to move an amendment to 599, seconded by the Minister of 
Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) or union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 600 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 600 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 600, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) or 
union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 601 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 601 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 601, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1813 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) leave with partial pay for 
the purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 602 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern)moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 602 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Government Printing Company that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to Return No. 602, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Government Printing Company who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with 
partial pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on 
leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 603 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 603 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay 
for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of the regular salary received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1814 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 604 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 604 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Fur 
Marketing Service that are, (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Fur 
Marketing Service that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay for 
purposes of union business, (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 605 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 605 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Forest Products Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial 
pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendments agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 606 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 606 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1815 

the Saskatchewan FarmStart Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
FarmStart Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay 
for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of the regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 607 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 607 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members at the Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave 
with partial pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salary received 
while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 608 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 608 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1816 

Resources (Mr. Messer), that all of the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted, and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members at the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund Corporation that were (a) on education lea e with partial pay, (b) leave with partial 
pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of the regular salary received while on leave. 

 
I hope that all hon. members bought their registered retirement savings plans from the Saskatchewan 
Development Fund before it was too late. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 609 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 609 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — It gives me a great deal of pleasure to move an amendment to proposed order for 
Return No. 609, that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted 
therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial 
pay for purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 610 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 610 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Computer 
Utility Corporation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1817 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Computer Utility Corporation (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay for 
the purposes of union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salary received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 611 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 611 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Community Legal Services Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all 
the words after ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Community Legal Services Commission who were (a) on education leave with partial 
pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government 
and each employee while the employee is on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 613 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 613 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Foundation that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I don’t see any other alternative but to ask the 
members to defeat this motion. The Saskatchewan Cancer foundation is an autonomous body, 
corporation. We don’t have the authority to provide information requested. This is consistent with the 
concept of a completely autonomous foundation which of course had the approval of the members 
opposite. Unfortunately, I would request that it be defeated. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, we agree with the Attorney General that the 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1818 

Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation at least should be an autonomous organization largely due to the 
insistence of the member of the opposition over the last several years. We thank the Attorney General 
for finally confirming that the cancer foundation is in fact an autonomous organization. For that reason, 
we are prepared and I am sure the member for Rosthern who put the motion is prepared to withdraw the 
motion. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — With leave we’ll withdraw the motion. 
 
Motion withdrawn. 
 

RETURN NO. 614 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 614 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number of and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union 
leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 615 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 615 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) or union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1819 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 616 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 616 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Archives 
Board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Archives Board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) or union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 618 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for a Return No. 618 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Revenue, 
Supply and Services that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Department of Revenue, Supply and Services that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) or 
union leave with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each 
employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1820 

RETURN 619 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 619 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the public service 
superannuation board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the public 
service superannuation board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 620 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 620 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the public service 
commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the proposed order for Return No. 620, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the public 
service commission who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 621 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 621 showing: 



 
April 15, 1980 

 

 
1821 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the public employees’ 
superannuation plan that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial 
pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ on proposed order for Return No. 621 be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the public 
employees’ superannuation plan who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee 
while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 622 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 622 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the public and private rights 
board that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 622, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Messer), that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the public 
and private rights board who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RETURN NO. 623 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod), 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 623 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the office of the Provincial 
Secretary that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular services now being received. 



 
April 15, 1980 
 

 
1822 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 
Messer), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the office of 
the Provincial Secretary who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with 
partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agree. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6 p.m. 


