






















































Hansard: May 22, 1980


3417 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 22, 1980 

 
Evening Session 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act 

 
Section 1 

 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister a few questions with 
regard to this bill. He would be aware of course that we do not support the bill, not for the provisions of the 
bill with respect to northern Saskatchewan residents, but primarily for the way it's being done. I suppose 
that's going to be a continual, ongoing basis of opposition to a lot of government bills. It's not so much the 
intent of the bill as it is the manner in which the objective is being achieved. 
 
It makes it very difficult for the members of the opposition in the sense that we agree, in the majority of the 
bills, with the intent and the general objectives, the principle (if you like) of the bill, yet we are so opposed to 
the manner in which you set out to achieve that. It becomes a very difficult proposition. We are sometimes 
forced into the position of having to vote against a bill when we would like to think the intent was honorable 
and well meant and would like to vote for it at second reading. 
 
I think, more specifically with regard to this particular bill, similarly to Bill 19, it seems to be giving you and 
the department of lot of unnecessary power. We're not just too certain or for what reason. If we take a look at 
the air transportation service, it certainly would mean an expansion in that particular area. I'm wondering is it 
just for the suppression of fire, or is it of broader range than that? I just wonder if you could reply to that 
particular area in terms of air transportation service and what that is going to entail with respect to this 
particular bill. 
 
HON. J. A. HAMMERSMITH (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Chairman, the air 
transportation service currently exists. It is, however, defined in the existing legislation as being part of a 
construction service. In addition to fire suppression, it provides planes for transportation of departmental 
personnel to various locations in the North, as well as transportation of personnel between primarily La 
Ronge and Regina. It includes, in addition to the six Drummond Tracker air tankers, three Canso water 
bombers, an Aztec, two Beach Barons and three Cessna 185s. The Cessnas, the Barons, the Trackers and the 
Cansos are used primarily for forest fire protection in the summer. The Aztec and Cheyenne are primarily for 
transportation of personnel; however, in the winter, the Barons and 185s are also used for transportation of 
personnel. 
 
The idea in this section is to clearly set the air service aside, to take it out of the general classification of 
construction service for purposes of accounting, recording of expenditures and making the information more 
clearly available in terms of what the expenditures are in the air transportation service. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Maybe for good reason, but anyway there seems to be some confusion to me as to the 
differentiation between the air service and the construction service. Are they one and the same or is there a 
clearly distinct different function there? 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3418 

What really is the situation with regard to the construction service and the air service? 
 
I'm not too certain I understand the bill. After having read the bill I really don't grasp what the difference is 
between those two types of services. I wonder if you could fill me in and give me a little education in this 
regard. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said, the situation currently is that the air 
transportation component is included as part of the construction branch. This bill would take it out of there 
and that's all the amendment would do; it would clearly differentiate air transportation service from 
construction services. They are not differentiated now. They're all part of the same service. 
 
MR. J. W. A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Minister, why does this have to be done? Why do you have to 
take this out of the air transportation and the construction? Why is this being done? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Basically, to provide a more clear and specific record of those expenditures 
which are related to air transportation so they are clearly distinct and apart from expenditures related to 
construction. It's probably more for the convenience of members of the Assembly in estimates or public 
accounts than for any other reason. It clearly sets it apart and it's not part of that overall body of expenditures 
currently known as construction expenditures. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, on that particular point, that's why I asked the question — what is the 
difference? — so we could clearly understand what the difference was and what the intent is. Now, having 
said that in your reply to the question, is the distinction between the construction service and the air service 
being made so you can account in a more concise way to the opposition when it relates to air transportation 
service with regard to departmental people? Has it been as a result of a pretty heavy line of questioning from 
time to time from the opposition in this particular regard? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I don't think the heavy line of questioning is the only and 
exclusive reason. It is administratively more accurate to have the service set aside. But, yes, I think it does to 
some extent respond to questions by the opposition with relation to the air service. It sets it out clearly which 
presumably makes the questioning and identifying of areas for questioning somewhat easier. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Then, Mr. Minister, would it be reasonable to assume that next year we will be able 
to get concise figures as they relate to the number of departmental personnel who travelled via aircraft in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the number of hours those particular individuals were in the air and the actual use 
of the aircraft? As well would that include the number of hours of use for the total fleet of aircraft? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — It may be easier for the opposition to decipher it. The hon. member may not be 
aware, but earlier this year, perhaps it was still in 1979, I provided to the member for Regina South Xerox 
copies of the sheets from all the logbooks from all the DNS aircraft. It was a fairly substantial package of 
material which is not all that easy to consolidate information from. So the information is available. I think it 
is easier now to make available the information which you request regarding this service. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, what additional cost to your department or saving will this bring about? 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3419 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I think there won't be any additional cost nor is there likely to be any 
substantial saving. There will be the normal increases in cost of operating the aircraft which occur as costs 
go up. But setting the air service clearly aside will not mean any new costs. 
 
MR. GARNER: — O.K. Mr. Minister, just so we have this clear then. If there are going to be no additional 
costs or savings to the department, then in other words you are telling me there will be no new employees 
hired along these lines? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — There won't be any new employees as a result of this particular move, which is 
not to say that some time in the future there may not be an expansion of the service which would require new 
employees. But no new employees will be required as a result of this amendment. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, with this differentiation now between construction and strict air 
transportation service, will any of the aircraft under the construction service be utilized for the construction 
of the capital projects which will be going into uranium development in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan will not have any aircraft in the 
construction branch. The construction branch, like all other branches when it uses the services of the aircraft 
in the air transportation service, will have billed against its budget the cost of the use of those aircraft. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, I see by the bill that you have made provisions for the air transportation of 
either provincial or federal government employees. Now how wide-ranging is that? Does that include all 
departments of both federal and provincial governments, which you would provide transportation for? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, it depends on the situation. But there are many situations where, 
particularly with the federal Department of Regional Economic Expansion, the Canada Employment and 
Immigration Commission, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (federal departments with which we 
are engaged in joint or cost shared activities), it is more convenient for both agencies involved (both the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the federal agency involved) to use the services of an aircraft 
which we may have going to a particular community where we are engaged in a joint project. The same kind 
of thing would apply to activities in which we are engaged on a joint basis with other provincial departments. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K. You also make provisions under section 8, subsection 4, for the transportation 
as well to include Crown corporations. I would assume that is going to include all provincial Crown 
corporations. To what extent? I wonder if you could give us any concise examples of where it is going to be 
necessary to fly personnel of Crown corporations in the northern Saskatchewan region? In reply to my 
question with regard to the construction end of it concerning uranium development, there doesn't seem to be 
any coalition there, any interrelated agreements in that regard. What is the position now with reference to the 
bill under that particular section as it relates to Crown corporations? What activities are there going to be 
back and forth between Crown corporations of the province, of the Crown here, and Northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Well, I can give the hon. member a couple of examples. One would be North 
Sask Electric which is a subsidiary of Sask Power. North Sask Electric is 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3420 

responsible for the provision of electrical transmission lines and electrical power generation in Northern 
Saskatchewan. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has one representative on the board of North Sask 
Electric, and there are occasions when officials and board members of North Sask Electric may be travelling 
with departmental personnel to a community in relation to the provision of electrical generating and 
transmission services. 
 
Another example would be the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation which, as you know, is 
engaged in uranium exploration and development activities. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan has 
responsibility for manpower programs and for the training and securing of employment for northerners. 
Associated with that are negotiations and discussions with all mining companies which include the 
provincial Crown corporation, Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, and the federal Crown 
corporation, Eldorado. 
 
Another example would be Sask Tel, which is responsible for providing the hardware and the transmission 
facilities for television and telephone services. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan will continue to 
have a significant interest in seeing that those services are provided. And it will be necessary from time to 
time for officials of the department to travel with officials of that Crown corporation. This gives us the 
ability to bill that corporation for the travel of their personnel. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, just a little further on in that same section, section 8, sub 4, 'or of any 
other province, or to any Crown corporation or person resident in the district'. Mr. Minister, I'm just curious; 
first of all would you define the word, district. Then, we'll dig into it a little deeper. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — It refers to the northern administration district. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Then this bill will allow you, upon the authorization of the minister . . . I hear the 
Minister of Sask Tel saying, it's a goofy question. We're talking about spending the taxpayers' dollars and I 
want to know if DNS is going to be flying people all over the North. It costs money. If there's a need, yes. In 
other words, Mr. Minister, it's your discretion — persons resident in the DNS district. Is that correct? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I can give the member a couple of examples as to why that's in there. There 
will be occasions when we are engaged in a project or a planning exercise or implementation of a program 
with (for example) the local community authority of Buffalo Narrows, or with the northern municipal 
council. It may be necessary for either elected members of those bodies or their staff to travel with officials 
of our department. This provision is there so that we have the authority to permit those persons to travel with 
us and thus not cost the taxpayers more, but less. Because the other example would be, if representatives of 
the local community authority in Buffalo Narrows were attending a meeting in La Ronge with officials of the 
department, if we didn't have this authority, we would presumably use our aircraft to transport our officials 
who were involved from Buffalo Narrows to La Ronge. The local community authority would have to 
charter another aircraft, and thus there would be greater costs. This would allow two people to fly together, 
rather than one person in each airplane, if the need arose. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, I think you can see my concern on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
It's something worthwhile but a power that could be (and I'm not accusing you, I'm just saying) greatly 
abused and could be a great burden to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. For a worthwhile project, fine and 
dandy, I can agree with 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3421 

that as long as it is not abused. I want to give you advance notice right now that we will be checking into the 
logs after this comes into effect. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I say to the hon. member that I think that any inclination, either deliberately or 
inadvertently, toward abuse is open, and by the provisions of the other amendment even more open, to the 
members opposite for scrutiny and we fully expect that such scrutiny will continue. That's part of the job of 
all of us, to scrutinize very carefully. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, at the outset of my remarks on this bill, I expressed concern with what 
I felt was the unnecessary power gain of the department which goes hand in hand with what seems to be a 
government that's top-heavy in power and, from time to time, a little complacent and a little arrogant. The 
bill itself indicates that. When you take a look at the powers you have, just to quote the subsection: 
 

(a) acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise any property, including plants and equipment and 
any products or materials required to implement, develop, maintain, operate and manage 
projects (now, that's bad enough, notwithstanding what it's relating to) relating to: 

 
(i) value converting of non-renewable natural resource products or materials; 

 
(ii) harvesting and producing of agricultural and forest related products and establishing and 
diversifying the processing and packaging thereof; 

 
(iii) establishing and diversifying handicraft and related activities and acquiring materials for 
handicraft purposes; 

 
(iv) other areas of economic opportunity that the minister considers advisable. 
 

Well for goodness sakes, just like that, any other areas of economic opportunity that the minister considers 
advisable. I don't think I need to go any further on that particular concern. What you have here in this bill is a 
right, the power, to go up there and just purchase or lease or otherwise (and I don't know what that otherwise 
is all about). It says, purchase, lease or otherwise. Otherwise, I would assume is expropriate or take over any 
property, absolutely anything. 
 
I guess an example would be, a fellow who has fly-in fishing lodge up there. And if you see it necessary to 
buy that or purchase it or lease it or expropriate it, you have the powers to do that under the legislation 
contained in this bill. And then you could (further down and I'll get into that later) turn around and dispose of 
that property. So you could be buying property or leasing it or whatever. You could work yourself into 
almost any kind of arrangement up there in northern Saskatchewan. And what's the bottom line on all this? 
The bottom line on all of this is, as I have said many times, that what we want for northern Saskatchewan 
residents is the opportunity for northern Saskatchewan residents to go ahead develop and capitalize on that 
tremendous potential that exists in northern Saskatchewan, not for the government to capitalize supposedly 
in the name of northern Saskatchewan residents. I know that's going to be the reply. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3422 

I really quite frankly believe that you have some understanding of what I'm saying. I think, in fact, that you, 
in many instances agree when I say that what we need to have is a balance up there. Granted, right now 
maybe they don't have the mechanism, maybe they don't have the capital or maybe they don't have the 
know-how. That's not questionable and the government may have to take the lead in many areas. But what 
I'm suggesting is that there should be a nice balance between government involvement in the development of 
the potential in northern Saskatchewan and the development that residents themselves, or groups of 
residents, may undertake. 
 
When I look at those sections of this bill and see what possibilities are open to you, even establishing and 
diversifying handicraft and related activities, and acquiring materials for handicraft purposes. I don't know 
whether, if I let my imagination go, I could assume that maybe you're going to go into the processing and the 
manufacturing of fur coats. You could be processing raw furs in northern Saskatchewan and then going into 
the manufacturing of fur coats, which, Mr. Minister, wouldn't be a bad idea for northern Saskatchewan 
residents to do. 
 
It makes very little sense that we here in northern Saskatchewan have a great potential in the fur market; we 
export our furs to Montreal and we import, I understand, about 85 per cent of our furs from Montreal back 
into Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We're doing this quite nicely between the minister and me 
and we don't need any interruptions. 
 
That is again one of the bottom lines that I am concerned about. I see that as being one of the potentials in 
northern Saskatchewan, something that could be viable. And when I see these sections in the bill, I say, 
whatever hope there is for the development of the potential is going to be taken and swept away by that big 
hand of government. The local residents, the residents of northern Saskatchewan, are not going to have any 
opportunity whatsoever to reap the benefits of that potential except maybe to be employed by the 
government. That certainly isn't in keeping with my personal principles or philosophies or the philosophies 
of the opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, at this point I think it would be incumbent upon the minister to make some explanations 
to the House as to what endeavours he intends to go into with these tremendous powers contained in these 
two sections I have read into the verbatim tonight. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Yes, I might say for the information of the hon. member that I have met with 
the executive and board of the Northern Saskatchewan Outfitters Association with particular regard to this 
amendment. I have also met with other groups and individual business people in the North. 
 
I think that although the concerns expressed by the hon. member attempt to suggest the minister wants some 
legal means to take something away from somebody, I assure him and others this is certainly not the intent. 
The simple reason for the amendment is quite evident. Since the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is a 
department being part of the larger framework of the provincial government all operating legislation 
respecting the various departments, agencies, boards, commissions, corporations and local government must 
be parallel and generally consistent with each other. 
 
It must also be realized that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is very complex in having many 
responsibilities within its jurisdictional area, responsibilities which in the South are spread throughout the 
array of parent departments. If DNS is to function 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3423 

in the North as a sound umbrella department, it must have the same authorities and parallel provisions which 
are in existence in southern legislation. To alter the proposed amending provision to eliminate the phrase 
which the member raises concern about — the phrase 'or otherwise acquire' would expressly mean that land 
and real property may be purchased or leased only. 
 
This would restrict or prohibit the department from entering into contractual arrangements in respect of 
agreements between public and private enterprises. It would prohibit the department from receiving land and 
property as an assignment, trade, transfer, grant, gift or bequest. It would prohibit the department from 
entering into joint ventures which may very well be possible in some of the kinds of enterprises the hon. 
member lists, situations where the northern corporation or individual may not have available the kind of 
capital or managerial expertise to initiate the undertaking. The department through this amendment will be 
able to enter into a joint venture which will give the department the opportunity of lending some managerial 
expertise and also of providing greater protection to the public funds invested in a given project. 
 
In support of the parallelism or consistency of this proposed provision with other legislation, I would like to 
relate to the hon. member the following provisions in other legislation. If he refers for example to The 
Department of Municipal Affairs Act he will find in section 5(1), subsection 1, 'the department may purchase 
or otherwise acquire land, buildings or materials for any purpose related to the exercises of any power 
conferred by this subsection'. He will find similar provisions in The Department of Social Services Act: 
section 6 and 7. He will find similar provisions in The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources 
Act: section 10, subsections 1 and 2; in The Department of Revenue, Supply and Services Act: sections 28, 
29 and 30; in the existing Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act: section 5, subsection (a); in 
The Educational Communications Corporation Act: section 10; in The Credit Union Act: section 24 'For the 
purpose of carrying out its objects, every credit union may subject to this act and the by-laws purchase, take 
or lease or in exchange, hire or otherwise acquire and hold any real or personal property, etc.'. Similar 
provisions are included in The Crown Corporations Act: section 10; The Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation Act: section 13; The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act: section 8; The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act: section 9; The Power Corporation Act: section 10. The Rural 
Municipality Act: section 222(1) and 222(5) gives exactly the same kind of power to rural municipalities. 
The Urban Municipality Act, Section 178, gives the exact kind of power with the exact wording to urban 
municipalities. The Education Act gives the exact kind of power with the exact wording to school boards. 
The provisions for otherwise acquired or otherwise disposed of property is not restricted to the government 
departments. It's extended to other entities as I pointed out, for example, credit unions, Crown corporations, 
local governments and school boards. 
 
I find it somewhat inconsistent that there would be a suggestion that the options available to rural 
municipalities, urban municipalities, credit unions and Crown corporations should be somehow dangerous or 
threatening in the hands of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I thought Bill No. 13 was a bad one but I didn't get a chance to read 
this one until now. Boy, I have to go back a little bit on the power on the airplanes. When I look at page 2 of 
this bill, it's something else. 
 

For the purpose of increasing the economic opportunities of any persons 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3424 

resident in the district, the minister may, subject to the regulations . . . (c) enter into 
contractual arrangements with any person on a joint venture basis for the purposes mentioned 
in clause (a). 

 
I won't go through all of them. But, Mr. Minister, I think you're fairly well aware that I have some questions 
on a few corporations which have been set up in northern Saskatchewan. I'm not saying you set them up or 
that there was any political patronage in them. They were in orders for return. I have not received my 
information yet but if the information I have is correct, (which I believe it to be) this bill will give you the 
power to go into business with them, to bail them out using the Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars to do it. 
 
I don't know why any government or any minister wants these kinds of powers, certainly not a minister or a 
government that says, we're in to help the people of northern Saskatchewan, bail them out, get them into 
something else and get more government into the North. 
 
We would like to see less government in the North, Mr. Minister. You cannot camouflage it by airplanes and 
maintenance and bring in something like this and then you want a blank cheque under: 
 

(d) make any necessary expenditures respecting any of the undertakings mentioned 
in clause (a) for the purpose of clause (b). 

 
You're just asking this Assembly for a blank cheque to bail out some of these corporations. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say to you, that is wrong, very wrong. The people of northern Saskatchewan may need some 
help but the direction this government wants to take them isn't to help them, it's to control them, take them 
over and bail them out. I say to you that is very wrong. 
 
You know the corporations I'm talking about. You know the people. You shake your head. You know the 
people I'm talking about too. 
 
I'll tell you this, Mr. Minister, when we get into DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) estimates I'm 
going to have the answers. I don't know when the orders for return are ever going to be tabled in this 
Chamber, but I'll tell you there's no way I can agree with a bill like this which gives a government or one 
minister that kind of power. It's not necessary, not necessary at all. 
 
If you think, Mr. Minister, that you're helping the people of northern Saskatchewan to go up there with a 
blank cheque and start either bailing them out or going into business ventures with them, maybe their 
businesses are in trouble right now, but I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Minister, if you get into bed with them, 
their businesses are going to be in real tough shape. I say it's a mistake; it's wrong, and if you don't think this 
is asking for a blank cheque, please tell me what it is asking for? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member makes a number of references to northern 
Saskatchewan. He refers to some corporations and some people. I don't know how I can be expected to know 
which people and which corporations and which alleged problems with regard to those corporations he is 
referring to, so that is something that is impossible to respond to. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3425 

In terms of his comments with regard to the presence of the government in northern Saskatchewan. I think 
the people of northern Saskatchewan have experience in the neighbourhood of 65 to 70 years of the kind of 
approach the hon. member talks about. I think if the hon. member were to talk with the representative bodies 
in northern Saskatchewan, would find their response to the presence of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan — particularly with regard to the commitment of this government to undertake what stands as 
(and every one across this country agrees) one of the most courageous and one of the most comprehensive 
and one of the most positive attacks on rural or northern poverty this country has ever seen. 
 
He would find the general view across northern Saskatchewan is quite the contrary to what he suggests. Far 
from asking for a blank cheque, this piece of legislation asks for increased opportunity to work with northern 
people in their efforts to secure for themselves a greater degree of participation in and benefits from the kind 
of northern development which is occurring now, and which will occur at an ever-increasing pace over the 
next four years. 
 
All of the activities of the economic development branch are governed by legislation and by regulation. To 
suggest that there is a motive to suppress the legitimate economic ambitions of the people of northern 
Saskatchewan is to deny the fact of what has happened and what is happening in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It is not our intention to bail out anyone. It is our intention to work with northerners in their legitimate 
attempts to gain a fuller role in Saskatchewan society as a whole, and in this case particularly in the 
economic sectors. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, I will give you one specific case, and this is one of the reasons I don't 
want you to have the power in this bill. It had to do with a trucking firm in the North, a trucking firm which 
received a letter of intent to operate. I don't know how many grants — DNS grants, or any other government 
grants — they obtained. As it turned out, they went trucking for a little while and then bang! They don't even 
show at their own hearing. Now, it seems to me they could have folded. Under this bill, you can go in and 
either become partners with them, Mr. Minister, or you can buy them out. That is just one example; I want to 
tell you I could give you five or six. Now, why do we have to have this now? Is it because of the questions I 
raised about DNS and the North, about some of the gravel-crushing contractors and some of the truckers up 
there, on the order paper? What effect did this have on the established truckers who were trying to truck into 
the North and who had been set up? When a government comes along with maybe a little bit of political 
patronage (give somebody this, give somebody that) . . . You know, Mr. Minister, I don't know when this 
government is going to realize that everyone can't be bought. Everyone in Saskatchewan cannot be 
controlled and does not want to be controlled. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Especially northerners. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Northerners have their pride as southerners do and everyone else. Why do you and this 
government think the answer to all problems is to go into business with them, buy them out or give them a 
bunch of grants? Give them the chance to work. They want to. Don't take their pride away. They don't want 
government leaning over their shoulder. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3426 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Right on. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the credit the hon. member for Wilkie takes with 
regard to questions he tabled in this Assembly leading to these amendments, I remind him that the 
amendments were introduced in December. I am not aware he had tabled any questions at that point. Most of 
what he says has been said by members opposite on previous occasions in this Assembly and has been 
thoroughly answered by both previous ministers of this department and by me. I say to him there is one little 
set of figures which belie what he suggests. That is the set of figures with regard to welfare dependency in 
northern Saskatchewan which in 1973 was 47 per cent of the population and today is less than 16 per cent. 
That doesn't suggest to me that there has been no gain in terms of jobs, employment and northern 
participation in the economy. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, just very quickly in response to what you said with regard to the 47 
per cent now reduced to 16 per cent dependency on welfare — that may well be, but that difference is made 
up, in most cases, by grants in one form or another. Well, if it isn't you certainly would have to spend (and 
we would have to spend) a lot of time, and I, for one, am not going to take the time of the House in proving 
that particular point. You would take a long time to show us how residents in the northern Saskatchewan 
district are in fact employed to the extent where those figures have been reduced by that amount. I am not 
going to get into the numbers game with you. What I am going to do is give you the bottom line on this bill. I 
think we can wrap it up after that. 
 
Basically, what you are asking is for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to give you the right to sign a cheque to 
the extent of $25 million. And that is up $20 million from what is was. It was $5 million that you were able 
to advance under the act before. Well, I am pretty sure it was $5 million. But at any rate, it is now $25 
million. That is the current figure. So we can just take that. Never mind what it was or what the difference is. 
Let's take the $25 million. You now have the power to write a cheque for $25 million, in parts of course, for 
any of the provisions mentioned under subsection 2 on page 2 of the printed bill. That is the concern. That is 
a legitimate concern which members of the opposition would have. I suppose one could suggest that what we 
are looking at here is possibly another SEDCO. You know you're going to, as a department, now enter into 
all kinds of business arrangements with people in northern Saskatchewan, whether they be individual 
residents or groups or maybe you're just going to enter into a business arrangement up there as a department. 
Certainly, that's what appears to be the case. I can't see any other motive for it. 
 
I would suggest that with this $25 million allotment you have, under the powers of this act, to spend in 
northern Saskatchewan, we would likely see the bulk of it spent nearer to the next election to maintain the 
northern ridings for the NDP. I certainly see that as being a very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . obviously 
that struck a few nerves — but I see that as a very real possibility. 
 
If you were not doing that, if you were taking the appropriate steps to assure (as I've said many times before), 
that northern Saskatchewan residents had the way cleared by your department to develop the North on their 
own, with local autonomy as the basis of that development, you would not require from this legislature and 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan the authority to write a cheque for $25 million over this period of time. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, seems to be the bottom line of the whole bill, and certainly is the major concern we as an 
opposition have. That's basically the way I see it. I suppose, if 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3427 

you don't see it that way then it would likely be incumbent upon you at this time to describe to me how it is 
going to be any different. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, not by way of debate but by way of information, I wish to 
inform the hon. member that the limit on the economic development advance account was $15 million, and 
this asks for an increase to $25 million. But that is by no stretch of the imagination any authority for the 
minister to write a cheque in that amount. 
 
I wish to inform him of the process by which economic development loans are handled. There is, in every 
community, a local loans committee made up of representation from elected representative bodies in the 
community, as well as personnel from the economic development branch of the department. They have the 
authority to rule on loan applications up to $4,000. With loan applications higher than that, they either 
recommend approval or rejection of the application to the district loans committee, which is a committee 
representative of the northern administration district and has northerners (members at large) from various 
parts of the district as well as a representative from the department. That district loans committee approves 
or rejects loans up to an amount of $25,000. For loans above that amount, the committee makes a 
recommendation to the minister, to which the minister either concurs or rejects. At no stage of the game is 
the minister out writing cheques. 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, I know the minister wouldn't deliberately mislead 
the House, and I know that it could have been a slip of the tongue, but more likely he's just not familiar with 
the legislation in his department and didn't know any better. But just one minute ago, you said the net 
amount of such advances under the old act, was $15 million. 
 
1978 statues, Section 10 — Subsection 3, says very, very clearly: 
 

The net amount of such advances shall not at any time exceed $5 million. 
 
The amendment in the bill we are dealing with amends the said subsection to read $25 million. I think the 
minister wasn't in any way intending to mislead the House. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I thank the member for Souris-Cannington for his generosity. It is my 
understanding (and I don't have the statute here) that there was an amendment subsequent to the statute the 
member quotes that raised it to $15 million. I can't quote the bill and date. But you are right, I wasn't 
intentionally misleading the House. I'm pretty certain you will find another amendment between the statute 
you quote and the bill we are dealing with today. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — No, Mr. Chairman. If that is the case, then this legislation has been improperly 
drafted. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 13 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill on division. 
 
The committee reported progress. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3428 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — ENVIRONMENT - VOTE 9 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce for 
the first time in this House, Mr. Carter, the deputy minister, who joined us in the new year, sitting to my 
right; directly behind me a person who has been introduced many times before to the Assembly, Mr. Bill 
Howard who is the chief of the environmental protection service. 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. G. S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, they might as well start saving their voices now 
because every time I . . . Don't start hollering, agreed, agreed, when I haven't even got up yet. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say to the minister that I'm not going to make the mistake I made last year in environment 
estimates. I had a 20 minutes prelude speech which let the minister bring out an hour and 40 minute speech 
so we're going to dispense with the speeches tonight and get right at the questioning. 
 
I just have about two or three minutes opening remarks but I want to ask one quick question first, Mr. 
Minister. I want to know who is responsible for making up this estimate on pages 36 and 37. Who's 
responsible for putting that together? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Department of Finance prepares the estimates for the 
House. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Somebody from your department must give them the figures. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, the customary budget process is undertaken by the department but it's no 
different in the Department of the Environment than it is in any other department; the final approval figures 
are made by the Department of Finance and the estimates book is printed by the Department of Finance or 
under direction of the Department of Finance, as are the numbers. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — O.K. Mr. Minister, I'll just give you a few items on which I'll be touching tonight. 
Then we'll go right straight to questions. I'll be talking about and asking questions on the PCBs in the Regina 
drinking water. We'll be touching on the PCBs at Federal Pioneer. We'll be talking about the Saskatchewan 
drinking water situation, Buffalo Pound water reservoir and ditch from Lake Diefenbaker concerning 
Regina, Moose Jaw and the intervening area. It's typical of last year, Mr. Minister. The people start laughing 
as soon as you mention water or environment. I take this very seriously, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I might as well warn the people that they can heckle all they want but it doesn't make any 
difference to me. I just love it. It means that it's hitting home and I just love it. It makes the adrenalin flow, 
so just keep on heckling boys; I love it. 
 
The first question, Mr. Minister, is (now these questions I'm going to ask you may not just be in the proper 
order, I put them down as I thought of them) did you test the water for PCBs at the Regina General Hospital 
in 1979? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, while the officials are getting me the answer for that particular 
question, I know that it's going to be a hot and heavy session here this evening. I wonder if, with permission 
of the House, we might (those who want to at 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3429 

least) take our coats off. 
 
The officials tell me, Mr. Speaker, that we don't have here with us this evening the places where water 
samples were taken, but we can provide the hon. member with all the locations where water samples were 
taken. It's just that we don't happen to know whether or not a sample was taken at the Regina General 
Hospital. I think that's the question you asked. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I can't believe the minister is already starting to sweat and we haven't even started 
yet. Mr. Minister, can your people tell you how many places other than the wells or the pumping stations, 
how many private homes and businesses and city hospitals, were tested for PCBs? Do they have that 
information? Not where, but how many? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the hon. member's question is that there is a joint 
operation between the city and ourselves. There were eight or 10 sites which we took water samples from on 
a consistent basis. But there is no way we could be accurate enough to indicate to the hon. member tonight 
where all samples may have been taken within the city because I did hear him mention private homes and 
other places where water samples may have been taken. I think it would be inaccurate for us, Mr. Chairman, 
to try to give a precise answer. 
 
Most of the deep wells in the city were sampled and of course the Farrell pumping station where much of the 
sampling was taken and the end results arrived at. I certainly can provide the hon. member with that. But I 
can't give you the exact data as to what address of a private home or whether or not a sample was taken from 
this tap or that tap in the city. We just don't have that material here with us at this point. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, I'm very surprised, Mr. Minister. I was sure you would know this would be a 
subject that would come up tonight, and that you would have every bit of information possible. I think it 
would be very easy for you to send one of your boys to a telephone to have someone get that information. It 
should be right there, easy to get hold of. Send somebody for it now. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We can send someone, Mr. Chairman, to the phone and, if we can make contact 
with the right person, see whether or not we can get the information for the member. But I would hope we 
are not going to hold up the estimates on the basis of whether or not we can provide all the number of taps in 
private homes and so on where water samples were taken, because as I indicated to you the water sampling 
was divided between the Department of the Environment and the city of Regina. The officials from both the 
city and the department were involved in the sampling process, so there is room for the possibility of error. I 
think it would be more careful to wait than for me to just recite it to you at this point. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I won't hold up the estimates but I want you to try to find this out for me. I'm not 
interested in the pumping stations and the water wells. I'm interested in private homes, businesses, hospitals. 
Try to find that out while we go ahead. My next question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Hospitals and 
businesses, any place that you have done a test other than normal, like Farrell pumping station. I'm not 
interested in those because I know all those. I want to know the private homes. 
 
My next question, Mr. Minister, what was the total cost of checking for PCBs in the Regina drinking water 
last summer? 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3430 

MR. BOWERMAN: — We'll try to get that information at the same time. Again, that's no way to ask us 
what it costs to do the sampling program. We'd have to estimate the staff time and the mileage costs. We 
would have the costs of sampling. We could get those because those were actual pay-outs. But to ask us what 
is cost the department or the taxpayer, relevant to the estimates, would be a very difficult question to answer. 
We'd have to do some research on it. We just wouldn't be able to give you the figure you're asking for. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, Mr. Minister, that really disgusts me on as big an issue as this. A lot of money 
was spent last summer fooling around with checking water when it turned out, as you said, to be only a flaky 
tap. In the end you spent an awful lot of money. 
 
I think it's up to me; it's my duty as a member of the opposition in the House, to ask what the total cost is, 
what it cost the taxpayers of this province. O.K. You can't give it to me tonight, but I want your word that I'm 
going to get a copy of the exact cost — everything relating to it, even what it cost to hire the National 
Research Council to come in here. The taxpayers must know the exact cost. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I will not undertake to give the exact cost because I think that's 
going to take more time than is necessary. I think it's irrelevant. Whether I think it's irrelevant is not, I 
suppose important to the member. Consider the time we would spend deciding how much staff time was 
involved, how much automobile mileage was involved and how much the telephone costs were. We'd have 
to go through the telephone costs for calling the laboratories outside of Saskatchewan if there were 
long-distance costs. All these things enter into the exact total cost. I can't undertake, Mr. Chairman to 
provide this for the hon. member. 
 
We will provide the hon. member with information regarding the accounts we pay, that is accounts which 
have been paid. We certainly can give those and have no hesitation in doing so. National Research Council 
accounts were paid there; laboratory accounts were paid there. They were direct cost accounts where we can 
get into an invoicing situation. We'll go through them and provide the answer to the hon. member. We'll 
have no difficulty in that at all. But to try to segregate staff time, telephone calls, and things like this, that I 
would not be able to do. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — That's what I'm getting at. I don't mean to ask for a breakdown on someone who is 
already on salary because his salary is not changing whether he's doing a little work here or a little work 
there. That's what I mean. I'm sorry if you misunderstood me. It's the cost you paid out pertaining to the 
PCBs — checking, digging, any outside costs — that I want. I don't need the breakdown of any officials and 
stuff like that. That's small peanuts to me. I want to know the outside big figure that it cost. That's what I 
want. Thank you. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I can give the member an estimate. It's over $200,000. As to the exact figure, I can't 
give it to him this evening. Again, we can provide that. But there has been over $200,000 of expenditures in 
the Department of the Environment with respect to this matter of the PCB spill. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, have you ever been at the Farrell pumping station? I've looked over the 
register many times when I've been there and I've never seen your name. And everyone who enters that 
building has to sign even officials. Have ever been at the Farrell pumping station? 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3431 

MR. BOWERMAN: — No, Mr. Chairman, I have not been at the Farrell pumping station. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I figure this has to be the biggest joke of the century, if you haven't been to the 
Farrell pumping station. You go and check the register to see how many times I've been there. There's no 
way you're going to be able to answer the questions I have if you've never been there . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I have the answers but it's not up to me to give them. If I don't get them here, I will give 
them. That's what will have to happen. I'm going to have to answer the questions. Have you ever been at 
Federal Pioneer? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — What do you know about Federal Pioneer? Do you know where the spill took place? 
Do you know the dimensions of it? Do you know what part of the building? Do you know what part of the 
building it's under now, other than just looking at this map in the book? Have you been there and gone 
through the building with the managers to explain the exact situation? Have you done that, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I was at Federal Pioneer plant before the report was complete, 
before the National Research Council had completed the report. At that point in time no one knew the exact 
location. No one knew the exact volume and so on relevant to what the hon. member now asks. I was at 
Federal Pioneer. We reviewed the place where it is reported the original spill took place. I have not been 
there either subsequent to that or before that first occasion. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, will you explain to this Assembly why Dr. Mathias resigned? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Dr. Rick Mathias was not an employee of the Department of 
the Environment. You would have to ask the Minister of Health, who is responsible for the Department of 
Health. He was his employee. I can't answer the question. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, I would like to know this. I talked to Dr. Mathias quite a few times last 
summer, Mr. Minister (I'm sure you didn't because you were away on holidays). Can you tell me why he 
made the statement that there were PCBs in mothers' milk and then a few days later he changed his position 
on this? Can you tell me why? When I talked to him, he said this was a most serious situation. He said the 
amount of PCBs in the drinking water was serious. I also have inside information (I might as well tell you 
now) from the engineer of the city of Regina who does not believe that these PCBs came from a flaky tap. I'll 
explain to you later (and ask you more questions) why I can prove to you it didn't. 
 
Why did Dr. Mathias change his statement? After he changed his position I phoned him and he was just like 
a beaten dog. He could hardly talk to me. He just changed his position. He had no reason; it was just like he 
was shut up. He didn't say that, but it was just like he was told to change his position. That's the feeling I 
had. Now I might be wrong. I'm not accusing him, but I had that feeling, Mr. Minister. I would like you to 
explain the position here, on Dr. Mathias' change. Because there is no way, and you know it, that PCBs, if 
they came from a flaky tap, ever got in mothers' milk that way. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3432 

MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to attempt to answer the question. I say again, 
Dr. Rick Mathias was not an employee of the Department of the Environment. I will not try to explain why 
— and have no basis or reason to explain why — Dr. Mathias (if he did change his mind) changed his mind, 
or why he allegedly said something different one time as opposed to another. I don't propose to try to answer 
those questions on behalf of Dr. Rick Mathias. 
 
I think, however, Mr. Chairman, there is a rather serious imputation upon the professional ethics of Dr. Rick 
Mathias. If the hon. member is suggesting Dr. Rick Mathias had some knowledge that PCBs were serious 
both in the water and in mothers' milk. Subsequently he changed his mind without evidence. I think there's 
an imputation or a suggestion that certainly questions the propriety and the professional ethics of Dr. Rick 
Mathias. The hon. member does that on his own account. I neither defend nor do I attempt to defend the 
situation in that respect. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I read Dr. Mathias' remarks in the paper — the first ones. I don't have the articles 
here, but you did just as well as I did. I talked to him on the phone about it and he was quite hepped up about 
it. I phoned him back as soon as his position was reversed because he made the statement (perhaps you can't 
remember it, but I do) that it was just a miscalculation. But when I talked to him on the phone he sure gave 
me the feeling that something smelt. I had this feeling. I would say, if I hadn't become well acquainted with 
Dr. Mathias (and I respect him very much and I know this didn't happen) as I did, I would say this right to 
you, how much did the government pay that man when he resigned? But I can't say it because I have too 
much respect for Dr. Mathias. He wouldn't go for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your involvement and jurisdiction in connection with all water supplies in the city of 
Regina? What is the Department of the Environment's involvement and jurisdiction in connection with all 
water supplies in the city of Regina? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, that the approvals or the authority come in two forms. 
Firstly, under The Water Rights Act we give the city the right to take water or to draw water from a source. 
Secondly, we license the construction and operation of the water works. Therefore, there are basically two 
areas of jurisdiction or authority. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, this leads to quite a topic. I tried to obtain samples of water from 
Farrell pumping station last summer (I believe it was the month of June) and was told by city water officials 
that Farrell pumping station was their complete jurisdiction. I was leaving to go away on a trip on a Sunday. 
I phoned my colleague Paul Rousseau from Regina South to ask if he would go over to pick up two samples 
of water from Farrell pumping station. I phoned Mr. Mann to see if this could be arranged on a Sunday. He 
said, yes, as long as he identified himself as Paul Rousseau he could get the samples. When Paul Rousseau 
got there they said no way, we have to have permission from environment before we can give you any water. 
 
So when I came in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . it's a coverup all right, because when I came in, Mr. 
Minister, that evening, I went around (I've been there before and they knew me, they didn't have to identify 
me) and I asked why I could not receive samples. So they let me phone Mr. Mann and he said, I'm sorry, I've 
been overruled by Don Fast from the environment. When I talked to Don Fast on the telephone he said, I 
cannot give you any water samples; you must have certain bottles. I said, will you lend me yours? No, you 
must have certain bottles. Can you explain why environment had this 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3433 

authority to come in and step over the city of Regina to say I could not obtain water samples when Regina 
would have given me the bottles from the Farrell pumping station? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We are certainly not going to attempt to dwell on the subject. There is no question 
about it. I outlined to the hon. member the areas of jurisdiction and authority which the Department of the 
Environment has. Now I don't know what communications he may have had with city officials, with 
individuals or with whom? I don't take responsibility for that; there is no way I can. But I suggest to you that 
the Department of the Environment has no authority over who goes into the Farrell pumping station or who 
comes out of the Farrell pumping station or who takes water samples in Farrell pumping station or otherwise. 
Mr. Don Fast or anyone else in the Department of the Environment has no authority or no jurisdiction in that 
area. If the hon. member was talking with city officials, then I don't know what their answer is and I don't 
defend what their answer is. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, we don't have to worry about what they defend. You better defend Don Fast 
and right now. Because I was away for about five or six days and when I came back I took the Leader of the 
Opposition (well, he wasn't the Leader of the Opposition then; he was the member for Souris-Cannington, 
Eric Berntson) . . . When we landed in Regina on the plane, we phoned Mr. Mann and asked, can I get water 
or can I not? He said, of course you can. He phoned to Farrell pumping station and said, bring two sterilized 
bottles. I went right down here in the kitchen where they sterilized two quart bottles for me. Mr. Berntson 
and I went over there and the man who was on duty said, no way. I can't get you any water until Don Fast 
says you can have water. I phoned Don Fast and he said, you can't have water, no way; you have to have the 
proper bottles and we will not let you have ours. I was stopped by Don Fast. He wouldn't let me have it. 
 
So what I did, Mr. Minister, is I phoned the federal Minister of Environment to see what I could do. He said, 
get in touch with Environment Canada at Calgary and they can give you permission to do the water testing. 
So I phoned Calgary and talked to Environment Canada. They said, no problem, we will send you the bottles 
immediately. All we have to do is check it out with the federal Minister of Environment. I received a letter in 
the mail in just a matter of a day or two saying the bottles were on the way. But they didn't come so I phoned 
back to Calgary. I asked, did you not send the bottles or what happened? He said we have been stopped by 
the Saskatchewan Department of the Environment saying they have a contract with Environment Canada to 
test our water and no outside people can do it. 
 
So I had to get in touch with the federal Minister of the Environment again. He said, I guess they've got you; 
they have that contract. Somehow or another, the Department of the Environment did not want me to check 
the water at that time. So the federal Minister of the Environment made arrangements some place in 
Vancouver (I have the name here, CANTEST Ltd., Pandora Street, Vancouver, B.C.) But they could not 
understand why the critic of the environment in Saskatchewan would not be allowed to have bottles when 
Regina tried to give them to me. Environment Canada tried to give them to me; Environment Canada tried to 
give them to me. You stopped them both times. Now I don't know, Mr. Minister, whether it was you or Don 
Fast, but somebody had better explain why I was cut off at the pass. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I'm not sure whether I am pleased to know, or whether I am under some 
illusion that I have more powers than I thought or that the department has 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3434 

more powers than we believed it had. 
 
The charges the hon. member makes, Mr. Chairman, are very serious charges. I am sure if he had anything 
he could back up those charges with, he would have it here this evening. They're like many other charges the 
hon. member has made about other subjects. All I can suggest to the hon. member here is that we do not 
have any authority to prevent anyone from entering the Farrell pumping station. That is city property and city 
people will do so. 
 
However, if the hon. member or anyone else was attempting to negotiate a sampling process under some 
contract which the department had with a laboratory, then, yes, if they were asking for us to supply bottles to 
the hon. member or to anyone else, to get into the contract we had with someone else, I can well understand 
Mr. Don Fast or anyone else in the department saying no. I, in fact, would support them in saying no. 
 
I would suggest to you it was a difficult enough time to try to get the samples and get them properly 
analysed. There were so many different kinds of tests coming from various laboratories, and to have the hon. 
member coming to the department and taking samples (which we would have no control over once he took 
them), and sending them to a laboratory on his own, would mean we would have no knowledge of what the 
hon. member was doing with the samples or how carefully the samples were being taken. Therefore, Mr. 
Chairman, in order not to be implicated in any of the sampling done by the hon. member, I can quite well 
understand an employee saying no, we would not provide sample bottles and you cannot get your samples 
tested at a laboratory with which we have a contract. I am pleased to say I agree with the staff member for 
taking the initiative in doing so. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, if you're suggesting for one minute that I would take water and add 
PCBs to it, I am suggesting that you took the water and took the PCBs out before you sent it away to get 
tested. Well, he just blamed me for that. 
 
I say to the minister, there are far more chances that your department took samples from where they wished, 
than I would have tried to add to them, for goodness sake. Quit your accusations. If you want to know some 
more facts (you said I am making up accusations) I'm going to just tell you that the last time I did talk to Don 
Fast, he said the only way you're going to have anything out of this Farrell pumping station is to meet me 
there at a certain time. I took the press with me. 
 
If you want some proof, three or four people from the press were there. We went to meet Mr. Fast. He was to 
be there at 11 o'clock, and he wouldn't even show. But we went back at 3 o'clock and he did show. He said I 
could not have anything, but I could watch them take a test and how it was performed; I could watch them 
put the water in a bottle; I could watch how they took it out of the tap. I'm going to tell you, Mr. Minister, if 
you think you're fooling the people in this city by saying that tap flaked off some PCBs, well then you people 
are mighty short of brains over there and mighty short of common sense. 
 
I'll tell you there are four pumps in the Farrell pumping station. I have my diagrams from inside information, 
right from an engineer before I went in there. I knew where each one came from. Pump No. 1 brings the 
water from the surrounding wells and some from the well at 9th Avenue. Pump No. 2 brings it right from the 
reservoir . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, he doesn't know anything and I can remember something. 
 
All right, we'll read it if you want to get down to technicalities; I write my information 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3435 

down. Pump No. 1 comes from the surrounding wells mixed in the station at 9th Avenue, where most of the 
water comes from Buffalo Pound. Pump No. 2 comes from the reservoir at Farrell pumping station. Pumps 3 
and No. 4 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You know, this whole government confuses me because they have 
no interest in anything but hiding things. That's all you've done from day one. I have sat with this 
government in this place for over a year, and I have never run into such a block in my life. I sat in Crown 
corporations this year. You only find out what they want to tell you. Then they sit there and snicker at you. 
 
Now, I've respect for you, Mr. Minister, and I am not blaming you for this water situation. I am blaming Don 
Fast for the way he communicated to me and the way he overruled the city. You've already said there is no 
way he had the jurisdiction to overrule the city. So I want something to come of this. I want you to find out 
exactly. If you can prove me wrong and Don Fast didn't overrule Mr. Mann, I'll apologize to this Assembly 
inside and outside; but if I am right, I want you to be man enough to make the statement that Don Fast 
overruled. 
 
Now that's fair enough. Because all you have to do is ask Don Fast and ask Mr. Mann, and you can also have 
a little chat with the mayor of that time as to what was going on. He told me himself there was no reason; I 
talked to him at the funeral of the late Mr. Diefenbaker and he said, Gerry, there is no reason you couldn't get 
water from Farrell pumping station. There was a good reason all right; your men wouldn't give it to me. They 
overruled with no authority. 
 
Now, what am I supposed to think when you walk in there and the town says the city gets water and you cut 
us off? That means just the same old thing. You're hiding; you're hiding. Now they took me down to pump 
no. 1 where they took the water from. There was a tap sitting there. The bottle they took it from sits on a 
platform, and there happens to be about two or three inches of space left before the tap. It was just a little tap, 
as you would put on the bottom of a barrel. They turned the tap on and filled the bottle, then refilled the 
other ones. If you think for one minute that I think that flaky . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I wouldn't let 
you in for five, because if you get in for five you'll hold it until 10 o'clock like you did before. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the man from Nipawin can sit right where he is forever, for all I care. The only way I'll let 
him in tonight is that I may just say this is a good job and let him on Bill No. 105 if he wants. Yak away on 
that. 
 
Anyway, this is in the past, Mr. Minister, and it has been discussed plenty, but I just want it on record in this 
House that I do not believe for one minute and neither do the people of Regina believe the stories — the city 
officials who work there, the engineers, the majority of them, because I've talked to a lot of them. Now, I 
talked to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You did a good job. Somebody in your department did a real good 
job of convincing Dr. Gordon Butler of the National Research Council that the PCBs came off the flaky tap. 
But when I told him my storey, he said, I think I was led down the garden path by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Now phone him; here's his telephone number — 995-7852. Write it down. Phone him. He 
happens to be the man that you hired from the National Research Council of Canada to come in and do the 
whole research for PCBs. He is also the man who said, don't get off their backs, they have no reason to not 
bury these PCBs this summer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'll give you the number all right. 
 
I'll give you three numbers: 995-6600, 995-6601 and 995-7852. You'll get him . . . 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3436 

(inaudible interjection) . . . You heard me the first time. You can check Hansard tomorrow . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It happens to be 6:13; I have just as good a memory as Wes Robbins. 
 
Mr. Minister, what was the date (maybe you won't know the answer to this but you might) the Department of 
Labour was first involved at Federal Pioneer, due to the PCB spill? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say with respect to the staff members that I take full 
responsibility for the members of the staff for the Department of the Environment. I am pleased do so. Any 
accusations against staff members will be accusations against me in not fulfilling whatever the hon. member 
thinks my responsibilities are with respect to the samplings and the refusals, or whatever they were purported 
to be, at the Farrell pumping station. 
 
A question asked earlier this evening, one of the first questions asked, was how many samples were taken. 
We have the information. Approximately 300 samples in total were taken. Two samples were taken at the 
General Hospital, 15 samples at outside taps of homes and businesses. The cost for analysis of these samples 
was about $15,000 not including department staff time and so on. The plan for testing was developed with 
the city and went through major sources to trace the cause — samples from the pumping stations, the main 
supply wells, the transmission lines, the storage reservoirs and Buffalo Pound Lake, about 280 tests in all. 
 
The results were isolation of a cause or source. There were never any confirmed PCB samples found outside 
the Farrell pumping station. This is the information, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that we have for the hon. 
member. He probably won't be able to absorb that, but it will be there for a matter of record; you can refer to 
Hansard with regard to the number of samples taken and some of the costs and locations of the samples 
taken. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — I do appreciate it Mr. Deputy Chairman. I have only a brief remark to 
make to the minister. I was interested in what the member for Arm River was saying. I thought he was 
making a point. I wonder if the minister would be so kind as to conduct an experiment for me this evening. 
Just a small experiment, and I am sure the minister would be happy to do so. I wonder if he would mind 
picking up the water glass that has been served to us here in this Chamber and hold it up to the light and tell 
me exactly what he sees. The minister has been attempting to tell this Assembly about the beauty and joy of 
Regina water. I wonder if he would be so kind as to just take his glass and hold it up to the light and tell me 
what he sees in the water. Would you do the experiment for me, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that is nor will it ever be, I hope, the responsibility of 
the Department of the Environment to assure that each city, village and town in the province of 
Saskatchewan has a water supply which will meet the satisfaction of all persons. That's just not the area of 
jurisdiction or responsibility of the Department of the Environment. 
 
I have not been here this evening trying to say that this water is good or that it's poor or anything else. No 
questions have been asked relative to the quality of the water here in Regina other than whether or not there 
were PCBs in the Regina water supply. I will do the experiment and I'll tell him I can't see any PCBs in 
there. And I'm not sure that he will be able to unless he has visions, like the hon. member for Nipawin has. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3437 

MR. COLLVER: — I wonder if the minister might go a little further with the experiment. I wonder if he 
might taste the water he has been provided with in this city and then tell me that the water in the city of 
Regina is particularly pure. The minister said that he can't achieve a standard for all people in terms of 
quality of water. 
 
I wonder if it would be possible for the Minister of the Environment to say whether it is the responsibility of 
the Department of the Environment to achieve some form of quality of water for some people. I don't think 
there's a single citizen in the city of Regina who believes that the water provided to the citizens of Regina is 
anything but impure and perhaps unsafe, but certainly impure and tastes like — well, it's probably the 
worst-tasting water in the world. 
 
Is there not some means by which the Department of the Environment can possibly develop some form of 
quality standard for water so the city of Regina is not faced with this kind of problem on a continuing basis? 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to set one thing straight on the record. I didn't make any 
accusations against any of your staff. You made them against me. I said what they did and you just doubted 
my word. I asked you to straighten it out. No way did I make any accusations against Don Fast. I just said 
that he overruled the city. That's not an accusation. I didn't say the man did anything wrong. And I want it 
straight on the record. You doubted my word. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He's backing off. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I am not backing off. I said that Don Fast was responsible, that I would get no water 
and he saw that I didn't. Mr. Fast saw that I didn't get any water. Now maybe that was his job. You told me 
tonight that it wasn't. And I made no accusations against the man — none — other than what you said 
tonight yourself that you doubted my word. 
 
I am the one who has to see Mr. Mann and Mr. Fast and bring them together and get statements because I 
will not have you make accusations that my word is not right. I made no accusations against your man. All I 
said is what he did. That's all he did — would not let me have water. All you have to do is go up there and 
talk to the press and they'll know the situation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You better be careful or your 
neck will be in a noose. They are listening to you up there. 
 
I asked you the question, Mr. Minister, what was the date that the Department of Labour was first involved 
with Federal Pioneer due to the PCB spill? Closest to your knowledge, what was the date? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know what the date was when the Department of Labour is 
reported to have taken action or otherwise. I don't have the dates here. It would not be my responsibility to 
know those dates in the first place. So I don't have an answer to the question. I don't think really, Mr. 
Chairman, that it's the responsibility of the Department of the Environment to be answering questions as to 
what happened in the Department of Labour? 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — That's fine, Mr. Chairman. You surely can tell me this one though. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3438 

What was the date that the Department of the Environment was first notified about the spill? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — In August of 1976, I'm not going to try to get any closer to that. Mr. Chairman, I 
really don't understand the opposition member. I appreciate the hon. member believes he is going to make a 
point. We were through this for hours and hours and hours last year. We were through it before I became the 
Minister of the Environment, and here we are talking about something which happened in 1976, four years 
ago. You'd think, Mr. Chairman, or at least I would think that if there isn't anything more important in 
environment in 1980 than what happened in 1976, those folks across the way are really lost in the 
wilderness. It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, there are many, many issues that are current and relevant to the 
issues of today. In 1976, we're not going to change anything as to whether or not the staff member was there 
on the 15th or 16th or the 17th or the 24th. If the hon. member has something which he thinks the public of 
Saskatchewan should know that is deep, dark and secret, I wish he would unfold that information before the 
Assembly and before the public of Saskatchewan so we could at least talk about things that are current rather 
than 1976. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, if you don't think this is current when we are talking in 1976 about a 
PCB spill of 1,500 gallons, costing maybe a few thousand dollars to remove, and we're talking about $3 
million today, then you've got to be right out to lunch, Mister. Right completely right out! We're talking 
about $3 million, and you say it's not current. Now, come one! I'll lead down to the questions that will bring 
it up to date. It's got to go back to 1976. When you end up in the court room like you said your were going 
to, you're going to have to have this. You made the statement you are going to take Federal Pioneer to court. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — You have so. It's been in the papers and all over and you made it. What was the date 
the Department of the Environment first took action at Federal Pioneer? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Now, I'll say, Mr. Chairman, August, 1976. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — What did they do as their first action 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — A visit was made in conjunction with the Department of Labour to the Federal 
Pioneer plant. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — When did they put the pavement over the PCBs. What date? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Before freeze-up in 1976. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — That's absolutely very close. I want it back on record that I said a year ago in this 
House that environment knew about this in August 1976. And no one will ever make me believe that almost 
every cabinet minister sitting on that side didn't know about it. You're going to tell me, and I want it on 
record. The Mayor of this city had to know about it. The Minister of Labour knew about it because Mr. 
Scattergood of that department was contacted two days after the spill. I have the proof from Federal Pioneer 
officials that he talked to Mr. Snyder on the telephone right from that building. 
 
Now, if Mr. Snyder knew about it, you people all knew about it, and don't try to fool the 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3439 

public like you did. I've never seen such a bunch of monkeywooks in my life! You would think that 
something would happen in any caucus in Canada as important as that and a cabinet minister would find out 
about it. Hey, we have a spill out there at Federal. It's not serious; it's not even against the law (PCBs). They 
haven't even made it a law yet in this country, so it's not serious. But it's serious enough to cover it over and 
make a tomb out of it. I'm asking you why? 
 
It was your ruling, (not yours Mr. Minister, but the department's ruling) that pavement be put over the PCBs 
which Federal Pioneer could have moved to a garbage dump for about $1,000. You overruled them by 
putting the pavement there. Now you have the audacity to say to the press that we are going to sue them for 
$3 million. You have made the statement that if they don't pay you are going to sue. 
 
I have been talking to the officials of Federal Pioneer and you don't fool around because I know. I know 
exactly what's going on here. I know some figures will be coming out in this House shortly about when some 
cabinet ministers knew exactly. I'll tell you when I feel like telling you because I have been waiting for 
information from you people for a year and I never get it. It'll come out in the courtroom. That's where it's 
going to come out. 
 
I'm the last person in this world who wants to stand up here and see the taxpayers get stuck for $3 million. 
But I'll lose votes before I'll see even one person, one outfit like Federal Pioneer get stuck for all that money, 
when it's your responsibility by covering it over with pavement and saying we'll take care of it. They have 
been going by your orders ever since. Now where do you get the power? Where do you get it from to tell 
them that they have to pay? You have never even brought their suggestion to this House about putting a 
retaining wall around it, 200 feet in the ground, which might only cost $1 million. You have never brought 
anything to the public of Saskatchewan, only what the press digs out. They wouldn't know yet about that 
spill if the press hadn't dug it out. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Good for the press. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I say good for the press, yes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I have never seen such a coverup government in my life. Now, if you got away with 
that one, how many more in the province of Saskatchewan are not under cover yet? How many more? 
 
Mr. Minister, the next question I want to ask you is have we any more PCBs in transformers in 
Saskatchewan at this point? Now I asked you this a year ago and I'm asking you again. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, I would suspect that there are. I believe there is a fairly good inventory of 
where they are and how many there are. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, if I may have permission to introduce somebody? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Could the hon. member have permission to introduce a guest? 
 
Agreed. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3440 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Sitting in the gallery on the other side is a gentleman from the United States from 
Washington, D.C., a Mr. Steve Early, who is here and has been meeting with the Minister of Labour's people 
and looking at the Saskatchewan occupational health system and the committee. On behalf of the members 
here we welcome you; we hope you gain an education that will help you and your endeavours in the United 
States to copy this system. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Department of Environment (continued) 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, earlier today in the question period, you were asked a question about 
the Federal Pioneer spill. As I recall the answer, I think you said you couldn't believe the pipe had suddenly 
eroded and caused a spill overnight. Were you saying that the break had occurred some time before and it 
had been over a period of time that this spill had been going on? Is that what you meant by your reply? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say much of what I said this afternoon, as much as I can 
recall, was with reference to the National Research Council report. I was saying that the information in the 
National Research Council report would lead one to draw some conclusions about spills at the plant. 
 
I went further to say I preferred not to answer any questions about the detail of Federal Pioneer, because of 
the implications involved in court proceedings that are now under way. 
 
The gist of my statement, then really was relevant to the National Research Council report and the 
impressions which I took from the information contained in that report and the assumptions that I could 
draw, or that one reading that report might draw, from the report itself. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I'm curious to know how you would draw those conclusions. As I recall (and I don't 
have it here with me but I have it in my office and I can go get it), in the research council's findings, in that 
particular report they published and submitted, the drill tests they made were found in certain areas around 
the spill in close proximity and not very deep. I think the deepest drill was somewhere around 10 feet. I stand 
to be corrected on the exact footage. However, if you draw that kind of conclusion from what you read in 
that report, then how do you account for the spread of the PCBs to the extent that they have spread now? 
 
The latest report we've had on it was discussed in this House not too long ago. We're talking now about a 
couple of hundred feet or something that they've gone down and spread out. How would you draw your 
conclusion, which you led us to believe in this House today, that the spill had to occur many months or years 
or whatever some time prior to its discovery, when it has spread that much further today? At that time the 
report will show you the spread of the spill wasn't all that great. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I have a copy of the report. I see that the hon. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3441 

member for Arm River has a copy of the report. He may want to hand it to his colleague. 
 
On the back cover of the National Research Council report, you will see up in the corner, a rail line with 
what is called by the reference note — major areas requiring remedial action, shallow — little round 
numbers unassociated with anything else near the plant. What conclusions might one draw from that? A rail 
line coming in, emptying from a rail car into a facility of some kind, but not related to the other area. As I 
indicated to you from that report, I look at that and I immediately ask myself the question: how does that 
relate to the other? Where was the pipe going under the ground and so on? I drew a conclusion from that, 
Mr. Chairman; there is other information in that report which has not been analysed and has not been 
questioned. I would not think it's fair to say that because the matter is before the courts and is a matter now 
of legal action. My counsel to the department and the legal counsel to ourselves is that I should not be 
discussing this issue; and as I said this afternoon, I would prefer not to go any further with regard to 
questioning or answers to questions. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — This isn't by the way, the report I was looking for. Wasn't there one prepared by your 
department at the time showing the depth of the drill holes and so on which were made. I have one and I'll go 
get it. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — You're referring to the main report. This is a summary, I believe. It's not all the 
material. You have the full report, so it will be more detailed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, O.K., that's the one I'm probably referring to; and, as I say, I don't have it with 
me so I can't refer to it at this point in time. The only reason I'm questioning you on it is to clarify in my own 
mind the statement you made in the House today. You indicated (at least I understood you to indicate) that 
what you believed to be true was that the pipe had erupted some time before its actual discovery. When you 
point to the back cover of this report, and you talk about where this rail line is going, up at the top corner . . . 
Yes, spills can happen from a transformer. It could have happened. And that indicates 'shallow'. That's what 
it says, shallow. What do you mean by shallow? It could be six inches into the ground, right. That has 
nothing to do with the pipe breaking. What we are talking about, and what we were talking about today, was 
the actual pipe breaking and its discovery and your action subsequent to the discovery, which took place two 
years after the breakage. 
 
As my colleague the member for Arm River has indicated, evidence seems to be coming out today that some 
ministers in your cabinet knew as far back as 1976. That being the case, I'm wondering whether your 
predecessor actually didn't know about it; or has he tried to make the members in this House believe he 
didn't know about it when, in fact, cabinet ministers did know. The evidence is coming out now. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, if the hon. members have some information which has never been 
made available, then they're covering up. All they're doing is insinuating or inferring that somewhere around 
there are deep, dark secrets about ministers who knew in 1976 and didn't advise the public, or inferences to 
that effect. If the members have that kind of information, surely they should have let it be known before 
now; and if they know now and are not making it available to the Assembly, then they themselves are the 
proponents of a coverup. 
 
All I indicated to the House this afternoon, in the question, is that by looking at the National Research 
Council report I see some things which obviously raise questions in my own mind. And I'm sure anyone who 
takes a look at that and at the incoming railroad 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3442 

tracks and spur lines, and sees that obviously (or it looks to me like) samples that have been taken there 
show there have been spills in areas which are unconnected with the tank where the line ran under the 
ground to the plant — unrelated, not connected thereto. It seems to me it may have been possible this 
material was spilled in unloading and may not have occurred at the moment members opposite seem to be 
asserting — at the expansion or the break in the line. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I don't have the evidence which you're referring to and I certainly am 
not suggesting anything like you have suggested. All I'm saying to you is that the member for Arm River a 
few minutes ago indicated to you that he has a letter or evidence (I can't recall whether he said letter or 
evidence). A phone call was made to the Minister of Labour two days after the spill. He will probably 
produce the evidence which he has to support the statement he made. 
 
However, I want to ask you if your department was negligent back in 1976? Certainly it was admitted by the 
deputy minister at the time that he knew about it, and the ultimate responsibility is always to the cabinet 
minister involved. He is responsible for that department. If you knew (and you did or your department did) 
and no action was taken by your department and it was sloughed off, how can you justify penalizing the 
company which acted in the only way they knew how at the time, based on their reporting it to your 
department and to the city. They were told there were no problems to carry on and clean up as much as they 
could and (as the report indicated) also to cover the ground with an asphalt pad. These were instructions 
coming from your department or at least from some department of the government. How do you justify at 
this point in time penalizing that company by saying to them that they have to pay for the cost? 
 
Now are you not setting a precedent, to lay very costly penalties on the shoulders of taxpayers, whether they 
be businessmen or individuals in this province, by acting the way you're acting now? I think you have a 
moral responsibility if nothing else to see to it that the costs are shared, and I realize I'm talking about 
taxpayers having to pay this. Maybe we should be talking about the individuals who are responsible paying 
for it and I'm talking about the people within your department. You're setting a pretty dangerous precedent to 
the citizens of this province by acting in the manner you are, and I would like your comment on it. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to speak with reference to Federal Pioneer. I'm going 
to try to avoid that because I have been advised and our department has been advised that because of the 
nature of the proceedings which are now underway, I shouldn't jeopardize future actions in any way. I will, 
however, answer with regard to another situation with is similar. But I would answer it in general by saying 
wherever there is a spill of toxic materials, chemicals or otherwise, (I would believe this about INCO in 
Ontario; I believe it about Hudson Bay Mining & Smelting in Flin Flon, where they are emitting into the air 
sulphuric acid and it's causing problems in the environment and it's causing problems for people in 
communities) then I don't see how that becomes a taxpayer's responsibility. When they have a stack that's 
emitting pollution, then I think that company and that corporation is responsible for its actions. I think it is 
only justifiable and responsible on the part of government to deal with issues on that basis. We have a 
situation in Moose Jaw where we are going to be faced with perhaps the same kind of an issue. 
 
In my judgment (maybe I'm wrong, and I hear the members opposite in support of Federal Pioneer saying, 
it's the taxpayer who should pick up part of the cost), the 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3443 

responsible agent is the person who is in control of, or the person who is the owner of the toxic chemical. 
Whether it's an accidental spill or whether it's an intentional spill. I think it nevertheless is a spill. It's into the 
environment. It's causing some damage to the environment and to the people related to that environment. I 
believe it's a responsibility of the government to see first that it's cleaned up. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. I think the procedure and the custom of the committee 
has been when a member or members are on one item of questioning they are allowed to continue. If the 
member for Saskatoon-Sutherland is on a new line of questioning, I suggest you must refer back to the 
members on the other line. That's a custom and usage. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — That's not a valid point of order. The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, apparently the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland is yielding to me. 
Thank you very much, I appreciate that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you hear only what you want to hear when you say you're hearing that we're supporting Federal 
Pioneer. That is not what I am saying, not at all certainly not in my meaning and my words. What I am 
saying is that you are setting precedents. I certainly will support anyone who is being penalized by your 
department through your mistakes and your errors, whether they be Federal Pioneer or John Doe on the 
street. It doesn't matter. If the law was made by you and the ruling was made by your department and that 
ruling is found to be wrong, I don't think you have a right to turn around and penalize the person who is 
involved. That could set a very dangerous precedent. We could use all kinds of examples. 
 
If you were to tell IPSCO, for example, how to build a certain smoke stack for their plant and they followed 
the instructions exactly the way you instructed them . . . I'll go another step. The department of occupational 
health insisted one time that I put a certain unit in my dealership for clean air. And we followed the 
instructions as laid out by that department. If two years later they come to me and say, you put in the wrong 
one, why should I have to pay for it? And that's an example I'm using. I say if you're setting the rules, then 
you be prepared to live with the rules you have set. Don't change them after the fact. And that's the point I 
am trying to make. So if you're going to come out with the regulations, rules and equipment that people are 
obligated to install or rules they have to follow, then allow them the privilege of doing so without penalizing 
them later on. I think that is the point which you are missing. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, you let my colleague in for a few minutes there, but I will go back to 
my line of questioning here. Who paid for the pavement at Federal Pioneer? Was it Federal Pioneer or the 
Department of the Environment? Which one paid when that pavement was put down? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I have indicated a number of times that I do not wish to be drawn 
into debate on the details of Federal Pioneer at this point in time. I regret that. I would like to have the 
opportunity to debate and answer the questions as much as I am able to. 
 
But I have been advised by our solicitors, by our legal counsel that we should not be discussing this, even to 
the extent we have. I am asking the hon. members to recognize that this is a position I am going to have to 
acknowledge and to honour. I am not going to 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3444 

be drawn into a debate with regard to the issues at Federal Pioneer. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, there is no way you can get away with that kind of talk. If you were 
getting close to a court case or something like that — but you are not. That is a simple question. I can go to 
the phone and find out in a minute. But it is up to you as minister; you should know; your people should 
know. Who paid for the pavement when they put it down? It is simple. It is a very, very simple question. 
Which one paid for it, Federal Pioneer or the Department of the Environment? There is no reason why you 
can't answer the question. There is no way you can weasel out of this and say you don't want to get into a 
debate about Federal Pioneer. Let's not call it Federal Pioneer. Let's call them A and B, Government is A; we 
are talking about B. Which one paid for it, A or B? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Who's C? Are you 
refusing to answer the question, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I am. I tried to indicate as well as I was able, that I am not 
going to be drawn into a debate. One question leads to another. One answer leads to another. I am simply not 
going to be drawn into a debate with regard to this. I have been advised by the legal officials. My officials 
have been advised by our legal counsel that the issue is one which should not be discussed. We should not be 
dealing with the details of the matter. I am going to honour those directions and that guidance. Therefore, I 
am not going to answer the hon. member's question. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Respect for the courts. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Somebody said something about courts. We're not even talking about courts. He just 
wants to settle it and they'll end up in court, if they don't pay. 
 
Now what do you expect me to do? What do you want me to do then, Mr. Minister? Do you want me to 
insist that I get the answer? Because if I insist, we will sit here until doomsday. All right then, tell me. I want 
to know the answer or we don't move. Mr. Chairman, I wish to ask a question of the minister. Who paid for 
the pavement that was put on at Federal Pioneer in 1976? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I say again, I tried to give the hon. member an answer, the best 
answer I am able to give. Once I begin to answer, who paid for this, who paid for that, how much was paid 
for, who put it down, who was involved in the construction process, were there any decisions made in 
conjunction with the company, the corporation — they would lead to other questions. And we are going to 
have to face the issue sooner or later. I have attempted to give the answer which I am advised to give. I am 
going to follow that advice. Therefore, I cannot answer the hon. member's question. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, I am just as stubborn as you are and I will do what the Social Credit 
member in British Columbia did. I will ask it 78 times if I have to, if it goes right through until Christmas 
time: who paid for the pavement at Federal Pioneer? We'll call the government A and that outfit B. Who 
paid for it? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I'll have to inform the hon. member that his question is entirely in order and 
the answer of the minister is entirely in order. It is not in order, however, to be tedious and repetitious in any 
line of questioning. It is obvious the hon. member is not going to give you the answer to that question. I 
suggest you go on to another question. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3445 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — I ask the same question again. Who paid for the pavement at Federal Pioneer? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I said your question was in order the first eight times you asked but, but you 
are getting a little repetitious and that is out of order. Have you another question? 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Could the minister tell me just how much pavement there is in this area to cover the 
PCBs? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, Mr. Chairman, I cannot tell the hon. member. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — What was the purpose of laying the pavement, concrete, asphalt, whatever it was? 
What was the purpose? You've taken credit for putting it there, now surely you know why you put it there? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I will answer the hon. member in the same way. I'm not free and at liberty to 
continue to be drawn into a debate about the actions or issues at Federal Pioneer because of advice which I 
have and which the officials have from our counsel. Because of the pending actions in court we are not able 
to discuss them. I say to that hon. member and to all hon. members across the way, I will not be led into any 
further debate with respect to Federal Pioneer. I regret that. I would like to debate the issue. I would sincerely 
like to debate it. I would sincerely like to answer the hon. member's questions, but I cannot do so. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — If the minister would explain just what litigation is going on now. Where is it in 
court? Have charges been laid? Just what litigation is going on at this time? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The issue before us is that on March 5 I issued an order on the company to 
undertake to do certain things. I understand the company has now appealed that order and the issue is before 
the courts. I'm not prepared to answer any further questions with respect to Federal Pioneer, Mr. Chairman. I 
have tried to indicate to all hon. members opposite the reasons why. I think those reasons are valid. I am not 
going to jeopardize the success or the outcome or the failure of actions before the court. I think it would be 
irresponsible of me to do so. Because of things which I said here or discussions which went on here, it may 
or may not end up being the responsibility of the taxpayers to pay or to reimburse . . . 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I don't agree that it would be irresponsible but even if it were, it's not the type of 
action that is foreign to you. You indicated you had ordered Federal Pioneer to do certain things on March 5. 
These certain things were not done. You indicated that and I think the records will show it. What sorts of 
things? Surely if the thing is before the court, if it's filed before the court, I can go down tomorrow and pick 
up the document anyway. So surely you can tell us what sorts of things you directed Federal Pioneer to do 
that they did not comply with. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The order which I referred to, issued on March 5, 1980, is something which had 
been made public earlier. It's a public document, so I see no reason why the requirements of the order issued 
at that occasion . . . Now I can either read it to the hon. member or I can send him a copy of it. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3446 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, have you discussed any methods with Federal Pioneer or with the 
department for taking care of the removal of PCBs, other than the solution or suggestion I made in this 
House some time ago that we move them out to a piece of Crown land; that seems to have been picked up 
and has gone quite a ways. Is this still your suggestion? Are you still going to go by my suggestion? Have 
you ever discussed with Federal Pioneer any other methods? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I did make at some earlier point, after the press conference with the 
National Research Council reported their findings, a public pronouncement that the department and the 
government would be following a six-step procedure with regard to the clean-up. That has been made public. 
I can send the hon. member a copy of the provisions, or I can read the six steps we would follow. We are 
pursuing those six steps. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, yes, we want a copy. Mr. Minister, you were answering earlier any 
question I asked you in connection with Federal Pioneer; and all of a sudden you cut off, boom, just like that. 
Is it because you are now in the courts with Federal Pioneer? It is my understanding that the public know. 
Talking to the manager of Federal Pioneer, the only thing that has happened to date that the public hasn't 
been made aware of (maybe you can't) is, I understand, that if they don't pay then you are going to sue them. 
And how could you have any secret or talk about courts when you don't have any idea what the dollars and 
cents figure is going to be. You haven't decided if you are going to build a retaining wall around the building. 
You haven't decided if you are going to purchase some land out at Bengough-Milestone, where we don't 
want it, or in Arm River, where we don't want it. We want you to put it up in your own area where it came 
from. You don't have a clue about the dollars and cents sign, and here you all of a sudden clammed up and 
are talking about being almost in the courts. And I have heard rumblings from the other side, it's in the 
courts. This is only because we were questioning just a little bit too much tonight; and you just went to a stall 
because someone with no authority told you to clam up. There is no one in this room who has the authority 
to tell you you cannot answer the questions. There is no one in this room who can tell me I don't have the 
authority to ask a question a hundred times until I get the answer. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman whether there is authority in here or whether there isn't, good sense 
and good judgment suggests that one should not proceed on that line of answering those questions. I want to 
indicate that I sent the order which was issued on March 5 over to the hon. members. I thought they could 
read it, but apparently not. It reads as follows: 
 

The Minister of the Environment of the Province of Saskatchewan, by this order do hereby 
prohibit Federal Pioneer Limited from discharging, depositing, draining or releasing 
polychlorinated biphenyls from those lands described as follows (and it gives the description 
of the lands) hereinafter called the said lands into the city of Regina storm sewer located 
parallel and adjacent to the most southerly boundary of the said lands or to, into and upon 
any lands immediately adjacent to the said lands. 

 
The Federal Pioneer Company has appealed that order and by appealing the order has appealed to the courts 
that they will not proceed to do what the order requires. Therefore the issue is before the courts. 
 
I suggest to you that the reason I ceased to answer the questions is because what we 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3447 

were coming into were matters relevant to the issue of the courts. And I am not going to discuss it any 
further, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Obviously the minister had some reason to issue this order and the fact that the order 
was issued two months ago suggests that Federal Pioneer was in fact consciously and deliberately 
discharging, depositing, draining or releasing PCBs from the said land into or upon the lands immediately 
adjacent to the said lands or into the city of Regina storm sewers. Was that in fact true, prior to March 5? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Why then was the order issued if they were not consciously and deliberately, or even 
inadvertently, draining PCBs or discharging, depositing, draining or releasing PCBs from the said lands? 
What was the reason for the order if those things weren't happening? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I'm sure all members are aware — with as much information as they seem to have 
on other issues, they certainly ought to be informed with regard to the National Research Council report. 
You know what they recommended, and as a result of the recommendation which the National Research 
Council made, I have subsequently now sent to you the public statement I made with regard to the response 
of the government to the recommendation of the National Research Council. 
 
I said the government, through myself, indicated that these were the steps we would follow in response to the 
recommendation of the National Research Council: 
 

1. I have asked my officials to draft an order under The Water Resources Management Act 
directing Federal Pioneer to control run-off from the site. 
 
2. Saskatchewan environment will not allow any new wells to be installed closer to the plant 
than existing wells until the downward migration is controlled or until we are certain that the 
migration patterns of PCBs at the site will not be affected by installations. 

 
3. When potential safe storage sites have been identified, the department will initiate an 
environmental assessment review process on these sites. 

 
4. When the storage site is selected, action will be initiated to have the storage facilities 
constructed. 

 
5. When the storage facilities are constructed and adequate monitoring is in place, I will issue 
an order requiring Federal Pioneer to remove the contaminated soil under conditions 
specified by the consultant and approved by my department. 

 
6. When the materials have been removed I will instruct Federal Pioneer to undertake the 
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure that the remedial measures have been effective. 

 
Those are the six steps that we announced that we would take. We are proceeding on those six steps. The 
number one step, we were to issue an order. That order was issued as of March 5, a copy of which you have. 
That order has been appealed. The appeal is before the courts. 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3448 

MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you very much. That's all very interesting but you didn't answer the question. 
The question was, prior to March 5 when you issued this order, to your knowledge, did Federal Pioneer 
discharge, deposit, drain or otherwise release PCBs from the said lands into the storm sewers of Regina or 
adjacent lands? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, and I think it probably won't be tonight, Mr. Chairman. 
Surely, there has to be some reason for issuing this order. Anything you said in that neat little information 
package you set out a minute ago certainly doesn't justify an order like this: 
 

Federal Pioneer is hereby prohibited from discharging, depositing, draining or releasing 
PCBs from the said lands into the city of Regina storm sewer located parallel and adjacent to 
the said lands or into or upon any lands immediately adjacent to the said lands. 

 
Now surely there can be no just reason for issuing an order like this, unless in fact they had been discharging, 
depositing, draining or releasing or whatever, or otherwise conveying these nasty little beasties onto adjacent 
lands or storm sewers or etc. You talk about irresponsibility; you're being grossly irresponsible right now by 
not coming clean with this House and telling us why this order was issued. 
 
It was you that went in there four years ago (not you but your predecessor) and put the pavement on the thing 
that makes it a little difficult to drain, discharge or otherwise dispose of these things. To say that prior to 
March 5 these things are before the courts is utter nonsense. The order was issued on March 5. On anything 
that's happened since then you may have a valid argument; I don't accept that, either. But certainly prior to 
March 5 your argument rings very, very hollow. I think you have an obligation to answer to this House for 
activities of your department particularly as they related to PCBs in Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, we'll be here until the cows come home until we find out: number one, why was the order 
issued? Nothing from your happy little Canada research council tells you to issue an order. You had to have 
some justification for issuing the order, unless it's just another of your big brother attitudes to beat them into 
the ground. You had to have some justification for issuing the order. You haven't given us that justification 
yet. I think you have an obligation to tell this House why the order was issued. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — He's not answering questions but that doesn't say I can't tell him something that I 
think. I think in closing time here I'd better just tell him a few things I do think. Mr. Minister, as I said 
before, we won't even call it Federal Pioneer. We'll call the government A, and we'll call Federal Pioneer B, 
because I said before I don't like to have to push this on to the taxpayers. You've admitted earlier tonight, 
Hansard will bear me out tomorrow, that Environment Saskatchewan did issue instructions that pavement be 
put over that PCB. You did it. Your department, not you, Mr. Minister, but the people before you. Federal 
Pioneer, we'll call them B, say they do not feel they should have to pay after you put the PCBs into a tomb 
because they could have removed it for $1,000. They didn't know there was any danger about it. About 
$1,000 was going to move 1,500 gallons of PCBs into the dump yards. But you knew the danger. 
 
The Department of the Environment must have known that PCBs were dangerous chemicals. They must 
have known it or they wouldn't have put the pavement down. Federal Pioneer didn't know and you don't 
know. I asked you a question in this House a year ago. Is this going to go on until the PCBs get under the 
building? You're the 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3449 

member who got up and laughed at the member for Arm River and said, oh, the soil is so heavy, come back 
in 100 years. It goes in an inch per year. One year later, look at the mess we're in. The manager from Federal 
Pioneer took me on a tour just about two weeks ago. He showed me a whole wall of transformers full of 
PCBs that could blow any time. What has your department done in there to see that those PCBs are removed 
from those transformers? They're piled up in there — dozens and dozens of them — and you made the 
statement in Hansard one year ago that there are no more transformers in Saskatchewan with PCBs in them. 
You stood right up here in the House and made fun of me and said, oh, you've washed your hands in 
hydraulic oil; you've used toilet paper with it in. You're the one who made joke of it. Well, I'll tell you, it's no 
joke now when we are around the $3 million. I think it's a disgrace of your department and the government 
to try to make this outfit pay the $3 million or whatever the figure is. It's a disgrace because you should pay 
every penny from the pavement on, every penny. Boy, if you come on my farm and tell me that I have a 
bunch of hydraulic oil spilled into the ground and you tell me for the first time it's a dangerous chemical, but 
you don't know what to do with it so you're going to cover it with pavement; then you come back when it's 
soaked into the ground when you can't burn it any more, you can't destroy it any more and you have to store 
it because you have too much sod in it now . . . 
 
At the front of that building it's 35 feet deep at the very front corner under the cement. You are in a mess 
now that you can't get yourselves out of. If you knew enough to put the pavement there in 1976, why didn't 
you have enough thinking power between all your brains over there to remove it? What's the matter with the 
thinking of you fellows? Any farmer in this country would have enough brains, any Chinaman who runs a 
cafe would have know better than that — anybody. You could have gone up north and asked the native 
people who have never been education and they would have said, what do you do with the PCBs? Oh, don't 
leave it there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I'm hearing some unparliamentary remarks coming from my right and I would 
ask the members to cease and desist on all unparliamentary remarks. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, tomorrow we're going to get into another subject. If you think this 
problem with PCBs at Federal Pioneer is finished, you can just think again because we are going to have 
some answers from you or have you prove to us why . . . Now, you did say it was in the courts, but why 
didn't you say that half an hour before? You prove to us it's in the courts. Bring us documents that show us it 
is in the courts. 
 
But I can tell you I've got a subject here that we're going to spend another day or two on; that's the drinking 
water supplies in the province of Saskatchewan. I'm just going to open it up a little bit so you know what's 
coming up for tomorrow; just a little bit, just a little peek at the drinking water in Saskatchewan. As I said 
before, Mr. Minister, I consider you an honorable man. And I tried and I tried (and Hansard bears me out) to 
get you to inform every town, hamlet and village in this province how to go about testing their water by the 
two different methods. You wouldn't do it. But we met afterward and you agreed; and I trust a man. 
 
You said you would let every village, town and hamlet know the two methods of testing water, the bacteria 
test and the complete comprehensive test. And this is very important, because I'm going to be reading to you 
letters from all over this province. I'm the one who wrote a lot of letters, got a lot of information, and it will 
come down in this House whenever estimates come back. I want to have you table your information because 
you must have done what I've done. You must have done the same thing because you promised me you 
would. I want you to be able to tell me what each town 



 
May 22, 1980 

 

 
3450 

told you about comprehensive tests and bacteria tests for the safety of water in Saskatchewan. (Oh, the 
member is shaking his head. He didn't do it. How could you not do that?) 
 
Don't you believe we have to have an improvement in drinking water in Saskatchewan? I'll read you a little 
item from the paper. This is written by Paul Brettle of the Leader-Post. Some of the items I'm not going to 
inform you of until tomorrow, but listen to this one. It will wake you up overnight. 
 

Saskatchewan is generally acknowledged to have the poorest water in Canada. In a survey of 
10 capital cities, Regina was at the bottom of the list. 

 
And you people sit there and say we haven't got any problems. It's also in here. We'll discuss this tomorrow. 
Paul Brettle wrote an article about the survey of 400 towns that I wrote letters to. I want you to be able to tell 
me what your tests were because you promised me you were going to do it. 
 
Your government, if this water tasted like poison, would still say it is good. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 


