






















































Hansard: April 11, 1980


1657 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
April 11, 1980. 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

REDUCTION OF STAFF AT OUTLOOK HOSPITAL 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. The 
approved daily census for the Outlook Hospital for 1980-81 period was left the same as the ADC 
(approved daily census) for last year but their approved staffing complement was cut by 1.00 registered 
nurses. Mr. Minister, is this not an attempt by your department to force the Outlook Hospital Board to 
close more beds because of a lack of adequate staffing? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that those question 
weren’t directed to me when my estimates were in the House. I haven’t the information at my fingertip 
with some 130 hospitals in the province. I think it’s not unreasonable that a minister wouldn’t have that 
at his fingertip. But the staffing of each hospital is based on the population served. It could well be there 
may have been some reduction in the kitchen staff. It could be a reduction in the laboratory staff or it 
could be a reduction in some other area. I’m not sure in what particular area the staff was reduced. I will, 
however, take the question under advisement and provide the information to the member for Maple 
Creek. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t ask you this in the health estimates 
because the letter just came with a copy of the letter sent by your department to them asking them to 
delete 1.00 registered nurses, not kitchen staff. Mr. Minister, you and I know that staffing in rural 
hospitals, especially on evening and night shifts are today at the bare minimum. If they’re to delete these 
registered nurses, are you doing this in anticipation of a substantial increase in nursing wages? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Of course not, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the reason at all. The staffing, as I indicated 
to the member, is based on the anticipated use of the hospital and the anticipated population that will be 
served. It has nothing to do with the anticipation of increase for nurses. I have no idea what that increase 
will be. I’m not directly involved with the negotiations. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary. Well, if the ADC remains the same, how can you justify cutting 
back one nurse? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member twice now already. It is based on the 
anticipated population that will be served in this coming year. It will certainly also be based on the use 
of the hospital. There is a standard that has been worked out throughout the whole province. If Outlook 
has been asked (I think you said the Outlook Union Hospital) to reduce one registered nurse, it will be 
based on those criteria. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it just not an example of backdoor bed 
closing? 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1658 

MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, she answered the question herself. She said there was no reduction in 
the approved beds. You said there was no reduction. How can it be possibly a backdoor method of 
reducing beds? You’ve answered the question yourself. 
 

MEDICAL CARE RE SENIOR CITIZEN 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Minister of Health. I have a letter here from 
a resident, a senior citizen who has been in Regina General Hospital, and he was advised by letter that 
his condition had improved and he no longer needed hospital care, and if he didn’t find other 
accommodation he would be billed $148.15 per day. Because nursing home beds are not readily 
available, do you not feel that the government should still pay the costs of this individual until you can 
provide him with a bed to move to? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, several things must be kept in mind. First of all, I think the member 
knows that on any one of those there’s 30-days notice give to individuals that they no longer require 
hospital care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Did you have a question? Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
the Minister of Health who makes the decision as to whether or not someone requires medical care. 
That’s the decision of the doctor. I hope that the member would appreciate that. Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, 
the facts bear out that in Regina we have 96 some beds per 1,000 senior citizens — the highest in the 
province other than Saskatoon and I would say, Mr. Speaker, the second highest in Canada without any 
doubt. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. You state that it’s not up to your department to make 
the decision, and I agree with that, but it is your department’s responsibility to set the policies that the 
health care system operates under. Do you not consider that it’s inhumane to ask a senior citizen to pay 
$148.15 a day out of his own pocket when you don’t have a bed for him to move to? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, if the member would set his brain in motion he would know (he told 
me himself) that the individual doesn’t need a bed. That is a decision which the doctor makes. The 
individual simply needs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I want to tell the member for Qu’Appelle that I 
don’t think he’s qualified to decide whether somebody needs a nursing home or a nursing bed. He 
doesn’t make that decision. We have people in this province qualified to make those decisions and they 
happen to be in the medical profession, and not the member for Qu’Appelle. You’re not an expert in that 
the medical profession, and not the member for Qu’Appelle. You’re not an expert in that area. I want to 
say to the member for Rosetown-Elrose that we have sufficient beds in this city. We have more beds in 
Regina in levels 3 and 4 than anywhere in this country except for maybe the city of Saskatoon. We have 
sufficient beds. It’s not the answer to move someone out of a hospital bed into another bed. There are 
other ways of dealing with these people, and they should be taken care of in other ways. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Further supplementary. I don’t think the minister understands my question. Mr. 
Minister, we have a gentleman who no longer requires full hospital care but does require nursing home 
care. He was advised that he could have a month to look for another place. In a whole month neither you 
nor social services nor anyone else has been able to find the man a bed. Do you still consider that he 
should be paying the cost himself when you don’t have a bed for him to move to? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it is not my responsibility and it’s not the responsibility of 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1659 

the Department of Social Services to find an alternative facility for this individual. That is a 
responsibility of the individual and his immediate family. It’s not our responsibility. It is our 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to provide sufficient nursing beds in this province. I have indicated to the 
member, on average, we have 68 beds in levels 1, 2, and 3 per 1,000 senior citizens in this province, 
which is the highest in Canada. In Regina we have 96.1 beds which is a third higher than what we have 
in the province and I say to the member opposite that our level 3 and level 4 beds in this province an din 
Regina are sufficient for the number of senior citizens we have in Regina and in the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

GRANTS TO PLANNED PARENTHOOD SASKATCHEWAN 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — A question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, last 
fiscal year Planned Parenthood Saskatchewan received $40,000 in grants from Saskatchewan health. My 
first question is how large a grant are you going to be giving them this year and secondly, since this 
organization is the largest abortion referral agency in the province, will your department cease the 
funding of that organization with taxpayers’ money? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I think my personal position on abortion is very clear — I’m opposed 
to it. However, Mr. Speaker, I could change my mind looking at the members opposite and in some 
instances I would make it retroactive maybe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member for Regina South, no, I will not cut off the grants for Planned 
Parenthood. The reason I’m not cutting off the grants for Planned Parenthood is that I have had several 
meetings with these people, as I have had meetings with Pro-Life and Campaign Life and Serena, and 
I’m not cutting it off because their main emphasis is in counselling people who have difficulties in these 
areas, not counselling for abortions. If the member has evidence otherwise, I wish he would put it before 
this House and make it available to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure what the grant will be for this year but it will probably be an 8 per 
cent or 10 per cent increase over last year. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Then I presume from that it will be 
somewhere around $44,000 - $45,000. Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that the federal government is 
going to be discontinuing funding of Planned Parenthood and secondly, how much of a grant will you be 
giving the Pro-Life group? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, again we have had some discussions with Pro-Life. They have not 
asked for a specific grant; they have asked for some money to offset the cost of their conference. That 
money will be forthcoming. We are making a grant available to Serena — I believe it’s in the $30,000 
bracket, give or take $1,000, I’m not sure. But it’s in that particular area. It was started under the 
previous minister of health and yes, I’m looking at increasing the grants in those particular areas. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I let me say that I would like to make grants available to organizations which are prepared 
to have a look at this whole area of dealing with abortions, dealing with sexuality and, Mr. Speaker, that 
does not mean I will only give it to Serena, only to Pro-Life groups, but will take into consideration 
other groups which will positively deal with the situation to try to reduce the number of abortions. I 
think all of the organizations we are funding have agreed that abortion should be the last resort and that 
we ought to deal with the situation by making sure people know what it is to have individual 
responsibility when it 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1660 

comes to sexuality. 
 
MR. P. PREBBLE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — A question to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. 
Would the Minister of Health not agree that in light of the fact that the cost of hospital costs for teenage 
pregnancies is approximately $1 million; in light of the fact that approximately half of these pregnancies 
involve unmarried teenagers, and in light of the fact that the work of Planned Parenthood is primarily to 
prevent such situations and to prevent unplanned pregnancies, that in fact what is needed is an increase 
in support for the Planned Parenthood organization in this province. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland makes a good point in 
regard to the costs available or the costs incurred when people spend time in our institutions or in our 
hospitals. I would like to increase the funds not only for Planned Parenthood but for Serena, for Pro-Life 
and any other group which is prepared to work in this area in dealing with young people in coming to 
grips with the problem. 
 
I do want to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that in my discussions with all of these groups, I have 
indicated to them my opposition to abortions. They have all agreed that should be the last resort which 
should be used in dealing with it and that it’s not an effective way of dealing with it, and they would 
much rather spend their time in, and their personnel in, counselling and dealing with young people and 
with parents of those young people. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Have you talked to the doctors, Herman? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Yes, I have too. 
 

NATIONALIZATION OF CANADIAN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Attorney General. In light 
of Premier Blakeney’s comments yesterday to the national Press Club that there would be no growth in 
the Canadian manufacturing industry this year since more than half of the industry is foreign owned, and 
suggesting as an alternative that we should consider nationalizing these business places as your 
government did with potash, do you really believe this option is possible? Where would the 
indescribable amount of money be available to finance such a scheme? 
 
HON. R.M. ROMANOW (Attorney-General): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to make too many 
sweeping generalizations but the general thrust of the Premier’s remarks is the thrust of the remarks that 
he’s been making to this House. That is, if we are concerned about the country and the economic 
domination of the country by our friends to the south, the United States, with the attendant cultural 
domination that follows of necessity, thereby all working to lessen the bonds of Canadian independence, 
clearly the issue of Canadian ownership or foreign ownership has to be tackled. Nationalization, so-
called, is a tool. It’s not the only tool but a weapon or a mechanism by which Canadians can grab more 
control of the Canadian economy and make the economic decisions which affect us and our workers and 
our economic decisions here at home. From that hopefully, over a period of time, will stem and flow a 
logical expansion into the cultural area. 
 
That is the position we take. Members of the Progressive Conservative party opposite don’t believe in a 
greater degree of Canadian control through the mechanism of nationalization or provincialization. In 
fact, judging by their positions in the House here 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1661 

in Saskatchewan, they would oppose any kind of intervention of American or other multinationals 
continuing their economic takeover of the country. I think that is a threat to the country and that’s what 
Premier Blakeney, as I understand his message, is trying to communicate to the country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the Attorney General not agree that comparing 
resource nationalization to nationalization of major manufacturing concerns is not reasonable, and 
economically impossible? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the argument here I think is a fundamental one. Some people 
believe that economic takeover is inevitable, that we cannot finance it at home and people opposite scoff 
and some even on our side scoff but I don’t think it should be scoffed at. They believe somehow we 
can’t manufacture the money to pay for this, that it’s inevitable. Then I think a logical conclusion would 
be to follow the member’s and his leader, Mr. Collver’s recommended course — annexation to the 
United States. I don’t happen to share that point of view. I think Canadians can do it, can take over 
Canadian industry. It doesn’t have to be by government but through a greater degree of Canadianization 
to be financed by the profits that are generated, be those profits through Crown corporations or through 
manufacturing companies at home. That’s how I think it can be done. 
 

INVESTIGATION OF LIQUOR INDUSTRY 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A question to the Attorney General. Some months ago the RCM 
Police investigated the liquor industry and kickbacks to at least I believe one province’s liquor 
commission. I believe they studied it nationally. Would you be prepared to table the results of the RCM 
Police investigation in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the position that we have taken throughout the piece has been that 
police investigative reports are confidential and that has been the position of all attorneys general in so 
far as I know in Canada. Certainly it has been the tradition in Saskatchewan. I can tell the hon. member 
that information which we received from the Quebec Provincial Police and the Quebec Attorney General 
was, without amendment or change or comment or deletion, turned over almost immediately to the 
prosecutorial staff of the Department of the Attorney General and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
in Saskatchewan who have done in my judgement their usual thorough and competent survey of the 
matter. I am advised by our director of public prosecutions that no charges are warranted in 
Saskatchewan at this time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary. Well, rather than the police report, would you be prepared now to table 
your departmental official’s report, which you have just admitted you have, before this Assembly? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the same position takes place with respect to prosecutorial reports. 
I am sure the hon. member will understand that prosecutorial reports, those which see the light of day in 
court and those which do not see the light of day in court of necessity (I don’t know in this case; I don’t 
recall the report; I haven’t seen it lately) may or may not involve certain names. Keep in mind the 
investigation goes all the way back to 1964, from 1964 to 1980, and there are names which have been 
mentioned at length in this matter if my recollection serves me correctly. I think that it would do little to 
further confidence in the judicial system or the prosecutorial system 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1662 

to have the reports tabled. That’s the position we have taken. 
 
I can only say to the hon. member and to you, Mr. Speaker, as I reported earlier, this has been turned 
over to the deputy attorney general and to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who have the information 
and have dealt with it in the appropriate way. My position has been and remains, as Attorney General, 
that I have never interfered nor do I ever intend to take a position personally as Attorney General in 
prosecutorial matters of any kind and I stick with that position. 
 
MR. LANE: — Final supplementary. Was the direction that you gave to the RCM Police without 
qualification, without limitation? They were free to pursue all aspects of the matters raised? Secondly, 
will you be prepared in your estimates to table your departmental reports as opposed to the police 
reports for discussion in this Assembly? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I will deal with estimates when the estimates question comes up 
but let’s not fool ourselves when you deal with departmental reports, in this case it’s prosecutorial 
reports. Those are the only reports I have, if my memory serves me correctly. I think we’ll have to deal 
with the question, the specific question at the time. There may very well be some information we will 
want to table, dated to the earlier periods from 1964 and on. I think we will have to make that decision 
as it comes but the position I take, Mr. Speaker, is the position I have indicated. I think the only way a 
criminal prosecution system can operate is that the police do their job in an impartial fashion and bring 
to the bar of justice those who are required to be brought to the bar of justice. Mr. Speaker, my reaction 
is the same as for the second question. For the time being I just don’t see any reason for doing this; we’ll 
see what the specific questions are in estimates and how they are handled there. 
 

SASKOIL RE DRILLING OF WELLS 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SaskOil. Mr. 
Minister, your SaskOil report for the past fiscal year shows that SaskOil was either a partner or directly 
involved in the drilling of 174 wells. I wonder if you would tell the Assembly how many wells SaskOil 
is going to partake in this year either as a partner or on its own? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t get the 
substantive portion of the member’s question. 
 
MR. LARTER: — I wonder if the minister could tell the Assembly how many wells SaskOil is going to 
partake in this year and what proportion exploratory to development? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, I’d like to be able to answer the member’s question with precision but I think 
he can appreciate that’s difficult for us to do. We do tentatively plan in global terms the kind of 
exploratory and other drilling activity we will involve ourselves in but certainly the success of the early 
stages of that exploratory development sets the course for the real number of wells that you would 
ultimately be able to conclude in a year’s period of time. We are most ambitious and anxious to 
accelerate very significantly our exploratory and well drilling activity in the heavy oil area but as far as 
actual numbers I think it would be unwise to try to predict just how many wells we may complete this 
year. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, there were something like 50 rigs 
working in North Dakota in 1979. The border doesn’t seem to bother this basin. 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1663 

I know we haven’t had too much success there but I’m interested in knowing because they drilled about 
500 wells there last year, how many of these wells you plan on drilling in the Southeast and how many 
would be exploratory? Do you have any idea of that? 
 
MR. MESSER: — If the member is asking about SaskOil only, he will know we do not have a large 
presence in that part of the province with the deep well oil that is being sought. That is not unusual 
because most of the land that has the potential has been held for many years by other companies. The 
majority of the exploratory and development activity is being done by Dome and Shell. Unfortunately 
Dome and Shell have not been that successful north of the Canada-U.S. border. There has been a higher 
level of success in the United States and as I talk to the representatives of the oil companies which are 
involved and optimistic about ultimately finding oil, deep oil, in this formation, they can’t explain why 
there has been a higher element of success south of the Canada-U.S. border. I notice the member for 
Qu’Appelle laughing but I take it the member for Estevan is taking it very seriously because he knows 
something about this matter and certainly the member for Qu’Appelle tries to indicate knowledge about 
virtually everything and shows he knows nothing about . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MESSER: — . . . but to the member for Estevan, I talk in an ongoing manner with both the 
executives of Shell and Dome and they continue to reassure me that even though they have not had the 
element of success they had hoped for in the last two or three years of activity in that area, they’re 
continuing to pursue deep oil and they are spending more money and putting more manpower into that 
venture. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Final Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, can you tell me does SaskOil have 
any plans of drilling in North Dakota either on a partnership venture or on their own, through hiring of 
rigs of course? And also, is there anything to the speculation that possibly there is a good producing well 
— deep well — on this side of the line, just south of Carnduff? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, as I indicated to the member, Mr. Speaker, there is optimism that we will be 
able to obtain a level of success in this deep well activity. As far as SaskOil drilling in North Dakota, I 
have no knowledge of SaskOil’s intention to so do. We do have activity outside of the province of 
Saskatchewan but it is not our intention, at least at this time, to extend that activity south of the border 
into the United States. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yesterday, a point of privilege was raised by the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale to the effect that certain remarks of the member for Qu’Appelle, which were made outside 
the House, were a serious reflection on the Chairman of the committee of finance and constitute a breach 
of privilege of this House. In the second point the member claimed that a reflection on the Speaker had 
also been made. The radio transcript and press clippings of the remarks in question were tabled. I 
deferred my ruling. I have carefully considered the questions raised with regard to the second point of a 
reflection on the Speaker. I want to inform the House that I consider this matter closed. 
 
The question of a reflection on the Chairman and Deputy Speaker is another matter. I 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1664 

want to outline to the Assembly what the role of the Chair is in a matter of privilege. I refer all hon. 
members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, paragraph 84 as follows: 
 

(1) Once the claim of a breach of privilege has been made, it is the duty of the Speaker to decide if a 
prima facie case can be established. The Speaker requires to be satisfied, both that privilege appears to 
be sufficiently involved to justify him in giving such precedence (or as is sometimes put, that there is a 
prima facie case that a breach of privilege has been committed); and also that the matter is being raised 
at the earliest opportunity. 

 
(2) It has often been laid down that the Speaker’s function in ruling on a claim of breach of privilege is 
limited to deciding the formal question, whether the case conforms with the conditions which alone 
entitle it to take precedence over the notices of motions and orders of the day standing on the order 
paper; and does not extend to deciding a question of substance, whether a breach of privilege has in 
fact been committed — a question which can only be decided by the House itself. 

 
And that reference is May, Parliamentary Procedure, pp. 346-47. It is my opinion that in this case 
privilege appears to be sufficiently involved to justify giving this matter precedence over the orders of 
the day. I refer all members to a precedent of this Assembly: Journals of Saskatchewan, December 19, 
1977. I, therefore, leave the matter in the hands of the Assembly to deal with as it sees it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, in light of your ruling this morning I’m following — I don’t know 
if I should do this — but I invite the hon. member for Qu’Appelle and I think the matter can be solved 
very easily by a simple withdrawal and apology. On the assumption that he has not beaten me to the 
floor, I think the only approach is to follow the procedure which we have followed in one other 
precedent I’ve been involved in two years ago or so. I shall move, without any further comment, 
seconded by my colleague, the member for Kelsey-Tisdale (Mr. Messer): 
 

That this Assembly requests: (1) that the statements by the member for Qu’Appelle reflecting on the 
impartiality of the Chairman of the committee of finance, and accusing him of partisanship in the 
conduct of his office, be withdrawn forthwith and (2) that, the said member tender apologies to this 
Assembly in respect of the said statements. 

 
I drafted the motion, by the way, based on a precedent which I think is fairly well-known to the hon. 
members. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Attorney General, unfortunately, has put me in a difficult position by referring 
to the precedent he has referred to because I just happen to have it lying on the table before me. The 
precedent, I must report to the House, unfortunately is a bad one. I’ll explain why I’m going to call the 
Attorney General’s motion out of order. This will allow the Attorney General to prepare another motion 
and submit it. Now, the precedent he was following, I believe, is December 19, 1977, because the 
wording of his motion at this time is substantially the same with just the necessary elements changed. I 
realize the context in which this is approached. Everyone here understands what is happening. But this 
particular motion should have a short preamble at the 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1665 

beginning of it, and words to the effect that this matter constitutes a breach of privilege and therefore, 
that this Assembly requests — so on that basis I am going to have to state that I don’t regard that as a 
good precedent and that in order to have this motion acceptable, I would have to have a preamble stating 
that, in fact, this constitutes a breach of privilege. Then I could proceed with it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’m seeking guidance from the Chair because I went to the one, 
what I thought was obvious precedent involving the member for Thunder Creek and the member for 
Qu’Appelle — I think it was in ’77. 
 
Would it be in order (I’m not asking you to prejudge this), but if the motion which is tendered would 
read something to this effect: 
 

That this Assembly requests: that the statements by the member for Qu’Appelle reflecting on the 
impartiality of the Chairman of the committee of finance and accusing him of partisanship in the 
conduct of his office be deemed a breach of privilege of this House, and, accordingly, be withdrawn 
forthwith. 

 
That would precede the balance which would have in it the statement of the allegation of the breach. 
 
What I would do, with your permission, is tender it to you and then you can make a ruling on it. You 
don’t have to tell me now in advance. I’ll take my chances with it. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would just like to call to Mr. Speaker’s attention, a precedent ruled by Mr. Speaker on 
the opening day of budget in 1977, I believe the year was, when the Conservative opposition attempted a 
priority of debate motion on budget day, and Mr. Speaker made it quite clear to the Assembly that it was 
not the Speaker’s role to draft the motions, or to draw the motions for members of the House. I believe 
that precedent was firmly stated by Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes, I think that is quite legitimate, to raise that point of order, and I don’t think 
I’m in contravention of that at this time. Because the Attorney General was, in fact, citing a precedent 
which I consider to be a bad precedent, therefore. I feel an obligation of the Chair to say that I don’t 
intent o regard that as a precedent for this purpose. 
 
I’m not telling him what to put on his paper; I’m just suggesting it would have to be revised in such a 
way that it would identify that a breach of privilege had occurred. I have declared his initial submission 
to be out of order. 
 

MOTION 
 

REGARDING IMPARTIALITY OF THE CHAIRMAN 
 
HON. R.M. ROMANOW (Attorney-General): — I move, seconded by the Hon. J.R. Messer 
(Minister of Mineral Resources): 
 

That this Assembly requests: (1) that the statements by the member for Qu’Appelle reflecting on the 
impartiality of the Chairman of the committee of finance and accusing him of partisanship in the 
conduct of his office be deemed to be a breach of privilege, and requests the remarks be withdrawn 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1666 

forthwith, and (2) that the said member tender an apology to the Assembly with respect to the said 
statements. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — I find the motion in order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question first. I’ll place it as a 
point of order rather than entering into debate on this motion because I don’t want to lose my place in 
this motion. I wonder if Mr. Speaker would indicate why he did not rule on the comments of the 
Chairman on April 4, 1979 when he said: 
 

I am not a bit impartial. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Yes, that’s a valid point or order and I’ll try to answer that at this time. I said 
yesterday in the Chamber if it (meaning the subject before us or the quotation that the member for 
Qu’Appelle read from the previous debates) bears any relationship to this particular point of privilege 
that’s raised by the Attorney General, I will consider it. Otherwise, it will not be part of the case or part 
of the decision. I took the trouble of going back and examining the record that was referred to by the 
member for Qu’Appelle. I must admit that I was surprised that it was offered as evidence in this 
instance. I rule it not to be relevant to this case. I’ll tell the member why I rule it not to be relevant. In 
examining the record it is quite clear that the Chairman said: 
 

I’m not a bit impartial. 
 

He said this immediately after receiving a comment from the member for Thunder Creek who said: 
 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank goodness that there is somebody who is impartial in this Assembly. 
 

The member for Thunder Creek, it appears, was complimenting the Chairman on being impartial. The 
Chairman retaliated, it would appear, by saying: 
 

I’m not a bit impartial. 
 

Now, I examined this record very carefully. I could not find one instance where a member rose at that 
time on this very important matter of a Chairman declaring himself to be not impartial. There, I think, 
for that particular day, would have been a breach of privilege. No one rose. There’s nothing in the record 
to show that anyone took exception to what the Chairman said. Therefore, I can only assume that it was 
said in jest. It’s the only assumption I can make. No one challenged it when it was made. It’s not my job 
today to rule on something that happened in 1979 unless it can be related in a direct way and be relevant 
to what is under discussion now. For that reason, I didn’t bring the matter forward. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Well, speaking to a point of order, as Mr. Speaker stated, in an 
unequivocal statement . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll get out my ruling. This one is getting pretty dog-eared but I will read it 
to the member again. Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1667 

Edition, citation 68 says in part: 
 

He takes no part in debate and must be careful not to indulge in any argument with members on the 
soundness of his rulings. 

 
This is discussing the Speaker’s position in the House. I don’t intend to discuss my ruling on the matter. 
I was asked by the Leader of the Opposition to relate to the House why I didn’t mention the matter. I 
didn’t mention it because it’s not pertinent. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course I accept your ruling. Speaking to the motion 
of the Attorney General, I would just try to explain it why it may be perceived that the Chairman could, 
in fact, have acted in a rather partial or biased manner and I quote from page 235 of Erskine May on 
impartiality. 
 

The Chairman of Ways and Means, during his occupation of that office follows the same tradition of 
abstention from party controversy as the Speaker. He no longer exercises the rights of the ordinary 
Member to participate in debates and division of the House. His independence has not . . . 

 
On April 4, 1979 for whatever reason, the member for Rosemont while he was in the Chair in fact said, I 
am not a bit impartial, which would lead one to perhaps think that maybe that was true. In examining the 
record . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I just want to clear a point of order. I want to confine the debate to the resolution 
before us. Therefore, what members say must be relevant to what is before us. I have made a statement 
and I have ruled that the comment the member is referring to is not relevant to this particular debate. 
Therefore I have to say if the member is talking about that he is out of order. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Will you read the motion for me, Mr. Speaker? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes. Moved by the Attorney General seconded by the Minister of Mineral 
Resources: 
 

That this Assembly request: (1) that the statements by the member for Qu’Appelle reflecting on the 
impartiality of the Chairman of the committee of finance and accusing him of partisanship in the 
conduct of his office be deemed to be a breach of privilege and request the remark be withdrawn 
forthwith, (2) that the said member tender apologies to this Assembly in respect of the said statements. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to the impartiality of the member 
for Rosemont while he occupied the Chair, I have examined the record very carefully from April 4, 1974 
on and no place in here have I seen a statement that said anything like I certainly am impartial, or I am 
in no way biased. And nothing has led me to believe and I think all thinking members of the House an 
understand why perhaps it was perceived . . . This statement coupled with the fact (and perhaps I’m not 
all-seeing) but it seems to me as it relates to this perhaps breach of privilege that when the continuing 
line of questioning, was cut off and someone opposite was recognized . . . And that coupled with the 
statement that I am not a bit impartial — you could understand why perhaps it should be perceived . . . 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1668 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The member is going contrary to a decision that I’ve made with 
regard to whether the member is in order or not. I don’t want to get into the member’s argument on how 
he phrases it, or whatever, as long as he’s in order and talks about items relevant to this. I have to keep 
the discussion on this motion before us and I have declared that the comments raised specifically before 
by the member for Qu’Appelle are not relevant to this issue. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t quarrelled with your ruling from the outset. All I 
am suggesting is perhaps by justifying the perception of biased, an apology or withdrawal wouldn’t be 
necessary — simply acknowledging that it was a breach would be all that was necessary. I think that'’ a 
valid point and it’s not hard for any thinking member or even anybody in the gallery who has been 
sitting here watching perhaps perceived that impartiality was something that was a little foreign to the 
Chair. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think, speaking from a personal point of view, that there has been a breach of 
privilege and I therefore cannot support the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 31 
 

Pepper MacMurchy Matsalla 
Smishek Mostoway Lusney 
Romanow Banda Prebble 
Messer Kaeding Long 
Snyder Hammersmith Johnson 
Kramer Kowalchuk Poniatowski 
Robbins Dyck Lingenfelter 
Skoberg MacAuley White 
McArthur Byers Solomon 
Gross Rolfes  
Shillington Cody  
 

NAYS — 12 
 

Berntson Taylor Muirhead 
Birkbeck Rousseau Duncan 
Larter Swan Andrew 
Lane Pickering McLeod 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, it falls upon me as House Leader to move the next motion 
unfortunately in the light of the obvious decision by the member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I declared the motion carried and it’s incumbent on me in my position as Speaker, 
to have the member for Qu’Appelle consider his position in light of the decision of this House. That’s a 
serious decision for the member to take regardless of what his decision will be and I hope that he will 
give it serious consideration. The rules of this Assembly stem from evolution over hundreds of years. 
They’re not something that has been put in place by this Assembly but have been adopted and 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1669 

evolved by this Assembly and it’s the very framework in which we govern ourselves. I would ask the 
member for Qu’Appelle in light of the decision of the Assembly if he now wishes to make a statement 
with regard to withdrawal. 
 
MR. LANE: — I agree that the rules have evolved for centuries and I suspect that in the centuries of 
parliament it is the first time we have had an admission of bias from a chairman in this Assembly and I 
will not withdraw. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it’s unnecessary for me to ask the member for Qu’Appelle again to consider 
his position, but it’s incumbent upon me as the Speaker to give him generous opportunity at this time to 
adhere to the wishes of the Chamber and withdraw the remarks that the Assembly has made a decision 
about. I give the member one more opportunity. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’ve given it ample consideration and I will not withdraw. 
 

MOTION FOR SUSPENSION 
 
HON. R.M. ROMANOW (Attorney-General): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will move a motion in just a 
few 30 seconds or so. As I was about to say it’s incumbent upon me as House Leader of this Assembly 
to introduce the following motion and of course the previous motion as well. Frankly, I’m at some 
difficulty as to how to proceed. These are always very awkward situations. I note, however, Mr. 
Speaker, that the hon. member for Qu’Appelle in the Journals of the Assembly, Monday, December 9, 
1977 was involved in an earlier involvement with the House and I quote from the record of the 
proceedings: 
 

Mr. Speaker thereupon requested that the said remarks be withdrawn, Mr. Lane (Qu’Appelle) and Mr. 
Thatcher (Thunder Creek), having refused to withdraw the said remarks, it was moved by the Hon. 
Mr. MacMurchy, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Robbins that the member for Thunder Creek and the 
member for Qu’Appelle having refused to retract and apologize for their statements that the select 
standing committee on privileges and elections is a kangaroo court and thereby having breached the 
privileges of this House be suspended from the service of this House for five days. A debate arising 
and the question being put it was agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 
And there was a division based on the party lines. One might argue reasonably that within a short period 
of two and one-half years, the hon. member refuses in a different circumstance to do the same thing — 
to retract and withdraw. One might logically argue that the appropriate approach to be taken by the 
House in this matter would be to increase the period of suspension of service beyond five days. But I 
don’t believe that we ought to perhaps make martyrdom of something which in my judgement does not 
merit martyrdom and I firmly believe that no amount of suspension will make any member on that side 
or this side of the House act in a reasonably responsible manner if that individual is bound and 
determined under any circumstance to flaunt the rules as set by this House for whatever reasons. I think 
that a suspension of less than five days would be equally inappropriate given the precedent of but a short 
two and one-half years. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, to you and to the members of this House, with a great deal of regret I move, 
seconded by the Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1670 

That the member for Qu’Appelle having refused to retract and apologize for his statements reflecting 
on the impartiality of the Chairman of the committee of finance and accusing him of partisanship in 
the conduct of his office and thereby having breached the privileges of this House be suspended from 
the service of this House for five days. 

 
MR. LANE: — I think in the very short remarks of the Attorney General we see proof of the 
partisanship of his motions today. First of all he made the comment that even this won’t get all the 
members on this side of the House. Oh, yes you did! All the members on this side of the House if they 
don’t want to obey the rules, that this wouldn’t be good enough and you proceeded to bring in all the 
members of the Conservative opposition into your comments. I think that proves precisely what you are 
attempting to do today and that is to make sure the member for Qu’Appelle in particular is not 
participating in DNS estimates. And that is precisely what the Attorney General is doing today. 
 
Secondly, the Attorney General doesn’t think we should go back to 1979 to discuss previous statements 
but he sure didn’t hesitate to go back two or three years ago to attack the member for Qu’Appelle. It 
didn’t bother him a bit to go back and be highly inconsistent. Let’s face it. This motion was debated and 
voted along party lines, along partisan lines, and the record of course shows that we have the only time 
in Saskatchewan’s history, that much we know, a blatant admission of bias by a chairman. That was an 
unequivocal statement. The Attorney General says well, why didn’t you raise it at the time? Because we 
don’t have to raise it at the time! He could have raised it as House Leader at the time. He didn’t bother 
doing it. None of the government members bothered. The fact that we saved the unequivocal admission 
does not mean the admission and the statement are less than the unequivocal admission of bias by the 
chairman. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — The fact that you got caught a little short, not realizing before you made the motion 
yesterday what the chairman had said a couple of years ago, is no reason to blame the opposition. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I will ask the member for Qu’Appelle to stay on the subject which is before 
us. The member for Qu’Appelle will be quite aware of the fact that the matter he is discussing is not 
relevant to this and I have stated that it’s not relevant to this. And any member at the time that statement 
was made could have risen on a point of order or a point of privilege. None did and we are not going to 
do it today. The member must stick to the debate which is before us or the subject matter which is before 
us. 
 
MR. LANE: — I suppose it could come under the topic of easing of the penalty, so to speak. I believe 
that in some courts there is the right to do that. Mr. Speaker. I didn’t hear a ruling on the relevance of 
previous actions by the member for Qu’Appelle. I was awaiting that when the Attorney General . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. The member is reflecting on the Chair. If the member wanted to raise a 
point of order, when that occurred he should have raised it. He did not raise it. Therefore, he cannot 
reflect on the Chair now for not saying anything about it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, the actions, myself, are one, justified based on the 
statements of the Chairman, the member for Rosemont; my actions and 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1671 

statements are true in light of the statements of the member for Rosemont in his role as Chairman of the 
finance committee. You can have your motion. It obviously warrants no penalty and I’m going back to 
what the Attorney General has indicated yesterday when he referred in tabling the motion (I’m talking to 
penalty) about libel. Libel on the individual member was the phrase he used, and the Attorney General 
nodded his head in affirmation when I indicated that in a court of law an absolute defence to libel is 
truth. And he nodded his head in affirmation. 
 
What we’re seeing is a vote along strict party lines. A vote brought in, a motion brought in by the 
Attorney General today because he didn’t want the questioning last night about when the investigation 
started and why it took so long to get to the RCMP and several other questions that followed naturally. I 
suppose we could go back to Judge Noble and how he wasn’t going to put an individual in jail because 
there was active participation of a department and there was . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I am only going to caution the member once more to stay on the 
subject and then I’m going to move on to another member. Nowhere, within my knowledge, has any 
decision by any judge entered this contingent to this motion. What I see before me is what I read out to 
the members and that is what we must discuss at this time. We cannot discuss something that happened 
at another time when I wasn’t here and bears no direct relationship to this. We have to stick to the 
subject or otherwise I’m going to have to allow all members to do that and I am not prepared to do that. 
 
MR. LANE: — Speaking to sentence I believe the phraseology is, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
the vote along strict party lines, that the penalty will be imposed by the government and I suggest in no 
uncertain terms to the House Leader, that no penalty is justifiable or warranted and nowhere in any of 
your remarks on this matter have you denied the unequivocal statement of the Chairman. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Chairman, I suppose as members of the Assembly we sit 
here today as judges as we sit in judgement of another member of this particular Assembly. Listening to 
the Attorney General, he attempts to go through the normal arguments of a prosecutor as it relates to the 
matter in which a person will be sentenced. He clearly, I think, as a prosecutor, has said that the 
deterrent is not there, by saying it doesn’t really matter what we say in this Assembly. The deterrent is 
not there. The deterrent is not going to be followed by the members of this side and I believe, to a 
degree, he also said by members of the other side. I think in that sense he included the whole of the 
Assembly. I think when we look at the type of sentence we are proposing or the Attorney General is 
proposing, we are talking about mandatory sentencing if you like. Is there a question here as to whether 
it should be five days or ten days or whatever it might be? The Attorney General makes reference to (if 
you like) a previous conviction. He makes reference to a previous conviction but then moves away 
saying no, that shouldn’t be a factor. I think in any question of sentencing you must look at 
circumstances around the alleged offence and whether those circumstances in any way mitigate the type 
of sentencing that should be imposed. Are we not talking here about something different than a person 
charged under the Vehicles Act where he will pay $25 or $35? 
 
The Attorney General falls back in his final defence to simply saying that two or three years ago the 
sentence was five days and therefore today the sentence must be five days. He makes no reference to 
what I think is a mitigating circumstance in this case. Clearly and surely the previous statements of the 
last session made by the member for 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1672 

Regina Rosemont must be considered by the Assembly; surely that has some bearing. The Attorney 
General made no reference whatsoever to the mitigating circumstances in this case. I suggest any fair-
minded person is going to take into account those statements made before, clear statements as to his 
partiality. Surely that has some mitigating effect; surely that mitigates somewhat the sentencing that we 
seek to impose. As an Assembly, surely that has something to do with it. I simply ask the members of 
this Assembly: is it relevant when it comes to sentencing that the Speaker has ruled (and I respect his 
ruling) it has no relevance as a question of privilege or as a question of the offence? But when it comes 
to sentencing, surely we have to look at that. 
 
A man who does something wrong in this situation because he is charged with the offence is not going 
to always have the same penalty imposed. We must look at different things when it comes to sentencing. 
I clearly ask the members of this Assembly, when you are voting, don’t simply break down on party 
lines. Surely that is nothing more than mandatory sentencing. I ask you to bear that in mind when the 
time comes to vote. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, in my judgement this is one of the very grave acts that this 
legislature or any Assembly can carry out. 
 
There used to be a time, Mr. Speaker, and I still hope that it has not gone by, that when a member was 
suspended from service of an elected legislative body, there would be condemnation in the land outside 
and inside of this kind of act. 
 
The thought of suspension, I hope, is still foreign to the minds of most of us. If the threat of suspension 
— be it five days, three days, whatever the penalty date is — has no impact on us, then Mr. Speaker, this 
parliament will not and cannot function. Accordingly, the issue here is (whether or not it’s five days or 
three days; I’m following the precedent) whether or not we as members of this House, notwithstanding 
our high feelings and high debate can discipline ourselves to have enough respect for the institution to 
avoid the ultimate decision by the elected peers of this Assembly. I ask you, Sir, and members of this 
House to contemplate no higher trust than that of election to avoid the penalty. The hon. member for 
Qu’Appelle in my judgement has defied, openly defied and continues to defiantly challenge the request 
of this House and Mr. Speaker’s finding that it’s a breach of privilege. 
 
I want to make two or three very quick points. One, the member for Qu’Appelle says I’ve exhibited 
partisanship, and he uses as evidence that I said the Conservative caucus only was unruly — or words to 
that effect. I did not say that. I thank the member for Kindersley for acknowledging that that, as a fact, is 
what I did not say. I said that no sentence to both sides will have any impact if we have no fear, or no 
respect, for the institution, and I mean that of all sides. I think it’s a wrong statement of facts for the 
member for Qu’Appelle to say it. 
 
Secondly, the hon. member for Qu’Appelle says that somehow by debating his statements of years gone 
by on policy issues, I have betrayed the rules, or informal rules, of the House. I say to the hon. member 
for Qu’Appelle that it’s my duty, as it is his, to read back statements to other members in the course of 
policy debate but to do it always within the context of the rules of the foundation of this House. And 
where I’ve breached those rules, Mr. Speaker, I hope, I know, I’ll be brought to order by you, and by 
other members; and I hope the day never comes where I don’t say to Mr. Speaker, right or wrong, or to 
Mr. Chairman, right or wrong, you are the Chairman and I must obey the 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1673 

order that is given. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, a brief word on the question of mitigating circumstances which ahs been raised by 
the member for Kindersley. Can this be viewed — the question of the quote of April, 1979 — as a 
mitigating circumstance? Should it be so viewed? I take the position, Mr. Speaker, that, with all due 
respect to you, you made the right decision in saying the remark of April 19, 1979 cannot be viewed as a 
mitigating circumstance or a debating factor and in ruling that issue out of order, Mr. Speaker, is it 
relevant? The hon. member for Qu’Appelle would have us believe that he and the members (or I would 
say he, I won’t say the members of the PC caucus) knew about this comment made by the Chairman in 
April ’79 and kept it in their hip pocket just for an occasion like this. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that offends your ruling and the rulings of this House which say that a privilege 
should be brought at the earliest opportunity. I was in the House exactly as were some of the members of 
the press, and the conclusion by Mr. Speaker, who was not in the House at that time and would not 
know other than by the reading of the record, in my judgement is the correct conclusion. It was done in a 
jocular manner from the member for Thunder Creek and responded to, unfortunately, by the Chairman 
of the committee of finance in a jocular manner, and was treated as such, Mr. Speaker, by all the 
members. There can be no other explanation as to why it was not raised for a period of virtually one 
year. No other explanation, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Qu’Appelle was there and he did not raise 
it. The very member who now alleges that it was an admission of bias so serious as to justify his 
accusations of the other day, today, was in the House a year ago, but did not apparently view those 
remarks so seriously as to raise them a year ago. Why? Why, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I close by saying two final things. I quote the hon. member Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and 
Forms, Fifth Edition, page 13, naming of a member, rule 25, sub (3):1 
 

If the member (and I draw this to the attention of you Sir, the members of the press and the public, and 
to the House) satisfies the House by an apology, no further action is necessary. If the member’s 
statement is insufficient it is the duty of the government House Leader to present a motion proposing a 
suitable penalty. 

 
The hon. member for Qu’Appelle says (I cite this from rules, hundreds of years of rules), this is an act of 
partisanship by the government House Leader. The rules obligate me as the government House Leader 
to present this motion. That’s the way it works in every parliament . . . (inaudible) . . . and that is a fact. 
And then in sub form, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s relevant to say that this quotation is also important. For 
my own edification and perhaps for some of the members of the House I would read this: 
 

A government House Leader in s statement in the House explained his role: ‘Mr. Speaker, because of 
the importance of the situation that has arisen, I feel I should explain the proceedings in which I am 
now engaged. It has been the tradition of the House of Commons that when a Speaker names any 
particular member, the leader of the government in the House supports the Speaker in that decision. 
That, I believe, has been the unvarying tradition of the House of Commons with one exception, and 
when that occurred the Speaker of the day was left in a very exposed, unprotected and unsupported 
position. It is therefore my desire in discharging my responsibility to support the Speaker. 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1674 

I would add that while the Speaker did make the suggestion that I put this motion, it is a decision 
which the leader of the government in the House make son his own account and he can either agree or 
disagree to move the motion’. Debates, May 16, 1978, p. 5457. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are the facts and the traditions of this House, no matter what the member for 
Qu’Appelle may say inside or outside this House. 
 
MR. LANE: — My point of order is that he has gone on now for about seven minutes talking about 
responding to me and not speaking to the issues of sentence, which I was cut off for on three different 
occasions. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — That’s not a valid point of order. The Member for Qu’Appelle was warned several 
times about talking about the things he discussed. The member for Kindersley further discussed them. I 
warned the members what would happen. The Attorney General is responding. He has every right to 
close debate and to respond to any points that were raised in debate. Therefore the member for 
Qu’Appelle’s point of order is not valid. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to put this on the record as well with respect to the 
sentence. I cite Beauchesne, Fifth Edition, sub (5), page 14: 
 

The penalty common in Canada is suspension for the remainder of the sitting day. On one occasion the 
House decided upon a seven day suspension for a second offence by the same member. Journals, July 
4, 1944. 

 
I remind the members of the House that this member for Qu’Appelle was only a few days ago suspended 
for the remainder of the day, two days ago. Two days later we are now acting again on a five day 
suspension. When you read that, together with the history of two and one-half years ago and the 
allegations there, five days is indeed, one might argue, if anything, a very generous sentence under the 
circumstances. I close by saying to him and to all the members of the House, let’s not inflict any more 
injury on ourselves or on the House when we pass this motion and get on with the business of what we 
were elected to do, responsibly and honestly and passionately, but within the rules deal with the issues 
of this legislature. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 34 
 

Pepper Shillington Cody 
Bowerman MacMurchy Matsalla 
Smishek Mostoway Lusney 
Romanow Banda Prebble 
Messer Kaeding Long 
Snyder Hammersmith Johnson 
Kramer Kowalchuk Poniatowski 
Robbins Dyck Lingenfelter 
Baker MacAuley White 
Skoberg Byers Solomon 
McArthur Vickar  
Gross Rolfes  
 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1675 

NAYS — 12 
 

Berntson Taylor Muirhead 
Birkbeck Rousseau Duncan 
Larter Swan Andrew 
Lane Pickering McLeod 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — I declare the motion carried. The member for Qu’Appelle is aware of the decision 
of the House. I expect him to take the appropriate action. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, last night in this Assembly the member for 
Regina Wascana, in his speech to this Assembly, made reference and inferred and directly stated and I 
will quote, that the members of the Progressive Conservative Party were racists. This was reinforced by 
the Minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan when he said, and I quote — although I do 
not have the quote with me, but as I recall it (and I quote for the minister) that the member for Regina 
Wascana stated in his speech the Progressive Conservative members tend to be racists. In the quote from 
Hansard, which I picked up this morning, Mr. Speaker, the member for Wascana says (I will read those 
areas which refer and infer the members of the Progressive Conservative Party are racists): 
 

Thirdly, the opposition has engaged in an attack on the minister which has been classed by some 
people outside this House as racist. Now, I just want to read a part of the two telegrams read yesterday 
from native and non-native members of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. And just to quote 
a line or so from one, ‘We have heard the racist and personal attacks which Conservative MLAs have 
made against you in this House.’ The other one bears the phrase ‘the obviously racist tirade of the 
opposition.’ That’s not the first time that statement has been made of the members opposite. 

 
I quote further, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Wascana: 
 

I think you will find it highly relevant. The point I want to make for the benefit of the gentlemen 
opposite is if you look at the attack they are making today on the minister, that type of attack has been 
made before. Various selections were fought on racial, religious and language issues — no less than 
three of them. The Conservatives finally came to power and when they did they brought in legislation 
dealing with these various matters. 

 
And I quote further, Mr. Speaker, from the member for Regina Wascana: 
 

Yes, in power the party proceeded to restrict language rights, educational rights and immigration to try 
to keep out some people it considered undesirable. But I want to point out to you, your party was very 
short-lived, one term, then every man was wiped out. The point I want to make to you is this: don’t 
feel it was the depression that did this; that’s a comforting illusion. People who have studied your 
party have this to say. The Conservative Party of early years based its campaign on race, language and 
religion. 



 
April 11, 1980 
 

 
1676 

I quote further, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now, if you look at what is happening today under your new leader, you are heading in the same 
direction. If you continue in this direction you can be assured of two things. Your tenure in this House 
is very insecure, and your moment of glory will also be very short. You may get some headlines by 
sensational charges, by appealing to the press, by raising racial issues under your new leader . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, these remarks were made by the member for Regina Wascana last night, reinforced by the 
Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I consider those remarks, Mr. Speaker, to be unparliamentary. I 
would ask those two members to withdraw those remarks and apologize to the members of the 
Progressive Conservative Party and to the opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I hope all members realize to raise a matter of privilege is a very serious thing and 
requires serious consideration by those involved on all sides. Therefore I will thank the member at this 
moment for bringing it to my attention. I will study the record and will return to the House with a 
decision as soon as possible. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on another matter of privilege, I would ask that you take this 
as notice as well and review the record and bring your decision back to the House. On April 10, in 
response to a question to the member for Qu’Appelle, the minister responsible for SGI said (referring to 
a Mr. Buck): 
 

I understand he has done (meaning resigned). If he has been granted a licence, then he’s no longer 
employed by Crown investments corporation. 

 
The Leader-Post last night or this morning’s paper said: 
 

But a phone call to Buck’s office contradicted the minister’s statement. A receptionist confirmed Buck 
was still an employee of Crown agency. 

 
Lest you think I take the word of the Leader-Post as gospel, just five minutes ago I phoned (and I’ll give 
you the number) 565-5892. Mr. Buck’s office, was the answer. I said, is Mr. Buck in? No, he’s in 
Saskatoon today. He will be phoning in. Could I take a message? I said Mr. Buck is still secretary of 
CIC? Yes, he is. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, that is clearly another indication of government 
members misleading the House. I would ask you to review the record and see that our remarks are not in 
fact justified. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. As I said before, the matter of privilege is a very serious matter and 
deserves serious consideration on all sides. I’ll take the matter under consideration and bring a decision 
back to the House in due course. 
 
HON. R.M. ROMANOW (Attorney-General): — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s obvious from the 
proceedings of this morning, this House has suffered some injury from which it will take some time to 
recover. I think, Mr. Speaker, given the present mood and attitude of members to conduct further public 
business today would not be productive. I think we need time to reflect on our words, conducts and our 
actions and on the motivations of 



 
April 11, 1980 

 

 
1677 

people. Accordingly taking cognizance of the time as well, I think the wise and most prudent thing 
would be for members, over the weekend, to reflect on the serious act of today. I beg leave to adjourn 
the House. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:10 p.m. 


