
































































Hansard: June 10, 1980


4345 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
Tuesday, June 10, 1980. 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that Bill No. 77 – An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — I would just like to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 77 and 
Bill No. 76, the bills pertaining to the district court, the provincial court and the unified family court, 
will receive the support in principle of the official opposition. Having spent some time over the last few 
weeks discussing the bills in some detail with members of both the legal profession and the judiciary, 
there is no concern about the acts themselves from the members I have talked to as they are unanimous 
in that it is a policy decision. They express some concerns about the administration, but those are not to 
be dealt with at this time. In my view, and in theirs, they are problems which can be rectified either by 
amendments to the rules or to any regulations which may be passed. 
 
One may question the need, however, for unification of the courts, but again that is a policy decision. I 
would venture to predict that the unification of the courts, notwithstanding the assurances of the 
Attorney General, will not result in any savings for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. The result of 
amalgamation in other jurisdictions has not resulted in any savings. But on the other side why in fact and 
practice do we need both a district court and a Court of Queen’s Bench when the jurisdictions are 
virtually similar and the movement over the years has been to increase the jurisdiction of the district 
court so that in many cases it is carrying on exactly the same activities as the Court of Queen’s Bench? 
 
I would ask the Acting House Leader to ask the Attorney General to respond to one point that I raise – a 
technical point. I see confusion resulting from the legislation. Under the present practice there is a 
procedure whereby certain judicial activities may be dealt with by what is called the local master, the 
local master being a judge of the district court acting with, (in limited areas) Court of Queen’s Bench 
jurisdiction. There was then an appeal from the local master to the Court of Queen’s Bench. This was a 
procedure which saved a great deal of cost. It was an expeditious proceeding and one beneficial to the 
public and the practitioners. With the elimination of the local master it seems illogical (I might say, not 
because of activities in the session) to have an appeal from a Queen’s Bench judge to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench, and I’m not sure that was the intent of the legislation. I don’t believe it was the intent to 
do away with a very expeditious procedure, so I asked the government members opposite if they would 
raise that with the Attorney General. Perhaps he has an explanation for the Assembly. But again, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be supporting in principle those bills, and I’ve dealt with them in my remarks, dealing 
with the amalgamation of the Court of Queen’s Bench and the District Court of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): — I don’t know whether or not any 
one else is going to speak on this bill, but with regard to the questions the hon. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4346 

member raised, I want to assure him that I’ll bring them to the attention of the Attorney General. When 
we’re in committee perhaps he can respond to your concerns. With that, I think I’ll move second reading 
on behalf of the hon. member. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that Bill No. 76 – An Act to repeal The District Court Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that Bill No. 79 – An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that Bill No. 126 – An Act to amend The Unified Family Court Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow 
(Attorney General) that Bill No. 127 – An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
MR. LANE: — This bill, along with the other two for which I’ve asked standing motions, The 
Defamation Act and The Queen’s Bench Act are legislation resulting from the defamation bill and I 
beg leave to adjourn debate. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes, the member has adjourned it before. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — As Mr. Lane said, these are subsequential; therefore I ask leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington 
(Minister of Culture and Youth) that Bill No. 88 – An Act to provide for the Preservation, 
Interpretation and Development of Certain Aspects of Heritage Property in Saskatchewan be now 
read a second time. 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before I adjourned debate on 
this, I wanted to have some time to study this bill and to look at heritage property legislation in some 
other jurisdictions, namely Ontario and Alberta which are, I believe, the other two jurisdictions in 
Canada that have similar legislation. I also indicated at the time that we, on this side of the House, are in 
agreement with the principle of the heritage property legislation and with the need to preserve heritage 
property. 
 
From what I’ve been able to ascertain in looking through the other legislation, about 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4347 

two-thirds of this comes from the legislation in place in the province of Ontario. In conversation with 
people in that jurisdiction regarding some of the clauses about which I had some reservations, they say 
they have very little problem with them. I have indicated to the minister privately, there are a couple of 
sections of the bill which I feel are not really justified. These are clauses which have appeared in this 
legislation and aren’t in place in either of the two jurisdictions, Ontario or Alberta. Those are sections 30 
and 51 of this bill, both dealing with the dereliction of designated heritage property. Section 30 deals 
with heritage property designated by the municipalities. Section 51 deals with heritage property 
designated by the province or the minister. 
 
In both of those clauses, the thing that bothers me and my colleagues on this side is the fact that once the 
piece of property is designated in the public interest . . . If it is in the public interest to designate a 
particular piece of property or a house or whatever, then we feel it certainly should be in the public 
interest to pay for the upkeep or the maintenance of the property. 
 
Having said that, certainly we do not believe that someone who owns the property should be able to 
profit from the expenditure of public funds in the maintenance or the upkeep of the property. So I have 
asked the minister privately if he would be willing to bring in some House amendments. I don’t mind 
who brings in the amendments as long as this thing can be covered. I would be interested in the 
minister’s response to this request. 
 
Basically what I’m saying is that if it’s in the public interest to preserve the property, then it certainly 
must be in the public interest to pay for the maintenance. If the owner subsequently sells the property 
and has permission to sell it, then the amount of public expenditure, which goes into it and into the 
maintenance of it, should be recoverable by the municipality in the case of section 30 or by the province 
in the case of section 51. 
 
With those remarks I will indicate again that we’re in favor of the bill in principle but we could get into 
. . . Well, we’ll see. I would hope the minister will agree with it when he wraps up debate in the second 
reading. 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, those behind me are 
threatening me with hellfire and damnation if I go longer than a couple of minutes so I’ll try to be very 
brief. 
 
I want to say to the member for Meadow Lake that I have some sympathy for the position he has 
espoused and the problem he has raised. It is under consideration between me and my officials. We 
really haven’t made a decision now. One of the things we want to check is the workability of the 
solution he has suggested. We want to see whether or not there may be some alternative which would 
work as well and perhaps leave the municipalities as much flexibility. 
 
All I can say to the member at this point in time is that I have some sympathy for the problems he has 
raised. It was raised as well, I believe, in some of the newspapers, particularly the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. It’s something we want to cover if we can so it’s under active consideration. We will be 
considering it and we’ll have an opportunity to discuss it further when the matter comes before this 
House in committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4348 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. G.T. Snyder (Minister 
of Labour) that Bill No. 92 – An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas – 21 
 
Pepper Bowerman Smishek 
Romanow Skoberg Shillington 
Mostoway Banda Kowalchuk 
Rolfes Cowley Tchorzewski 
Cody Koskie Matsalla 
Prebble Long Johnson 
Nelson Thompson Engel 
 

Nays – 13 
 
Berntson Birkbeck Larter 
Lane Taylor Rousseau 
Swan Pickering Garner 
Muirhead Katzman Andrew 
McLeod   
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski 
(Minister of Finance) that Bill No. 103 – An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act, 
(No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! If members wish to get into the debate all that it is necessary to do is 
say, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll try to recognize them. I’m sorry, I didn’t see the member for Regina South. 
I’ll put myself in the hands of the House. The member for Regina South. 
 
While I’m on my feet I’ll just mention one other thing. When the members cross the Chamber, I wish 
they would show the usual deference to the Chair as they pass the mace. Members have been forgetting 
that and I think that, along with the question of members saying Mr. Speaker to get my attention, would 
be advisable. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t aware I had to say, Mr. 
Speaker. I was standing when the bill was called and I assumed you had seen me but I apologize. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll take this opportunity to ask the member for Regina South to put himself in my 
position. There are members jumping up all over the Chamber and walking around. Now, if the member 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order! I say to the member for Regina South that all he needs to do 
if there are members jumping up around him (and I saw them walking across there) is to say, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m sorry. I apologize. I said I didn’t see the member. 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4349 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I apologize and I’ll leave it at that. 
 
Speaking on this bill, I would have to . . . I think I will wait until there is a little bit of semblance of 
order. 
 
The bill before the House now is certainly different than the original amendment to The Heritage Fund 
Act presented earlier in the session. This bill is certainly one that will bear criticism and scrutiny in 
committee of the whole. I intend to do that. I note from the bill it amends the heritage fund structure to 
create a resources division, an energy security division and an environmental protection division, which 
is all very well because that was all part of the direction in which the government was taking the 
heritage fund. 
 
However, there is one area I would just like to take two minutes to dwell on, that that is the Crown 
corporations area of this heritage fund. As I understand the bill now (and I stand to be corrected; I 
probably will hear from the Minister of Finance in due course on this) the Crown corporations are now 
allowed to receive heritage fund dollars. Well, if that is correct, then I must totally disagree with the 
concept of the Crown corporations receiving heritage fund dollars. The heritage fund was not originally 
established to enable or to assist Crown corporations. This sudden shift in direction on that is something 
I can’t understand. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance is shaking his head. I hope that I misread or misunderstood or 
misinterpreted the bill, but as I see it (and that is what I am going to speak on at this point in time) the 
heritage fund now can direct funds and dollars into Crown corporations. For example, if we consider 
Crown corporations like SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) – it is my 
favorite one I usually like to talk about – but there are 23 of them, forest products, mineral resources, 
and so on . . . When does the government ever expect to receive or to build up a heritage fund for the 
citizens of this province? There isn’t a Crown corporation in Saskatchewan today that is really carrying 
its weight, not one of them. 
 
You know, all one has to do is look at the very latest report or brochure or propaganda or whatever 
terminology you want to put to it, of the NDP government, that is Saskatchewan Into The Eighties, to 
confirm what I have just said. Very simply, for those who may not understand (and I doubt very much 
the Minister of Finance even understands it at this point) we have Crown corporations, according to the 
government that have net assets of $3.5 billion. Now if we consider these 23 or 24 – I’m not even too 
sure the government knows how many Crown corporations they have any more – is it 24? My seatmate 
says 24. It could be 25, but no matter. When we consider that these Crown corporations of the 
government have $3.5 billion in book value (book assets) but as admitted by a couple of cabinet 
ministers, the true assets of these Crown corporations are probably closer to $10 billion . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, no; what is bad about it is if you have $8 billion to $10 billion (and as I say this is 
admitted by a couple of cabinet ministers on your side) as the value and the worth of those Crown 
corporations and you are only receiving $27 million into the consolidated fund as a dividend from these 
Crown corporations. 
 
When you look at $10 billion of assets returning to the citizens of this province a mere $27 million in 
dividends, no wonder the government is saying, we have to direct the funds of the heritage fund into 
Crown corporations in order to help them out. That is a 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4350 

very simple analysis of why this bill is here. Because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I do not forget 
about the services, no. You know, if you took the $10 billion and had a proper return on it, Mr. Member 
for Saskatoon Centre, let me tell you what would happen. If you were getting the proper return on your 
$10 billion in your Crown corporations, there isn’t a citizen in this province who would ever again have 
to pay one penny of income tax. Did you know that? But you’re not aware of that. So the 
mismanagement of your Crown corporations has forced you to say, well, from the heritage fund we’ll 
direct more funds into the Crown corporations to assist them. A $27 million return on assets of that 
value is absolutely ludicrous even if you consider that as a return on what you say, (and what your report 
says) are the net assets of your Crown corporation, namely $3.5 billion. Now, we all know that is a book 
value and we all know the value of those 24 Crown corporations far exceeds that amount of money. 
 
So that is the main thrust of my criticism in respect to the amendment to The Heritage Fund Act, Mr. 
Speaker. I certainly, because of all of the changes within the bill itself and the different changes in the 
clauses of that bill, will be scrutinizing and criticising and asking various questions as that comes up in 
committee of the whole. But because of the direction in which they have amended this act we, on this 
side of the Assembly, certainly will not be able to support this amendment. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments, and 
certainly I will be most happy to reply to any questions that the member for Regina South has when we 
consider this bill in committee. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, the difference that we are seeing here this evening is the question of, do we, as a 
government, believe in the approach of Crown corporations in providing services and developing our 
province in a mixed economy, or does the opposition Conservative Party believe that should not be the 
case? And I think that the member for Regina South has made it very clear in his comments that (well, 
I’ll be pretty precise) heritage fund money should not be used to invest in Crown corporations. Well, 
that’s not new in the amendment and I want to explain what the amendments say. The amendments to 
The Heritage Fund Act do not change that. That opportunity existed under the act when it was originally 
introduced in this House, so there is no change in that aspect of it at all. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, and we believed when we brought in the legislation that it was wise to use 
heritage fund money to invest, for example, in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. It has done a lot 
of good. It has provided for expansion of the potash industry in this province. It has provided jobs that 
otherwise would not have been provided. It has provided us as a government an opportunity to regulate 
the development of the potash resource so that it best provides the maximum return to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And in 1979, as has been indicated many times in this House, that potash corporation 
returned a net profit of $78 million. Now that to me, on an investment of $400 million, is a pretty good 
investment. 
 
You can’t have it both ways. You can’t say on one hand that the Crown corporations shouldn’t pay 
dividends as was the criticism here with regard to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and in the 
Crown corporations committee, then stand up in this House several weeks later and say, Crown 
corporations aren’t making enough money on the investments and on the assets that they have. Those 
are two contradictory positions and I think what the opposition needs to do is decide which of those 
positions they are going to fall on. Now I know that when we get into committee we’ll dwell on that 
probably at some length, and so I shall not pursue it any longer. I have explained what 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4351 

this amendment to The Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Act does. It is an amendment that brings in 
provisions announced in the budget some time ago on March 13, and with those remarks in closing I am 
pleased to move second reading of this act. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski 
(Minister of Finance) that Bill No. 104 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, (No. 2) be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you. As I can understand The Income Tax Act amendment, it really is a 
housekeeping bill more than anything else. However, there is one section I hope the minister will clarify 
for me. As I understand it, again we are talking about a bill that creates retroactivity. I think the time has 
come for the government opposite, once and for all when they introduce legislation in this Assembly, to 
know what they are introducing, to make up their minds that the legislation they are introducing and 
want passed isn’t going to be changed two, three, or four years down the road and made retroactive. 
There is a retroactivity in this particular bill and anything to do with legislation that has retroactivity in 
it, absolutely abhors my way of thinking and I cannot agree with that concept. Other than that particular 
section, I see nothing in it, it being of a housekeeping nature and changes as indicated within the budget. 
Mr. Speaker, that is all I have to say on that one. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, once again I will be very brief. I 
am certainly pleased that the members opposite will support this bill. The member for Regina South is 
correct; it does implement the tax cuts which were announced in the budget speech. He makes reference 
to a certain provision which is retroactive, and indeed it is. I just want to point out to the House and to 
him (I think he wasn’t here when I gave second reading; he was unable to be here as he explained to me) 
that in the area of corporate taxation, because that’s what it deals with, we are amending The Income 
Tax Act to apply the lower provincial corporate tax rate to the income of credit unions eligible for the 
additional deduction under section 137 (of the federal act) and to the credit union mutual aid board, 
which will also benefit. 
 
Now that is retroactive, Mr. Speaker; we don’t apologize for that. We are trying in this amendment to 
bring our legislation into line with legislation which the federal government introduced prior to ours, to 
make amendments to their act. I think it is unfortunate that because there is a time lapse between when 
we can bring in our legislation and when federal legislation is brought in, the credit unions and the 
mutual aid board have been caught in a situation where they have had to pay the higher corporate tax 
rate, rather than the lower corporate tax rate which applies to small businesses. That is all this 
amendment does. 
 
I think the member when he considers it and accepts my explanation, he will accept it, even though he 
objects. I understand how he feels about it. Retroactivity in this case is I think, even in his mind, a good 
provision. I move second reading of the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek 
(Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)) that Bill No. 119 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act be now read a second time. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4352 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 131 – An Act to 
amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1980. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill is largely a housekeeping bill to correct some problems which have arisen 
under the act passed last year. The amendment to clause 2(g) will change the definition to include not 
only the indemnity but also the sessional allowance and the expense allowance. It was always intended 
that this be the case, and indeed it was the case prior to the passage of the legislation last year. That error 
was made when the original bill was drafted. This amendment will be retroactive to April 1, 1979, the 
date the new act came into force. The new clause 2(n) is necessary to ensure that pensionable service is 
defined as it was under previous legislation. Prior to July 1, 1975, sessions were declared to be 
pensionable. After that date, a year of pensionable service was an actual calendar year. Prior to July 1, 
1974, the act imposed a limit of $4,200 on a superannuation allowance payable. Members were not 
required to contribute in respect of more than 20 sessions unless they elected to do so. Most did not elect 
to do so because the $4,200 limit on pensions was there. 
 
Under the new section 9.1, a member who was a member prior to July 1, 1974, and who was in receipt 
of a pension under the act, may make contributions for those sessions which he did not contribute 
previously and have his pension recalculated. The spouse of a deceased member, who would have been 
entitled to make contributions under the proposed section 9.1 will also be able to make contributions and 
have his or her pension recalculated. Under the 1973-1974 amendments to The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, section 24(2), it was intended that anyone who was a 
member during the 1973-1974 session should have the benefit of the amendments. This section was left 
out when the act was redone last year. The new subsection 12(4) will restore this right to members. This 
amendment on section 8 will permit the widow of a Premier to claim 60 per cent of the Premier’s 
allowance in addition to 60 per cent of the rest of the Premier’s pension which she is entitled to, which is 
the case for all other members I might point out. 
 
Section 10, the amendments to subsection 23(3) and section 34 will permit persons to designate a 
beneficiary as they can under the public service superannuation plan. Section 11, the amendment here 
provides for new supplementary allowances for retired members and spouses of deceased members who 
are receiving pensions. It also provides for the recalculation of supplementary allowances of April 1, 
1980, for members picking up years of service under the proposed section 9.1. 
 
I want to point out to the members that this is the same formula which has been used in the past with 
respect to increasing members who are on pension, and members will know this was already done this 
year for members of the public service. 
 
Section 12, the new section 28 will give present members still under the old plan until May 1, 1981, to 
decide if they wish to switch to the money accumulation plan. It will also permit members who ceased 
to be members prior to April 1, 1979, and who are not in receipt of a pension, an opportunity to switch 
to the money purchase plan. As members will know, under the act which was passed last year, members 
had to elect by May 1, 1980, and previous members did not have the right to elect; this is to give them 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4353 

the opportunity to do so. 
 
As I mentioned previously, all of this act except section 3 which is retroactive to April 1, 1979, comes 
into force on the day of assent. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Superannuation Amendment Act, 1980. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, before I beg leave to adjourn debate to consider the 
minister’s statements, if the member remembers, I believe it was the spring of 1978, we had a bill 
similar to this which was retroactive and there was a considerable amount of jockeying . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s about time, Nelson, you got off your you know what and did some work yourself 
and stopped bugging. Just listen and you’ll hear something; it’s about time you learned something, so 
button it up. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I wonder if the members, when they are directing comments, could direct 
them through the Speaker. That way we would take the personalities out of the debate and probably 
speed it up a bit. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, there are some comments, and as I was indicating earlier the 
member for Biggar will remember the ’78 spring when there was discussion on this bill. It was down to 
about this time. The Legislative Assembly was about to adjourn when we were discussing a change in 
the superannuation for members. It was polled. There were certain areas that affected certain past 
members. Some of these members had been contacted, and once again I have contacted some past 
members to ask them their feelings about some changes being recommended. I have also contacted some 
pension people to understand exactly the two things that are . . . The portion of buying back for 
additional payments, and those that are already getting benefits, are the areas that I was concerned with. 
If any other pension plan allowed that or not – I can’t seem to find out if they do. It’s basically an 
unfunded liability from what I understand, and for a small fee we’re going to give them a lot more 
money back. 
 
That’s basically what it seems to do. Of course we haven’t had time for the money to accrue to gain any 
benefits for them. I’d like to double-check that. I’ve asked some people to get me some answers. 
Therefore, within the next day or two I expect to have the answers and be able to reply completely after 
studying the minister’s comments. For the benefit of the member for Yorkton, the explanation notes 
only came here yesterday. The bill has not been around that long in print. So if he would ever be up to 
date with what happens in this House and stop yak-yakking, we’d get along. Therefore I ask leave to 
adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 134 – An Act to 
amend The Business Corporations Act. 
 
He said: This is a very small amendment here. The members will know that a new Business 
Corporations Act was passed in Saskatchewan to coincide with the one in Ottawa and the one in 
Manitoba, I believe (and in Ontario at this time, although I’m not certain about that). 
 
There was a period of time given for the existing corporations in this province to switch 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4354 

over to the new Business Corporations Act. This bill is to enable the corporation to continue under the 
new act without a special resolution of shareholders, where there is in effect no change in the articles of 
the corporation. The problem that arose within a corporation is, because of certain rights within the 
corporation that a minority shareholder might have had, it was conceivable that he could have prevented 
the special resolution from being passed, even though he was a minority shareholder. The result would 
have been the corporation would have gone out of existence. This was obviously not the intent of the 
legislation. 
 
This act, I am told, has been amended in a similar way in Ottawa and in Manitoba. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move second reading of An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I have no reason to disbelieve 
the Provincial Secretary. I think everything he says is right on. Unfortunately our critic for this particular 
bill stepped out momentarily and rather than delay the House (and as I say, I don’t think there is any 
problem with the bill), I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 136 – An Act to 
amend The Constituency Boundaries Commission Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, again the amendment here is a relatively minor one. As members will know, the 
constituency boundaries commission has made an interim report. It is now considering its material for 
making a final report. I think all members would agree that as soon as that report is ready, it is in 
everyone’s interest to have it public. 
 
The way the legislation is now drafted, it must be filed with Mr. Speaker, who then distributes it to the 
House in session. For example, if the report were filed with Mr. Speaker at the end of June – let’s 
assume, and perhaps it’s a dangerous assumption to make, that the House is not meeting on June 30 – 
then members on this side and that side of the House would have to wait until the next session to see the 
report. 
 
And so this amendment simply says that the commission shall immediately submit its final report to the 
Speaker and file a copy of the report certified by the chairman with the clerk of the Executive Council. 
The result then would be that the clerk of the Executive Council will distribute to all members of the 
Assembly by mail immediately, a copy of the bill. And I think in the case of the leaders of the 
opposition, they will be simply delivered to their offices so they get it right away. This will then give 
members on that side and this side of the House an opportunity over the summer to study it. I think it’s 
the government’s intention to introduce at the fall session, on the assumption there is one, a bill which 
will follow exactly the report of the constituency boundaries commission. I suppose, theoretically, for 
some reason that might not happen, but I can’t think of the occasion in which we wouldn’t follow their 
report exactly. And so this is to facilitate getting the report out to members as soon as it’s tabled. I would 
therefore move, Mr. Speaker, second reading of An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries 
Commission Act. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I had some concerns when the thing was first brought in, but the 
minister’s explanation I think has cured most of the concerns I had. And now 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4355 

that I understand his intent, if I’m correct, as soon as the Speaker gets it, he will give it to the executive 
and they will immediately make it public. We will not have to wait until the fall session. Therefore I 
think that’s probably proper and what everybody would expect and therefore we’ll go along with it. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 132 – An Act to 
amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of Interests Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill is one which is the result of a study, now of some several months, 
stemming from criticism which the opposition and others mounted with respect to some aspects of 
legislation last year. Essentially, the criticism concerned itself with the sufficiency or the insufficiency 
of this legislation as it relates to a member’s participation in a company in a corporate capacity, either as 
a shareholder or a director or in some other function. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this bill can be fairly easily described as being concerned with three areas. First of 
all, we can say that this bill expands the definitions throughout it, where relevant and applicable, 
designed to catch and reflect more accurately the various corporate combinations which are possible in 
today’s business world. The old bill, for example, read in the definition section of business the 
following. 
 

Business includes a corporation or enterprise. 
 
Members will see that on the first page of the bill we are amending business to mean a corporation 
partnership or other association of persons organized in anticipation of profit. That’s an expansion of the 
definition of business and thereby an expansion of the corporate possibilities, a more accurate reflection 
of the corporate possibilities in which a member may find himself in which the old bill would be 
deficient. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, is on page 2 of the bill, (h), right at the very top. We are here defining 
‘participation share’. This is a new and more expanded definition which reads, if the bill is passed: 
 
‘Participation share’ means any unit of interest in a business which entitles the holder to participate in 
the profits of the business or in the assets of business upon its dissolution, as compared to the earlier 
definition with respect to participation shares, which simply did not seek to incorporate the same 
corporate combinations of participation shares as this legislation would do. So that’s the first thing it 
does. 
 
The second thing that it does is to clarify and permit certain activities which were engaged in by a 
member, where that member who participated in a government contract prior to the election or by 
operation of law is required to cease such participation as soon as possible. Members will realize that 
this may create some difficulties for members, such as a difficulty of getting out of the contract which he 
has incurred with the government prior to becoming a member. This bill proposes to allow a new section 
(h) which would obligate the member in such circumstances to appear before a federally appointed 
judge, to present the terms and the conditions of the contract, the old contract or the ongoing obligation 
as it might be. At which time, the judge would examine the facts and circumstances surrounding its 
acquisition and its terms. If he certifies it is satisfactory, then he would in effect issue a certificate saying 
it has been approved. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4356 

This method, presently set out in the bill elsewhere, is related to the holding of certain lands and the 
need for an approval of a land deal which a member may have with the government quite innocently, 
(say dealing with the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation or something of that nature). The member 
must go before a court to get the provisions and circumstances of that arrangement out in the open. I 
think it will be of assistance to members, and makes sense. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill deals (and I think this last point is probably the most important point) with 
the change of the law respecting prohibition by a member in dealing with the government as a member 
also of a corporation which corporation would have a contract with the government. Mr. Speaker will 
know the thrust of the bill has two prongs. One is a general prohibition provision with some exceptions. 
The second prong is a revelation section. Now, with regard to members in their personal capacity, the 
law is unchanged. There is a general prohibition with some exceptions, and there is a reporting 
mechanism, which I will speak to in a moment, as well, in the law. 
 
The way the present law is drafted on the corporate side, as opposed to the personal capacity side, we 
also have the two prongs: prohibition, subject to $5,000 and 5 per cent shares in a very complicated way; 
and revelation. After several months of review by lawyers and others, we are recommending to the 
Assembly that we drop the prohibition portion with respect to corporations which are doing business 
with government in which those members may be members of the corporation. Rather, what we’re doing 
here is laying the stress on the public revelation of corporations which do business, as opposed to 
prohibition. Frankly, this is simply an admission, based on our current review of the law, that an outright 
prohibition is impossible, (given the complexity of corporate modern day business practices) to 
effectively attain. Or in the other alternative, if we are to attain it, we would make the prohibition so 
strict that members wouldn’t, for example, be able to be a director of a credit union, a co-op or 
whatever, which of course in Saskatchewan life is a daily part of almost every one of our activities – or 
you’re a shareholder of a local co-op. You either make the kick-in so low it becomes onerous, or on the 
other side you try to define a higher kick-in which makes the law too full of loopholes. 
 
We are taking the approach in this bill that we will put emphasis on revelation and on public exposure, 
so that if a member is involved in an unethical or an improper situation corporately, as a shareholder or 
director, then presumably public pressure will be mounted and members themselves can attach the 
appropriate pressure required. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is a reporting mechanism change. The old bill required us to do some 
reporting yet last year but because we never proclaimed the bill in time the reporting mechanism is 
obviously no longer relevant. It is proposed that the new reporting mechanism be set out. It’s essentially 
the same as the old reporting mechanism. If my notes and my memory serve me correctly the reporting 
mechanism will be for some time this summer, and thereafter on a yearly (at the beginning of the year) 
basis, an update of any changes in the financial standing of the members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would be pleased to receive submissions from the opposition in committee of the whole 
which would improve this bill, because after all it’s not our bill. It’s ours in the sense of government; it’s 
ours in the sense of members of the House in doing public business. If there are any comments in 
committee of the whole, where I 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4357 

think this matter can be more effectively dealt with on a more detailed basis, we’d be pleased to deal 
with them. So, Mr. Speaker, with those few words I move second reading of Bill No. 132 – An Act to 
amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of Interests Act. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to put forth a few 
comments on this bill. I think all members in this House realize that every member wants to take time to 
study this bill because it certainly has implications for each and every one of us. Perhaps there has to be 
time for the implementation of it. I understand the Attorney General was indicating implementation 
some time within this year. I’m just wondering if it wouldn’t be wise to postpone implementation until 
the end of the current tax year, December 31 or somewhere around that period of time, which gives 
members time to get all their affairs in order. 
 
Again, I would like to point out that this bill, as we all know, is designed basically against the MLAs (I 
shouldn’t say against the MLAs, but it concerns MLAs). There may well be a need for this, but I think 
we have seen in this session where perhaps there is some need for influence. To me, this bill deals 
entirely with declaring assets, and perhaps more important than that is the ability people have to 
influence. Of course, as we’ve said from this side of the House on many occasions, we on this side have 
virtually no control over the expenditures. We handle no money; whereas members on the other side, 
Executive Council members and especially senior civil servants, are the people who really are in control 
of the expenditures of the government purse. So I think there are a few things we would want to debate a 
little further. I perhaps would be receptive, and I think would find it interesting to hear the Attorney 
General’s comments on revelation rather than prohibition of holding shares and so on in certain 
companies. I think maybe that is a step in the right direction, but I do think there are a lot of things here 
that each and every member has to look at and with regard to this I would like to adjourn debate at this 
time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 133 – An Act to 
amend the Statute Law. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to make a second reading speech on this other than to point out to 
the members that this is the (I was going to say traditional) bill for introduction when we are coming to 
(touch wood) the end of the session. It is a bill which is designed to rectify spelling errors, word 
omissions, in the multitude of statutes which we have introduced in this session. It is strictly a very 
technical housekeeping bill; there is no new law written, at least it shouldn’t be incorporated there. I 
think if members have any questions about it, they should be dealt with in committee of the whole where 
we will be able to deal with specific errors and omissions. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 86 – An Act respecting the Assessment of Real Property, Businesses and Special 
Franchises. 

 
Sections 1 to 9 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4358 

Bill No. 94 – An Act respecting the Provision of Financial and Other Assistance to Urban 
Municipalities for Capital Works Projects. 

 
Sections 1 to 11 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 66 – An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act. 
 
Sections 1 to 5 agreed. 
 
Section 6 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 7 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 101 – An Act to repeal the Department of Municipal Affairs Act. 
 
Sections 1 to 3 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 93 – An Act to establish The Department of Urban Affairs. 
 
Sections 1 to 12 agreed. 
 
Section 13 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 14 to 24 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 119 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act. 
 
Sections 1 to 8 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE – DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT – VOTE 9 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, it has been so long since we were on 
Environment, I can’t remember just exactly where we left off. But I remember the minister and I were 
having a debate on issues at Federal Pioneer. Then he refused to answer any more questions on account 
of it being in the court. 
 
The minister and myself were in a debate on issues at Federal Pioneer when all of a  



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4359 

sudden he just quit answering questions. We won’t have to waste any further time on Federal Pioneer 
issues tonight because after the lengthy time I went to Federal Pioneer and I was able to get my answers. 
They had no problem in answering them. They’re in the same court as you. You could have given these 
simple answers right here. There would have been no problem at all. We would have saved about an 
hour that night. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I recall it, there was another problem you and I had differences on. It was whether Don 
Fast overruled me on getting drinking water from the Farrell Pumping station. I have two questions here 
I want to ask you. One is this. Will the minister make a statement regarding the accusations made by 
himself that it was not true that Don Fast overruled the city of Regina waterworks, prohibiting me from 
receiving water samples? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — No, Mr. Chairman, I believe it to be 
true. I have no reason to believe otherwise. Mr. Don Fast, first of all, didn’t have any authority to 
overrule. He may have had discussions with city officials. I’m not denying that he had discussions with 
city officials and may have made recommendations; although I have no reason to believe that he even 
made recommendations to that extent, to overrule or to prevent you from taking water samples from the 
Farrell pumping station. We just don’t have that authority. He didn’t have that authority. It’s my 
understanding from the officials that there was no recommendation made that you were not eligible or 
not able to have water as far as he was concerned. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, I’m not going to go further on the matter. I just want it on record that I 
was absolutely refused water samples by Don Fast. He overruled the city. You’ve refused so I’ve been 
talking to Regina water officials and I’ll have to get the statement from them and bring it to this House. 
We’ll drop it after that because they have assured me that Don Fast did overrule the city of Regina and 
refused me water samples. Now this is fact and I want it on record. 
 
The other question, Mr. Minister, is on water samples. I didn’t bring my water file into the House so you 
can rest, because I was only through about half the towns and their problems. But we want to get on. 
 
I just have this one question. I think you understood my point, that there was a serious problem out in 
the country with the differences in the two ways of testing water. You don’t seem to admit this but you 
must see there are two different ways of testing water. I’m going to ask you again, will the minister give 
me his assurance that he will notify all towns, villages and hamlets of the importance to test water and to 
insist that they do a comprehensive test at least once a year, but absolutely to go no more than two years 
without a comprehensive test? Now, that is not too much to ask when I found such a mix-up in the 
province of Saskatchewan with towns not understanding what they should do. That’s all I have asked 
you to do. That is a very simple request for the sake of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The reason I took some extra time with regard to the question is because the 
hon. member asked the same question in estimates last year as to whether or not I would do this. I said I 
would. I think he took from what I said that I was going to write individual letters (which I gather he has 
done) to all the towns and villages or public water supply systems in the province. 
 
I am not sure that if I say yes, I’m willing; I have no objection . . . There is no reason why one couldn’t 
sit down to write to the towns and villages and say you should have the water analysed. When I say that, 
as Minister of the Environment (it reflects not only on 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4360 

me but also on the Minister of Health) many of them will believe it is an obligation on them; many will 
believe that because they see a letter from the minister and from the government, they should have their 
water system checked. I would suspect that what we will get is a flood of water samples coming in 
which we will not be able to handle in the lab. We would not be able to give the analysis the hon. 
member expects. 
 
What I am concerned about in answering the question, is the level of expectation which will be left if I 
say yes, I am prepared to do that. I have no objections to the communities, towns, villages, cities and so 
on, receiving a letter from the department recommending they have a complete analysis done of the 
water supply. But if that will lead to the feeling that they are obligated to do it, and if they are obligated 
to do it, they all begin to send water samples in for analysis. I am sure the lab would not be able to 
handle them in a large volume like that. 
 
The other thing is, if a community (let’s say it is Shellbrook) receives a letter from me or from the 
department saying they should get a complete water analysis once every year, or once every two years, 
or whatever it is, so they send in the water sample and with respect to the total dissolved solids, the 
water is above our quality standard, what do we say? What level of expectation does the town have 
when I write to them and say they should have it analysed, and then they find that the dissolved solids 
are higher than the standard? What do they expect of the government? 
 
I suggest to you that, because the water supply system in the province of Saskatchewan is one where the 
total dissolved solids or the salts are high, we are not going to be able to solve that problem. Therefore, I 
am cautious; I want to be careful about expectations which would be created by me or by the department 
sending out a letter. I would want to take great care, if such a letter went out, to indicate there is not a 
following obligation, that if they get a sample back and it is much higher than the standard that doesn’t 
upset people who have been drinking the water for some time and have become used to the salts or used 
to the solids and therefore are not bothered by them, unlike a stranger to that kind of water quality who 
would be bothered by that water. What do they do? They may feel, well, our water is not safe. Our water 
is above the standard. So, therefore, we must have a new water supply system. What implication does it 
have for the government in that respect? So, yes, in answer to the hon. member’s question, certainly we 
are prepared to advise the towns and villages if the recommendation is we should do it to every one. I 
am certainly prepared to consider that. But don’t be surprised if we miss a public water supply system. If 
we do, I don’t want it to be said that somehow we didn’t do a complete job. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We would never say that. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, I realize you wouldn’t, hon. member for Estevan; you’re a very honorable 
man; I recognize that. I know he would not be critical of the government, and hasn’t been. But there is a 
fear of the hon. member for Arm River who might do that, even though he is a very honorable man as 
well. But I do want to indicate that caution and concern which I have about us or the department sitting 
down and writing personal letters to communities saying this is what should be done. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is the first time I have ever heard this government worry 
about anything being compulsory. I understand your caution, Mr. Minister. But when you did not send 
these letters out last summer as you said you would, I did. I didn’t cause a panic in the lab. They were 
pretty busy for a while. I took samples in, and they said they were a month and six weeks behind 
because of the flood 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4361 

of samples, but there is no reason for the answer you gave. 
 
You have admitted right here tonight that we have a water problem in Saskatchewan but you are afraid 
to let the people know there may be something wrong with the drinking water in their towns. If we are 
talking about something being compulsory, ask the Minister of Health; he knows we have to get an 
injection for smallpox and all these vaccinations but they are compulsory for the sake of the health of 
humans in Saskatchewan. Now, what is more important than drinking water? What is more important? I 
know it could be very alarming for some of the towns in this province to find out about their water, 
because I mentioned towns the other night where the water was unfit for human consumption. I know it 
is very alarming for them. What are they going to do about it? 
 
You could do as the doctors did in Craik, Davidson, and Outlook in my constituency. They put notices 
in the papers saying that you drink the water in this community at your own risk. Advise them; let 
people know. You made the statement here a year ago in estimates when we were talking about the same 
thing. You said that old people used to drink the water from the wells; they would drink the water from 
the sloughs and it didn’t hurt them. Well how do you know it didn’t hurt them? They drank that at their 
own risk. 
 
Nowadays people move into the cities or into their towns. They have municipal wells and they are 
depending on the officials from the town that supplies them with drinking water to make sure the water 
is safe to drink. They are depending on you, Mr. Minister of the Environment. Even the people in this 
city of Regina are depending on you that this water is safe to drink; they don’t know. Until the press 
found out about the PCBs in the city of Regina, the people didn’t know what they were drinking. It is 
your responsibility as the Minister of the Environment of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You have admitted to us tonight that you are afraid to notify the towns about the water, just in case the 
samples come back saying that the water is not safe to drink. You might be causing a panic. Well I say 
you should cause a panic if the water is not safe to drink, absolutely cause a panic. I would love to see a 
panic in Saskatchewan about the condition of our drinking water. 
 
It has been proven and I have shown you (it’s on the records) last year and again this year, where Regina 
has the lowest quality of drinking water of any city in Canada! That’s serious, Mr. Minister, serious. 
Any place of business I go in this city and I give my name, they say oh, you’re the man who is trying to 
do something about the drinking water in our city. Please keep on. I was in a furniture store yesterday 
(Kozans) and they said your name is Mr. Muirhead. You’re the one fighting to clean up our water. Why 
can’t the government fight to better the condition of our water in Saskatchewan? Why do you and the 
opposition have to do it? It shouldn’t have to be me; it shouldn’t have to be my concern to write letters 
when I come in here in May and see 470 towns – it is your job not mine to see that the water is safe. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t think you understand the seriousness of this. I don’t want you to think I’m trying to 
make a political issue of drinking water. I am concerned that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
drink safe water and you’re not concerned. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I appreciate the hon. member’s concern and that makes the concern of 
this department and this government no less with respect to the drinking water. I can’t see, however, 
what the hon. member has done. So he went to the Kozan’s Furniture World and they recognized him as 
being the man of water and the man of the 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4362 

hour with respect to water. But what did that do to improve the quality of Regina water? . . . inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, I appreciate that; it didn’t do anything. What did it do for the people of Craik when 
the water analysis was done? They published it in the paper but it didn’t improve the quality of the 
water. Now maybe it helped some of the folk out in Craik to know what it was they were drinking in the 
water, at least in terms of the chemical. 
 
My concern, Mr. Chairman is the implications that will follow and I think the hon. member implies that 
in his discussion. If there is a situation for example, like Craik, where the water quality is above the 
standard or the objectives of the province, then somehow there needs to be a new water system and the 
government is somehow going to be responsible for that. That’s the care that I want to take with respect 
to it. I think it’s right that towns, villages, hamlets should know the water quality. I think even farmers 
should know what they’re drinking out of their wells. But I have to suggest that it’s been a long time, 
(and I don’t recall when the last occasion was, if there was ever one in the province of Saskatchewan) 
since there has been a major public health hazard from the water that people were drinking in this 
province, from public wells or from private wells which were dug and being used for domestic purposes. 
I just don’t recall any. 
 
If there had been major outbreaks in the area of public health, certainly there would be reason for greater 
concern; there would be reason for greater alarm and reason for greater care to be taken. Nobody is 
suggesting that we should stand around waiting for a health problem to arise. The suggestion there is 
valid; people should be analysing and most of them do. With the exception of the small towns or the 
small villages, most of them I would suspect do have an analysis of their water quality. 
 
I think the question has been answered. I don’t know what more I can say. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, we won’t push it any further than this . . . 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Chairman, following the hon. member for Arm 
River, I also want to deal with water quality and quantity when he finishes his line of questioning. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Thank you. All I can say, Mr. Minister, is that I have made it quite clear where I 
stand concerning the safety of drinking water in this province. People know where I stand; I definitely 
stand for the safety of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s been my only interest, and I can’t do any 
more than that. I’ve made it clear to you going on for two sessions in this House and you’re the minister 
so I leave it in your hands. But I assure you, in my constituency I’m making sure that the towns are 
being notified on methods of testing water. The hospitals in my area are being taken care of, so there is 
nothing on my shoulders; it all lies on yours. 
 
I have made it very plain and very simple in this House where I stand on the concern of drinking water. 
 
Now I have just a couple of short questions. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, excuse me. If you want 
to say something about water, I will let the member for Moose Jaw North in and then I’ll ask my 
questions. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Thank you Mr. Chairman and the hon. member for Arm River. Now that we’re 
back into the throes of government and issues that are affecting the people of Saskatchewan, there has 
been some indication that the samples of water which are 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4363 

taken at various locations, may lead some people to believe there is some danger. There is one area, I 
believe, which the hon. member for Arm River raised a week or two weeks ago indicating that there is 
some danger to the cities. I believe he mentioned Moose Jaw at that time. I think he should realize that 
when he suggests that the Moose Jaw River flows into Buffalo Pound Lake and that Buffalo Pound Lake 
supplies the water for Regina and Moose Jaw, in addition to the wells here in Regina, he isn’t quite 
correct. 
 
The Moose Jaw River does not flow into Buffalo Pound Lake. It flows into the Qu’Appelle chain, and 
naturally that poses a threat (if there is a threat) downstream. But the Moose Jaw River does not go into 
Buffalo Pound Lake, so when you talk about the Moose Jaw River and any contamination that may have 
been present at a previous stage in our history, (when the Canadian Forces Base had its lagoon hooked 
up to the Moose Jaw River, which is not the case now), that water does not go into Buffalo Pound Lake. 
 
But I think something we should recognize is that in the filtration plant that we have at Buffalo Pound 
right now, it is meeting the health standards of the Department of Health in so far as Moose Jaw is 
concerned. And in Moose Jaw proper, and I deal with Moose Jaw as I am somewhat familiar with it, the 
samples at the different locations completely meet the standards of the Department of Health. All of the 
tests in the Moose Jaw area for human consumption completely meet those standards. So, Mr. Minister, 
there is no problem in meeting the standard for human consumption of water in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Also I understand, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, that there is a miniature pilot plant now at Buffalo 
Pound Lake having to do with water treatment. I would like your comments on that miniature pilot plant 
being undertaken at this time in analysing the contents of the water at that particular location. But when 
we are dealing with water quality, I think all of us probably agree that some of the real problems, not 
just here in Saskatchewan or in other parts of Canada, but in North America, are the pesticides and 
herbicides, the reaction with the organic matter that’s included there, and the by-products of the 
pesticides and herbicides and their reaction. In addition to the miniature pilot plant at Buffalo Pound 
Lake, my question is whether or not the Department of the Environment is undertaking, or at least 
co-operating with other North American counterparts, in a major study into the whole area of the 
reaction of pesticides and herbicides and their organic by-products? I think all of us here appreciate the 
fact that we all are concerned about the by-products and exactly what’s happening here, not only in 
Saskatchewan but in North America. I am wondering whether or not his department is co-operating with 
other departments of other provinces and North America in this particular issue. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member for Moose Jaw is raising a question with 
regard to a pilot project which really has reference to the consultant who has been appointed out of 
Calgary, as I understand it, to do various kinds of treatment procedure and various kinds of tests. He is 
using pilot testing equipment or a pilot project, but it’s really part of a study. As far as I am aware there 
are no results from the study. In fact, it is too early for us to have any results from that, but it comes as a 
result of the interests of the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina with respect to the water supply of Buffalo 
Pound Lake. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Chairman, would the minister respond to whether or not his department is 
co-operating in a major study into the reaction of the organic matter that I have just referred to? 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4364 

MR. BOWERMAN: — With respect to the hon. member’s question, Mr. Chairman, the point which the 
hon. member raises is with respect to research that may be done or may be in the process of being 
undertaken. With regard to residual chemicals in the water supply system, my officials tell me that there 
are so many chemicals that you would really have to study them individually. There are so many 
chemicals that it would be an absolutely superhuman project to undertake at this point in time. 
 
The member is referring to a study which the department has been doing and was completed last year 
(taking about one and one-half years) relative to the chlorinated organics in the weather system. There 
has been testing going on at about 10 centres in the province as I understand it. And the report of that 
was in our hands sometime last year. Now, that may not be specifically and directly related to the 
question that you raised, but we are not participating in the large, overall North American studies that 
the member refers to, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — I appreciate there’s no way that an individual problem of this magnitude can be 
conducted and investigated at the provincial level as one province. I think all of us realize that it’s a real 
problem in the whole of North America. I’m wondering whether or not the minister wouldn’t agree that 
the whole problem of pesticides and herbicides and the reaction of those in the organic matter problem 
could be brought up in one of your interprovincial or North American conferences that are conducted 
from time to time? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly couldn’t agree with the hon. member more. I quite 
candidly say we are not very careful about how we use chemicals in our province, particularly in the 
agricultural sector. We’ve become used to dumping a five gallon can of chemicals into a sprayer and 
away we go. We may take water out of a well or we may take it out of a stream alongside the farm or we 
may take it out of a slough. We dip contaminated chemical cans into the water and so on. We have a 
habit of doing these things. Away we go with our sprayer and when we turn the corner in order to miss 
the creek, the sprayer boom goes out over the flowing water and so on. 
 
We have a tendency to do things that way. The problem the hon. members refers to is a problem of such 
magnitude that as a single province I think we could not deal with it on our own other than to start. I’m 
not saying we should throw our arms in the air and not start. I think there’s a point to be made there. I 
acknowledge that point. There’s no question, however, about the fact that we continue. I think there is a 
greater emphasis being placed in the Canadian Council of Resource and Environmental Ministers with 
regard to homing in on some of these very pertinent kinds of questions, more so than I think has been 
done in the past. I would be hopeful, from my own personal point of view, that council will somehow 
see its mandate as being more important to deal with some of these issues than some of the issues I think 
we have been addressing in the past. So, yes, I can agree with the hon. member’s question and I 
recognize the point that he makes is a valid point. The Department of the Environment is contributing to 
the analysis, to the assessment, as much as it is able in this whole matter, not only of chemicals into the 
water supply system, but chemicals in general as they relate to surface environment, the environment 
around and about us. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, the statement from the member for Moose Jaw South brings up a 
very important aspect to this water situation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, Moose Jaw North or 
South or West. Several times in this House, Mr. Minister, the member for Moose Jaw seems to think that 
I don’t know where the 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4365 

water goes at Moose Jaw. This has been a misunderstanding, the water coming from Diefenbaker Lake 
through the open ditch to Buffalo Pound Lake. Now, if he’s misunderstanding me, I’m sorry, but I’ve 
always talked about this open ditch. What he brought up tonight about the water always being safe for 
human consumption on Moose Jaw and Regina is absolutely correct. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I said Moose Jaw. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — And I’ll add Regina because I’ve had the water tested on many, many occasions 
with Auzie Mang at Buffalo Pound water station and if they’re too busy at the provincial lab here, I take 
my water test right to Auzie Mang. I asked him, why is it that you can keep this water down to this low 
level safe for human consumption? What do we do about our water? The other tests that I’m bringing in 
to you are so high, what do we do about it? He said, the station we have here at Moose Jaw has the 
machinery, has the ways and means of bringing this water down to these low levels, safe for human 
consumption. Maybe it doesn’t taste good. 
 
Last summer when the people couldn’t drink this slop in Regina, I took some of the slop that we 
couldn’t drink to have it tested, but still it was safe for human consumption. That’s also alarming if you 
can’t drink it, because people have to drink a lot of water to be healthy. But the issue I’m trying to raise, 
Mr. Minister, is that they have the facilities in the larger cities to bring the quality of the water down to a 
level safe for human consumption. But they aren’t able to in the other towns and cities in the province of 
Saskatchewan because they can’t afford it. They can’t afford it in Craik or Davidson, Outlook, Simpson, 
Milestone. They can’t do it. That’s what the importance is here. You have machinery out here that can 
bring this slop down so you can drink it, but it doesn’t help the water so you can drink very much of it. 
Just go to some of the places that I have gone to in this city. Go to some of the homes, the senior 
citizens’ homes, and talk to their officials and ask them what they think about the drinking water. 
They’re not even concerned about what the test is. Their concern is that our senior citizens don’t drink 
enough water for good health. Now, there’s no sense in pursuing this any longer. The member for 
Estevan has some water questions he wants to ask. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Minister, I don’t believe the member for Arm River is being 
unreasonable when he asks you to send letters out to these communities in Saskatchewan. I was very 
surprised at the answer you gave. What are we going to do if the answer comes back saying, there were 
too many solids or too much salt or too many nitrates? I think that’s something you have to meet when 
the time comes but I don’t think you should let that be the criterion, whether you send them a letter or 
not. I think the people in these communities should know exactly what their drinking water is and I 
believe it’s your duty to tell them what it is. 
 
The member for Arm River mentioned a while ago that some older folk were on salt-free diets, and they 
found the drinking water up there was heavily laden with salt. They would drink more in a glass of water 
than they were supposed to drink under doctor’s orders. I say it is up to you to tell these people exactly 
what their drinking water is like. If I were the Minister of the Environment I wouldn’t be concerned with 
what the results of the test were, as long as they knew the results of the test. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Nonsense. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Nonsense? You think that’s nonsense, Herman? The Minister of Health says he 
thinks it’s nonsense that the people should know what they are drinking. Now 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4366 

that’s really a wonderful statement. That’s really a wonderful statement coming from the Minister of 
Health 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know what you have done. We are so anxious to extend our potash mines 
by $20 million, $30 million, $40 million. What have you done for that 25 per cent of the population who 
live in Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. Have you looked at a pipeline from Diefenbaker Lake? Have 
you looked at a water pipeline from the proposed Rafferty Dam? What have you done about looking into 
these matters? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, there are studies which we are participating in with respect to water 
supply for Regina and Moose Jaw at the present time. Part of the Souris study was for water supply. Part 
of the research that was done there was for domestic water supply. And presently Lloydminster is 
looking for a domestic water supply and we are involved in some study there. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, the Souris River study really did recommend only one thing as far as 
any recommendations for this side of Midale are concerned. It was that they build a new reservoir and 
increase the drinking water supply for the community of Weyburn. I have no argument with this but the 
Rafferty Dam study really did not go any further than that. It recommended that it wouldn’t be feasible 
just for preventing flooding alone and I would probably agree with this. But you have since received 
proposals, both from the Souris River group and the North Dakota group, regarding a possible Rafferty 
Dam. I wonder if you have passed this proposal on to the minister in charge of SPC? Are you attempting 
to get together on this proposal? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I would want to check my answer here, but I do not recall ever receiving any 
direct communications from the North Dakota group with respect to the Rafferty Dam. I received 
correspondence or communications, either direct or indirect, from the hon. member for Estevan and 
some other people in the area suggesting that I should attend some meetings and people have been 
saying that the state of North Dakota is prepared to donate money. 
 
But there certainly has not been, with me, any formal communication from elected officials of North 
Dakota to elected officials in Saskatchewan with respect to the Rafferty Dam, the sharing of funding and 
so on. 
 
I think the hon. member is suggesting something which in essence, so far as an official recommendation 
or an official communication is concerned, has not been made to the province. 
 
I haven’t made any direct response to the Souris Valley group in so far as committing the province one 
way or the other, either in favor of, or objecting to, the project. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I’ll accept that. I know you’ve expressed your willingness to look at 
something if they offered it to you and I’ll accept the fact that you haven’t received anything concrete. 
I’m not arguing with you on that. 
 
Just leaving that for a minute to finish my question, I’d like to ask pertaining to Boundary Dam . . . and I 
thank you for this report on the monitoring. You mention that you had a sulphur dioxide monitor in a 
mobile air quality laboratory located at the Estevan airfield between October ’74 and November ’75. I 
wonder if this bears out the tests of 31,000 tons of sulphur dioxide out of the stacks. I wonder if you 
have done your testing anywhere else other than the airfield. The reason I ask this is because the 
prevailing 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4367 

northwest and southeast winds take the smoke much further than just to the airport in Estevan. Mind 
you, we do get a lot of smoke at the airport and sometimes it’s almost impossible for aircraft to land. But 
I would like to know if you’ve done any testing beyond this, so that you have a true assessment of what 
is happening to this smoke and the so-called acid rain coming out of the stacks. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The report, Mr. Chairman, which I have in my hands . . . Did we send this 
report over to you? Yes, it’s the same one. 
 
It doesn’t give the locations here other than to say the south and east and then I guess it pinpoints the 
airport, but there is nothing any more definitive than that. 
 
MR. LARTER: — I just wanted to ask you, is it your intention to take any further tests? I’m talking 
about downwind either way. Are you monitoring to see that we are living up to standards? We are a little 
sore at the Americans for the standards they’re trying to make us live up to. Are we living up to our own 
standards? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — No, as I understand in the immediate future at least, there will be no more 
studies directly related to this project. The monitoring will continue in Estevan and area, but not 
specifically related to this. 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Minister, I have some questions with regard to the effect 
of the heavy oil project. I’ve brought this up in the House with you before – the heavy oil project at Cold 
Lake and its effects on Saskatchewan, either with the North Saskatchewan River or with the 
Beaver-Waterhen system. My question to you at this stage would be, what involvement, if any, has your 
department had with that whole area of the environmental impact on Saskatchewan since your 
presentation to the energy conservation board hearings in Alberta? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Since that particular interface you talked about with Alberta, we have had 
ongoing communications, either formal or informal; we have participated on the prairie provinces water 
board for water quality coming from Alberta into Saskatchewan, and so on; it’s just a matter of 
continuing to watch the socio-economic implications of Cold Lake and developments in that area, as 
well as the environmental implications, but nothing more specific than that. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Does your department have a definite position with regard to where you would want 
to see surface waste water from that project disposed of, in the Beaver River system or alternately in the 
North Saskatchewan, which are the two present proposals before that board? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We have to say that we really don’t think we should be concerned about 
whether it is in the Beaver River or in the North Saskatchewan River, as long as we are sure the water 
quality is safe and satisfactory. If it’s safe and satisfactory for the North Saskatchewan, it should be safe 
and satisfactory for the Beaver. As I indicated, our ongoing concern with the prairie provinces’ water 
board is to establish a safe and satisfactory standard for waters coming into the province from those 
areas. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the report, which I’m sure you’re aware of (the energy 
resources conservation board report from Alberta), they suggest (it is my understanding anyway) that it 
would be better for the surface waste water to be pumped to the North Saskatchewan River rather than 
the Beaver, because of some of presentations which were before them from the Beaver River Ranchers’ 
Association 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4368 

and others who are concerned about the flood problems which are ongoing in the Beaver River. With an 
additional flow of water, they believe there will be extra problems, but that certainly wouldn’t be a 
problem in the North Saskatchewan River. 
 
I’ll just go further than that, and quote from the report: 
 

The board believes (that’s the energy resources conservation board in Alberta) that 
additional study is required on the biology of the Beaver River and the interaction 
between effluent quality and inventories of solid by-products. Detailed studies are also 
needed respecting the costs and impacts of disposing effluents on the North 
Saskatchewan River. The board would condition any approval it issues to require the 
above mentioned study. It recognizes the department’s (speaking of the Alberta 
Department of the Environment) responsibility in these matters and would make the 
condition consistent with the department’s requirements. 

 
Now, the question that follows from that is that if they say additional extensive studies are required 
before they would approve anything in the Beaver River, then I would think that those studies would 
have been going on by now. What involvement has your department had in those studies, either by 
yourselves or in conjunction with the Alberta department, or with Esso Resources or whatever? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, as I understand, from the time of that report the proponents have been 
actively doing ongoing studies which have changed their minds to a considerable extent with respect to 
the effects and where it should go and so on. That really is a recommendation to the proponents to do a 
proper and correct study. We say that we have confidence the companies will do those reports – at least 
we have no reason to believe otherwise. When the reports come in and we see them then we can analyze 
and do our own assessment of whether the reports are accurate and so on. But the request is a direction 
to the proponent, the person who is going to be undertaking the project, to assure us that all of these 
things are cared for and analyzed and properly assessed. So until those actual environmental impact 
assessments are done and the statements are prepared, we can’t do anything more than respond in this 
way. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I can accept that, Mr. Minister. I’m basically an information gatherer. I wanted to 
know if your department’s involved. Certainly I would agree with you, it’s up to Esso Resources to 
provide this because they are the company suggesting the project. Now you say that since the time of 
this report there have been ongoing discussions, which I know have been going on. What is the situation 
now as you understand it and the latest information your department has with regard to this, in terms of 
two things: first of all is it the thinking of your department that the surface water supply (the 600,000 
odd gallons that will be needed for the steam injection process) is to come from the North Saskatchewan 
River? Is that your understanding? And secondly, what is your understanding at this stage as to which 
river will be recommended for the disposal of surface waste water? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Just let me try to indicate to the hon. member, so that at least I can overcome 
some of his concerns, that the department officials have a fairly close working relationship with the 
Alberta Department of the Environment. I think there is telephone communication and things are fairly 
free flowing in respect to the communication process. The specific answer to your question is that it is 
our understanding they will take their water from the Saskatchewan River system and they will 
supposedly treat their effluent and put it into the Beaver River system. 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4369 

MR. McLEOD: — O.K. So far as you know at this stage the recommendation will be to put it into the 
Beaver River system. From that, I gather then, you must have some knowledge of the biological studies 
and so on that the conservation board required of the Beaver River, because they said that they would 
make the conditions consistent with the department’s requirements. In other words, the environmental 
studies of the Beaver River system must have been done and must, if somebody is of the belief that it 
will be going into the Beaver River, have satisfied the energy resources conservation board. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, well again, Mr. Chairman, this is something which really has to be 
negotiated between the Alberta Department of the Environment and Esso because those are the two 
agencies that are together. What I said earlier still applies, and that is we will want to know what the 
quality of the water is when it gets to the border and starts into Saskatchewan. Now they are negotiating 
as I understand. The officials tell me that the proponent, Esso, is negotiating, having its seesaw with the 
Alberta Department of the Environment now as to what the standard will be and what treatment will be 
required. But so far as we are concerned, until they arrive at some conclusion here, and perhaps the 
Alberta water standards are . . . The standard is set by the prairie provinces’ water board, which is 
Alberta, Manitoba, Saskatchewan. You have two provinces that are going to want to be sure the 
downstream waters are properly treated and cared for before they get to us, so the standards will be set 
by that interprovincial board. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Minister, now that may be well and good and I accept that. I believe there is 
very likely a good relationship between the two departments and communications are ongoing and so. 
And you have addressed yourself in your answers here to the quality of the water when it’s injected into 
the Beaver River. I mentioned earlier that one of the groups that made a presentation at the hearings was 
concerned with the extra flow of water that would aggravate flooding problems in the Beaver River. 
And I’m just not so sure that we should leave that to the Alberta Department of the Environment. 
Certainly they may, in their dealings with Esso Resources, say, well, certainly we don’t want to be 
blamed for putting bad water or whatever effluent that isn’t up to standard into the Beaver River to run 
into Saskatchewan and through Saskatchewan into the Churchill River system. That’s fine. 
 
But I’m not so sure they would be all that interested in the problems of a number of ranchers and people 
there that are depending on the Beaver River hay flats for their hay. The flooding problems are an 
ongoing thing there, and that’s a very real concern. Now I would think your department should be more 
involved than you have indicated here in terms of that particular part of the problem, the Beaver River. 
You know their concern is, Mr. Minister, that the proponent for the project should be somebody at least 
responsible for some effort to control the flood problems in that river. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, again, Mr. Chairman, the prairie provinces’ water board will deal with 
quality and quantity, and it will set the standards as I understand. And really, I have to say that if Alberta 
makes up its mind to use a certain amount of water and to release a certain amount of water, with the 
exception of what we can get in terms of the prairie provinces’ water board rates, so far as quantity and 
quality are concerned, there isn’t very much we can do other than make interventions. That’s the way it 
is. Alberta has a right to use its water. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4370 

Now we can go over there and tell Alberta not to gum up the works over here in Saskatchewan. We can 
make all sorts of interventions and we can say we don’t like it, but if they are determined that they want 
to use a certain quantity, and that quantity is proper relative to the agreements of the prairie provinces’ 
water board, what more can we do? That’s their jurisdiction. They have responsibilities and they have 
rights they can exercise. So we will certainly make our interventions, as we have done. We will certainly 
try to make sure that water flows will not jeopardize resources in the province, either agricultural or 
natural, and that water quantity and qualities will be such that it will maintain the Beaver River as close 
as we can maintain it to the natural characteristics of the river. 
 
But I can’t assure that we can maintain it. Alberta has obviously established some bans on the rivers that 
have made some differences in Saskatchewan. We’re prepared to intervene where we can and whenever 
we can, but more than trying to reach an agreement and have them respond favorably, there are no legal 
means which I know of that we can use. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I won’t prolong this too much longer, but I do suggest to you that there’s a little 
difference here. You say Alberta has every right; it’s their water and so on. But they’re taking the water 
from one river system, pumping it out of there and pumping it back into another one. That has the 
potential, at least from a layman’s point of view . . . That’s what I’m asking your department to do, to be 
sure you’re aware of this. 
 
You say the only thing you can do is intervene. What I am saying to you is if that is the only thing you 
can do, by all means do it, so we know exactly what’s happening. I have a feeling and the indication 
here tonight is that you’re leaving far too much of it to Esso Resources and the Alberta environment 
department and I say that’s not good enough. If intervention is the only thing you can do, then intervene. 
Get in there and find out and tell the people along the Beaver River valley just what your position is. 
Certainly you should have a position on the thing. 
 
What is your position? I asked you this, but you didn’t say. You said your position is to wait for the 
report. Is your position that the surface waste water should go into the Beaver River or should go into 
the North Saskatchewan River, back through the same river that it came from? Or are you going to say, 
if they say it’s fine to go into the Beaver, we’ll let it go? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I can’t answer the question because we don’t have the answers. . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that was the proposition. Esso Resources’ proposal, as we understand 
it, is that they’re going to take water out of the Saskatchewan and put the effluent into the Beaver River. 
That’s their proposition. But at this point in time, we don’t have the benefit of their study, or their 
statement with respect to the implications of it. 
 
What you’re saying (and I take that for its worth) is that yes, I suppose it will have some impact. You’re 
talking about the 600,000 gallons which they’re proposing to take out of the river and put into another 
river. Therefore the flows are going to be significantly higher and at wrong seasons of the year. These 
kinds of things will create implications for ranchers and so on, along the Beaver River. I acknowledge 
that and once we get a chance to view the implications (if they continue with that proposition) of what is 
likely to result in the Beaver River, then we can make an intervention. But we can’t sort of go over there 
and . . . Well, we could, I suppose, and frustrate the thing and frustrate ourselves and frustrate the 
ranchers. But until we know what we are talking about and 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4371 

what we’re intervening against, I think it’s really superfluous for us to be doing so. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Minister, you talk about intervention, but I would say that your intervention, the 
original one at the original hearings, had some impact. As you would know (or I would hope you would 
know), the original proposal by Esso Resources was to take water from Cold Lake. One group 
intervened and said that they felt it would have an effect on the downstream flow by lessening it on the 
Waterhen River and so on. The recommendation in this report is to now go to the Saskatchewan River, 
so your intervention in that case must have had some effect. 
 
It’s before the cabinet and there are some other things that have come into it recently to hold up the 
approval of the project. This is the time now for you people and your department to go in there, to make 
your position clear, if your position is as I think it should be, that the water should go back into the 
North Saskatchewan River where it came from. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I can’t give any further answer, Mr. Chairman, on what I’ve given. I’ve had 
communications ongoing and I will have, with the hon. minister from Alberta. We will continue to have 
those; we will continue to make our points known, continue to make the points that the hon. member 
raises. They’re valid points and valid concerns for his constituents and for Saskatchewan in general. So 
we will continue to make those from time to time. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, the first question I have for you is in the 
environment. I would assume that you should have been responsible for the environment in the schools 
re the insulation that they’re having problems with. I’m wondering if it was your people, or are you 
suggesting that occupational health is responsible? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Or the department of public health, I’m not sure which, but it’s . . . 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — In the northern area, around the mines and so forth . . . By the way, I’m informed 
by occupational health that you’re supposed to be responsible, not them. So when you two guys get your 
act together . . . Mr. Robert Sass has informed me that he believes your department is responsible, not 
his, because that’s an environmental thing and not an occupational health thing. But anyway, on the 
water pollution, air pollution, mine pollution and the land pollution, what amount of staff you have and 
what expertise do they have to do the job? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Eight staff, two with a master of science, engineering technologist, probably an 
engineering degree . . . One is an engineering physicist. One has some radiological training of some 
kind. We’d have to dig out the files on the qualifications is what I’m saying, but we’re just trying to get 
it from memory. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, your people have also been doing some studies on the South 
Saskatchewan River, north of Saskatoon, last summer and the summer before. Are these studies 
in-house studies or are they public studies, and what’s the purpose of them? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The report is not complete. It’s being prepared by a consultant. It has to do 
with examining the water qualities and the effects of the Saskatoon sewage system in the river. 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4372 

MR. KATZMAN: — Is it your department’s responsibility then for the wastes that finally hit that river 
or is it another department as I had thought it was? Municipal affairs I thought was responsible. You are 
responsible? Then, Mr. Minister, downstream from that spot as well as the Saskatoon sewage, you have 
the former mercury sewage that came in from the chemical plants north of the city. Now, I understand 
they have changed their process and their methods and have not been polluting with mercury. Am I 
correct or incorrect on that? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Basically, that’s correct. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, what residue is left from the mercury that was spilling in before? 
Are the lagoons and stuff being cleaned up so that it can’t happen from what was left before in the soil? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I understand from the officials that we believe the containment is sufficiently 
provided for so that any contaminated soils and material are now held on the property. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — With the encroachment of the city, do we have any guarantees that if the city 
should take over that area the soil will be done away with in such a method, there will be no problem left 
behind for the people as we see with Love canal and that type of thing? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — It’s a bit of a hypothetical question. I don’t know when the city is going to 
expand. It’s a viable operation and it’s satisfactorily being carried out now. If the city does expand then I 
guess we’ll have to deal with the problem at that point in time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the chemical plant is now within city limits. I think you’re aware of 
that. Residential and industrial areas are, I would say, within a half-mile of the plant now in many areas. 
It is a problem you’re going to have to deal with very shortly, and I suggest you start to look at it 
because people will begin to want to encroach upon the area. 
 
The second portion of my question refers to the two chemical plants is the – I call it controlled releases 
but I’m not sure if that’s the technically proper term – when they release chemicals into the air, which 
they did last year (I’m told now in discussing it with the chemical plants that it was an accident), and the 
crops in the area were affected. I have spoken with the management of one chemical plant and they have 
informed me that it was an accident rather than a controlled release. Do you monitor or do you give 
permission for people to release chemicals in the air as in controlled releases, and are all accidental 
releases reported to you? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — The answer to the question is yes, we do permit controlled releases. We don’t 
know whether all spills are reported to us or not. We hope they are and they should be, but I couldn’t 
give you a definitive answer that they are. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you say all controlled releases are reported? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Controlled releases are what they say; there is permission given for controlled 
releases. 



 
June 10, 1980 

 

 
4373 

MR. KATZMAN: — O.K. Is there any monitoring provision to check whatever you’ve agreed to allow 
them to release? Are there stations in the area to make sure the figure is correct? Is there a meter which 
shows what the release was? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — If, in a controlled release, you believe the release is going to be made on 
Friday, July 2 or whatever the day is, we’re not going to be up there with a monitor on that day. But 
there is monitoring that goes on at the plants and in the areas where controlled releases are permitted. 
There is periodic monitoring done, and we believe that to be satisfactory. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, let me give you an example. When Eldorado was doing its study re 
the refinery, they had things which measured the change in the atmosphere and so forth, the chemicals 
within the area, located at a certain spot and they read it every so often. Do you have these little 
machines you leave sitting there and every so often you read them to check what the environment’s 
doing? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — We do. We read them off the other day to you, where they were located and so 
on, but yes, we do. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, would you supply me with a copy of the report once it’s tabled to 
yourself, on the South Saskatchewan? Secondly, could your people indicate (and I think the concern is 
to the people in the area who live near the two chemical plants) or send me a letter indicating what the 
change in the releases has been and if the environment has changed because of these releases from the 
two chemical plants? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we’ll try to accommodate the hon. member on both cases. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the fires in northern Saskatchewan, over the peat moss, will burn 
for quite a lengthy time. In certain areas the uranium is very close to the surface, close to the peat moss 
area. Cluff Lake is an example of something close to the surface. I am informed by people in the 
uranium industry that fire will cause heat which causes the radiation to be released from uranium, which 
could be a dangerous dosage. Are you doing any studies on this? Are you checking to see whether the 
people who are working in the industry are safe or not? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I don’t know. I don’t have an answer. I would only be suspecting again. 
If that’s the case I don’t know what we can do about it in the sense that we’re going to have forest fires, 
I guess, and there is uranium up there and that’s been the case for the last 100 years or so. But we can try 
to get an answer for you. I don’t have anything specific on it. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Yes there have been fires and only the Lord can put them out in some cases and 
we sure wish His assistance at times. But if it’s true, at least in the areas that we know of, maybe we’ll 
need a method of fighting fires whereby we won’t put the men into danger. 
 
I am told by people in the industry that under certain conditions the moss will continue to burn and heat 
the uranium and cause release of radiation. If that is the case, most of the aerial maps will indicate to you 
where the danger areas are. You pinpoint them as hot spots and tell the guys to beware. I am certain 
there are areas that you know now are hot spots and therefore if there’s a fire in them firefighters should 
back away from the centre hot spot and work the edges. My concern is to make sure that the fellow who 



 
June 10, 1980 
 

 
4374 

goes up to fight the fire, even though he’s willing to fight the fire, doesn’t come away with something he 
didn’t expect he was getting into. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, could you inform this House why your department was not called 
in originally before the Key Lakes were drained? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The company responsible did come to the government to 
seek advice for the draining of the lakes in the area. The Department of the Environment was involved 
in the decision which led to permission being given by the Department of Mineral Resources for the 
lakes to be drained. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 
 


