






















































Hansard: March 25, 1980


1017 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 25,1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, and again members of the Assembly, I would like, as 
I did yesterday, to welcome and introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the members the rest 
of the group of Grade 8 students from Weyburn Junior High, some 58 in number today. They are sitting 
in the west gallery and are accompanied by their teachers, Jim Nedelcov and Gloria Garrison Again their 
bus drivers are Mr. Johnson and Mr. Hanning. I think it’s worth mentioning, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. 
Nedelcov has accompanied this Grade 8 group of students from junior high each year for, I believe, 14 
consecutive years. I’ll ask Mr. Nedelcov to stand, please. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — I am sure, Mr. Speaker, it is our wish that their visit here again in their provincial 
capital and their Legislative Building proves very knowledgeable and pleasant. As I said yesterday, this 
is another way to celebrate Saskatchewan in its 75th anniversary. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina North-East): — I would like to introduce to you and to the members of 
the legislature a group of 63 students. They are Grade 6, 7 and 8 students from St. Philip’s School 
located in my constituency. They are accompanied here by their teachers, Mr. Schuba and Mr. 
Thompson. I hope they have a pleasant experience in the legislature today and that it will not only be 
pleasant but a memorable and a learning experience. It is my intention to meet with the students and 
their teachers after 2:30 p.m. and perhaps we will have a chance to discuss the proceedings they will 
witness for a half an hour or so. Again, welcome to the legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE(Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure I introduce to you and 
to the Assembly, some 14 Grade 3 and 4 students from Saar School at Kronau. Kronau of course is a 
very famous community in Saskatchewan, and I think Canada, with a population of approximately 100. 
It has had four provincial junior curling championships, I believe, in the last three years. This year the 
provincial junior girls champions were from Kronau. They are accompanied by Mr. Tim Geiger, Mrs. 
Ferner and Mrs. Euteneir. I welcome you all. I know all members of the Assembly will join with me in 
welcoming the students and those escorting them, and in wishing them an interesting afternoon and a 
safe journey home. I look forward to meeting them a little later this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1018 

Request for Driver’s Licence re Handicapped Case 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney 
General, last week I personally gave you a news release that I issued in February of this year. It 
pertained to a handicapped young man, 18 years old, trying to obtain a driver’s licence, class 3 with air. 
Have you reviewed this case and what are you intending to do with this? 
 
MR. R.J. ROMANOW(Attorney General): — I have not yet reviewed this case. This matter is 
properly within the jurisdiction of the minister in charge of the highway traffic board. I am lending my 
assistance as a member of the Executive Council to see what, if anything, can be done on the issue. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When Mr. Attorney General, can I have an answer from 
this council? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I will not bind myself by any specific time. All I know is that I’ll 
be discussing this with the minister in charge, the Hon. Eiling Kramer, whose prime responsibility this 
matter is, and in due course he will be making a statement to an announcement to the member. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Attorney General, I think it’s a nuts and 
bolts question. It shouldn’t have come this far in the Chamber. Is it a policy of your government to allow 
a young man to take a written test and six months later when he comes in to take the driver’s test to be 
told he’s not allowed to take the test? A review board from the highway traffic board stated the young 
man will not be allowed to take this test until he produces a satisfactory medical report. Mr. Attorney 
General, is the government telling the young man that he has to grow a new arm before he can have the 
test? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the facts of the case involve an application by a young 
Saskatchewan citizens to drive what may be described as a transport truck or a very heavy-duty vehicle 
truck, one that involves air brakes. We all know the size of the steering wheel and the size of the 
machine that’s involved. Clearly, given the unfortunate physical disability the person has, it is 
understandable that the highway traffic board would want to review all of the facts and circumstances as 
carefully as they can. I don’t begrudge the hon. member raising this is in the legislature; quite obviously 
that’s his right. I was somewhat alarmed and concerned when I saw it 10 days ago, two weeks ago on 
CFCQ television in Saskatoon (the public media) with the member making these statements much in 
advance of bringing it to the attention of the House. All I can say to the member is that the highway 
traffic board, under the leadership of the minister in charge, is fully aware of the circumstances. I am 
looking at it as in effect an assistant to the minister and an announcement will be made in due course. 
 

Western Response to Quebec Referendum 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, in light of the announced support of Kevin Drummond, an Anglophone and former Liberal 
member of the Quebec Assembly to support the separatist cause in Quebec, it would appear this is 
another indicator of the success sought by the PQ in their quest for independence. Have you or any of 
your ministers discussed the probable out come of a separate Quebec in Canada, especially the western 
premiers? And, if so, what future do you see for Canada without Quebec? If the 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1019 

PQ loses the referendum, do you agree with the attitude in Quebec will never be the same? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have naturally discussed with a number of 
people the upcoming Quebec referendum. We do not, as a government, have any proposed course of 
action in the event that the yes vote in the referendum prevails. I do not hold the view that this 
necessarily foretells the withdrawal of Quebec from Canada. I think that will develop or not develop in 
the months and years following the referendum. Accordingly, to directly answer the hon. member’s 
question, we as a government do not have a contingency plan to deal with that possibility and I’m not 
aware whether other western premiers do. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, when Premier Levesque and his party came 
to office in Quebec, you stated that all provincial leaders should assist Quebec Premier Rene Levesque 
in bringing good government to Quebec. Did your government, or to your knowledge any other 
provincial government, offer or give any assistance to Quebec and, if so, what kind of assistance? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I really cannot answer that question from memory and I suppose 
all hon. members, at least on this side of the House, are conscious of the fact that we should not rely 
upon our memory in answering questions. Accordingly, I am unable to answer the question posed by the 
hon. member as to whether or not any agency of the Government of Saskatchewan may have had since 
1976 any dealings with the Government of Quebec which might be construed as assistance. 
 

SGI Limitations 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister responsible 
for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, last year specially on November 21, SGI 
introduced a so-called replacement cost coverage for contents of a residence and you subsequently 
advertised this to the people of Saskatchewan and the policy holders. I refer to the way you put it, is that 
the articles can be repaired or replaced at today’s prices. In reviewing your endorsement, Mr. Minister, 
why did you intentionally or otherwise mislead your policy holders? I am going to refer specifically to 
limitations where the limitations are 400 per cent and further are you aware that private insurance 
companies do not have any such limitations? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take that as notice. 
 

Closing of Kerrobert Courthouse 
 
MR. R. L. ANDREW (Kindersley): —A question to the Attorney General. On March 20 in this 
Assembly, in reply to a question of mine, you indicated that your department had no intention of closing 
the Kerrobert Courthouse and further that employees (in plural) would be kept at the Kerrobert 
Courthouse. I’m advised by the present staff at the Kerrobert Courthouse (who are two in number) that 
the sheriff, who is one of them, has been transferred to Prince Albert. The local registrar, who is the 
other employee, has been given a choice of either moving to Swift Current or to Yorkton, failing that to 
have her employment terminated. My question to the Attorney General is (that seems somewhat 
inconsistent) would you elaborate as to exactly what service you intend to maintain at the Kerrobert 
Courthouse? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I believe what I said to the hon. member is quoted on page 830 of 
Hansard, March 20, 1980. I think I said: 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1020 

The plan is not to close down the Kerrobert Courthouse. The plan is to keep the Kerrobert 
Courthouse open, to keep employees at the Kerrobert Courthouse, but there may be a 
reorganization of functions. 

 
I think that is substantially what the hon. member said in his question. The present idea is to give the 
Kerrobert Courthouse a function other than the present court registry function, one which involves a 
sheriff’s function, putting emphasis on that particular approach. A lay-off notice has been given 
apparently to a judicial officer in the registry, the intention is to place a deputy sheriff in that particular 
position. Now, as I indicated to the hon. member on Thursday last and I repeat again, I would be 
prepared to meet with him to receive his views as to what should or shouldn’t be done and we would 
take that into careful consideration. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary to that, Mr. Attorney General. The latest statistical information on 
the use of various courthouses in the province of Saskatchewan in various functions — 13 in number — 
would indicate that the use of the sheriff’s office in Kerrobert is very minimal indeed. However with the 
use of the local registrar’s offices as a filing place, which as I understand all files are going to be moved 
up to North Battleford, the judicial center of Kerrobert is indeed quite an active local registrar’s office. It 
is seventh in number of total fees received of the 19 courthouses. It is tenth in surrogate applications and 
twelfth in Court of Queen’s Bench trials. On the other hand the courthouses which seem to be located in 
places like Shaunavon, Assiniboia, Wynyard are used substantially less . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I take it the member has a question. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is, it seems to me the courthouses which are being closed down are 
the courthouse in Kerrobert, the courthouse in Moosomin, the courthouse in Arcola. Why is it the 
courthouses that are being closed down are all in seats represented by our side and the ones that are 
maintained are the ones represented by members on your side? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. I have indicated on at least two or three occasions 
for almost a week now, that I’d be pleased to listen to the legitimate representations of the member for 
Kindersley or the member for Moosomin on this issue. I want to inform this House I’ve heard not a 
word from either of them on this issue other than raised in the House — raised in the context that 
somehow it’s picked on the opposition side, I can tell you that we have proposals which will affect 
members on our side as well and Assiniboia is one and how that is to work out in due course I don’t 
know. I’ve said to the member opposite that I’d be pleased to sit down to talk to him about it or let them 
take just five minutes to jot down their ideas and their arguments. 
 
I’ll review the figures. I get my advice based on the Grotsky committee which did a circulation of the 
province on this issue, based on the law society and based on the representations of my department. If 
they’re in error, we can make some changes. So, I simply ask them to put it down in writing and forward 
it to me and I’ll have my department people give me an explanation on it. 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — A supplementary to the Attorney General. In reply to my 
question regarding the judicial center in the town of Moosomin, the Attorney General replied stating that 
no final decision had been made with respect to the judicial center in Moosomin. He had said and I 
accept his statement at that time, that he would 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1021 

accept a presentation from myself. Upon looking into matters later on, the next day and the day after 
that, I find out that in fact the deputy sheriff had been called into the city of Regina. She had been given 
notice that her employment would be terminated and therefore I have chosen the only means by which I 
can present a case to the Attorney General — through the Assembly. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order, order! I’ll take the next question. The member for Kindersley. Order! 
The member for Kindersley. 
 
MR. R. L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — The question to the Attorney General. He indicated in his 
previous statement that they were acting pursuant to the Grotsky commission and the Grotsky hearing. 
As I raised earlier, Mr. Grotsky on two occasions was invited to meet with the Kerrobert Bar 
Association and at no time did Grotsky even attend in Kerrobert to hear the representations of the bar in 
Kerrobert. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’d like to make a minute or so speech in response, if I may. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I can’t permit the Attorney General to make a speech. I realize the member 
was making a speech . . . Order, order! Well, it works this way in case the Attorney General doesn’t 
understand it. If he stands up and at the front of his comments says I want to make a speech in the 
question period. I’m going to rule him out of order right away. If the member for Kindersley is 
preambling his question, I’m going to listen to the preamble and after the preamble is over I expect a 
question. I ruled the member for Kindersley out of order because he had no question, he merely made a 
statement and that’s an abuse of the rules. I’ll take the member for Swift Current. 
 

Attitude of Federal Government 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, in view of recent events in Quebec 
pertaining to the referendum, you stated at the time of the PQ (Parti-Quebecois) victory that if the 
federal government continues an attitude of moving in on the provinces, it would be disastrous for the 
future of Canada because it would increase existing tensions to the breaking point. Mr. Premier, I agree 
with that statement but therefore, do you believe that Ottawa has changed its attitude and how do you 
expect the provinces, especially the western provinces, to react to centralist policies designed to benefit 
central Canada? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I had detected some change in attitude by the governments at 
Ottawa as indicated by the successive federal-provincial conferences where governments at Ottawa at 
least indicated that they would agree to changes in the constitution to which previously they were quite 
opposed. I do not believe that these indications from Ottawa are sufficiently vigorous to meet the 
concerns of regions such as western Canada and accordingly it will be necessary for spokespersons for 
western Canada to continue to press its case. I believe some modest movement is detectable at Ottawa. I 
do not believe it to be sufficient. 
 
MR. HAM: — This modest response from Ottawa, Mr. Premier — could you give to this House, or 
supply to me personally, a list of the advantages of changes that have taken place in Ottawa over the last 
several years that you, as Premier of Saskatchewan, have been involved with? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I clearly will not list from memory anything in this House at this 
time. With respect to supplying the member with them, I would suggest 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1022 

that I would be willing to do that. I would think it would be better if I understood to have one of my 
colleagues do that following the consideration of the estimates of intergovernmental affairs, because 
there will be an opportunity then to canvass them all and it may not be necessary to list them. 
Furthermore, obviously a good number of them are questions of judgment, so with that in mind I would 
say to the hon. member that I or one of my colleagues would be happy to send him a list of changes 
which have been made. I do not suggest it will necessarily be exhaustive because clearly whether or not 
a change is to the benefit of western Canada is debatable in many instances. 
 

Future of Judicial Centres 
 
MR. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — A question to the Attorney General. Because the member for 
Kindersley and I, the member for Moosomin, have not ample opportunity to present a case to you, 
would you in fact take it unto your self to make a presentation to both of us as to the proceedings on the 
future on the judicial centers? Since you and your department have chosen to just take action without 
any consultation, will you now, Mr. Attorney General, look into the matter on our behalf and bring us a 
presentation? We don’t have time to present one. Will you? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the hon. members of the House, and particularly the 
constituents of Moosomin and Kerrobert, to note the fact that the member says they don’t have the time 
to speak up for these matters of constituency interest and that I should do so. I want to tell the hon. 
member that the overall policy was announced in the budget speech. That was clearly enunciated by the 
Minister of Finance — the overall policy. The details of the policy can be debated during the estimates 
of the Attorney General. More particularly they can be debated during the course of proposed legislation 
on court merger, which will involve a reorganization of judicial centers and a realignment of some 
judicial functions — the subject of our debate. Furthermore, if in the interim the two members can find 
some time to sit down and give me some arguments on some points of consideration, the sooner the 
better, I would welcome such. I don’t meant that in a sarcastic way. I would welcome it. I would like to 
have the department check what information they have against its own, and would be prepared even to 
meet with them, but I think it is not too much to ask the hon. member to give me a little note in writing 
indicating what their points are on this matter. 
 
MR. LANE — Mr. Attorney General, do you take under advisement the information read into this 
Assembly today by the member for Kindersley, as to the amount of income fees derived at, in particular, 
the judicial center of Kerrobert, which indicates it is higher up on the totem pole in terms of earning than 
some of the others where changes are not being contemplated? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the members simply refuse to put something down in 
writing and I will have to go to Hansard to take a look at the few figures the member for Kindersley 
stated there. I will be pleased to take a look at that and if that amounts to the submission I certainly will 
give it all the weight it deserves and carefully consider it. 
 
MR. LANE — Supplementary. Would the Attorney General be prepared to take in writing the list of 
figures here (I will give them to him now) and take those under advisement? 
 

Sale of Draglines 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1023 

MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, a few short months ago Sask Power Corporation 
purchased two 90-yard draglines to the tune of $70 million or something like that — one for Coronach 
and one for Boundary Dam. I understand (is this correct?) that you are now in the process of the possible 
sale of one and you are selling the second one. Is this a fact? 
 
HON. J. R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is yes, we have 
found that it is in the best interests of the corporation and therefore the people that the corporation 
services with electrical power resell those draglines at some substantial profit to the corporation and 
lease those draglines from a company which will be the owner of those draglines. I would suggest to the 
member if he wants to pursue this further that a more appropriate time would be during Crown 
corporations when we will be studying the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s fiscal year activities. 
 
MR. LARTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying now that SPC is getting out of the 
coal mining business? Are you leasing these back to the private sector as well? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the corporation will be leasing the draglines from the leasing company 
and as far as the operativeness of the draglines and the objective which SPC set out to achieve in the 
coal mining sector, it has not changed in any respect whatsoever, only it is not and will not be the owner 
of the draglines during the lifetime of those coal operations and the need of those draglines. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, can you tell us what length of lease 
there is on these draglines? Is it a long-term lease? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, yes it is a long-term lease. I suggested in my initial response to the 
hon. member that I think it would be more appropriate and I would be willing to give him more precise 
information during Crown corporations. I think I could best do that at that time and I am sure the 
member would be satisfied with the government’s response. 
 

Drop in Price of Yellowcake 
 
MR. LANE — I would like to direct a question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, on March 19 
I asked you a question regarding the significant drop in the price of yellowcake from approximately 
$43.80 (U.S.) to $38 (U.S.) per pound within the last year and whether in light of the softening of the 
markets, you would be prepared to table for this Assembly and the public of Saskatchewan, the 
government’s marketing studies on uranium? At that time you indicated you wanted the answer referred 
to the minister responsible for SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation) whose 
response to me was that to get some idea where the uranium industry was going, to look at the results of 
the referendum in Sweden. 
 
Now the referendum in Sweden came down on Sunday and it indicated (I think in fairness) a restraint, 
that the Government of Sweden would be limited to no more than six new generating plants. Keeping in 
perspective that this is a country which obtains more of its electricity per capita from reactors than any 
other country in Europe, I think it indicates a restraint and a deep concern about further . . . 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1024 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I can’t permit the member to go on. He is making a statement; he is 
not asking a question. 
 
MR. LANE — Would the Premier now be prepared to table the marketing studies the government has 
with regard to uranium mining and world markets which the province is looking at? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation to deal with that. By way of a comment on the preamble I think the 
significance of the Swedish referendum was that they now have six reactors and the vote was that that 
move from six to twelve. They now have six operating reactors, Mr. Speaker. The vote was that they 
move from six to a maximum of twelve. That was the vote. Whether or not that is restraint is a matter of 
judgment. Clearly it is a doubling and more than doubling because the newer reactors are larger than the 
current ones in place; a more than doubling of the capacity of the Swedish system based upon nuclear 
power. 
 
With respect to the marketing reports, I will ask my colleague to respond. 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the answer with respect 
to market reports has changed any from the last time the member asked the question. With respect to the 
Swedish referendum, I think it is widely viewed as a positive step with respect to nuclear power. It will 
more than double the requirements of Sweden for uranium. I think the vote was about three to two. I 
haven’t got the exact figures. With respect to marketing studies there are several firms and agencies 
around the country, including some United Nations’ organizations, that produce public information with 
respect to the future forecasts for uranium. Obviously companies have their own private information as 
well. If the member is interested in the forecasts of some widely respected bodies, I suggest he look at 
some of the information such as the Untied Nations, etc. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Payment to Hog Producers 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform this 
Assembly that a payment of $156,775 will be made to hog producers enrolled in the Saskatchewan Hog 
Assured Returns program (SHARP). 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Payment is for the marketing period October to December 1979. 
Approximately 510 eligible producers will be receiving cheques on 34,219 market hogs. The average 
payment will be approximately $300 per producer. This is the first pay-out under SHARP since it was 
introduced in 1976. The payment was triggered by the combination of lower prices and increased 
production costs, due primarily to higher interest rates and increased feed costs. 
 
Pay-outs occur when market prices drop below the SHARP support price. The support price for the 
fourth quarter of 1979 was $59.82 per hundredweight dressed, while the market price for the same 
period averaged $56.76 per hundredweight dressed. The total cost of production was calculated at 
$65.26 per hundredweight dressed. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1025 

Mr. Speaker, the situation in the hog industry has changed dramatically over the last year. Market price 
for the fourth quarter of 1978 was $76.29 per hundredweight dressed, and total cost to production was 
calculated at $56.38 per hundredweight dressed. Not only have market prices dropped about $20 per 
hundredweight in the past year but production costs have increased significantly during the year due to 
interest rates, utility rates, higher feed costs and higher construction costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SHARP is a voluntary program available to all Saskatchewan hog producers. It provides a 
reasonable minimum price based on the cost of production. Producers contribute to the plan and those 
contributions are matched by the provincial government. SHARP is backed by the provincial 
government and administered by the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission on a fee-for-service 
basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, it is likely that all hog producers will be eligible for payments under the 
Federal Agricultural Stabilization Act for the 1979-80 fiscal year, but the amount of the federal 
payments will not be known until sometime later this spring. I have in the past asked that the 
responsibility for agricultural stabilization rest with the federal government. It should not rest with the 
province. Nevertheless we have a program in place in this province which I have announced will expire 
December 31, 1980. I think it is important to point that out. I intend to meet with the federal Minister of 
Agriculture in the very near future to determine whether he plans to introduce an improved federal 
stabilization plan incorporating many of the similar outstanding features which are in operation in the 
Saskatchewan plan. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, participants in SHARP are now benefiting from 
premiums paid into the SHARP Fund by themselves, and by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the Minister of 
Agriculture. I think he deserves a degree of credit for the payment to the hog producers but I don’t want 
him to rest too comfortably. The fact is the plan is voluntary and contributory so he is, to a large extent, 
giving the hog producers their own money. Secondly, we had the value added by secondary industries in 
Saskatchewan such as kill plants, processing plants etc., the cost of production, the cost of 
transportation, etc. would be less, and to a large extent, the mess that the hog industry’s in today 
wouldn’t exist 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPEAKER’S RULING ON A POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day, I was asked yesterday to peruse the verbatim record of 
the House and come back with a comment for the member for Thunder Creek. I took the opportunity of 
perusing the Debates and Proceedings, as I hope all members did who were involved in any questions 
with regard to the rules yesterday. I find that the member for Thunder Creek had asked me why he was 
denied questions with regard to the “conversations behind the rail with the member for Arm River.” I 
examined the record and I find that upon examining the record, the decision I made at that time that the 
member was out of order, is quite in order. The decision I made at that time was in order. Essentially it 
is that questions must not repeat in substance a question already answered or to which an answer has 
been refused. Just to clarify it completely as the member, I know, will want to go back and check the 
precedence, I’ll cite Beauschesne’s parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, chapter five, Rule 
171 sub (c) and (d). 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1026 

Sub (c) says: 
 

Multiply with slight variation a similar question on the same point. 
 
And sub point (d) says: 
 

Repeat in substance a question already answered or to which an answer has been refused. 
 
I will also cite for the sake of the member for Thunder Creek, May’s Parliamentary Procedure, 
Eighteenth Edition, page 319 to 331, and in this particular instance I’m referring to sub (g). 
 

Questions must not repeat in substance a question already answered or to which an answer has 
been refused. 

 
I hope that will satisfy the member and the members of the House as to the validity of the ruling 
yesterday. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — May I comment on your ruling, Mr. Speaker? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — No, no. Does the member have a point of order? 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — The point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that Hansard 
doesn’t verify what you’ve just said. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order . . . order! I think I’ve made my ruling with regard to the matter. I’ve 
examined the record very carefully, and I stand by my ruling I made yesterday that the member was out 
of order at that time. That’s why he was not permitted further questions. Examination of the record by 
any fair minded person will show that. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Annual Report — Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day I want to take this opportunity to suggest to the members 
that the eleventh annual report of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association will be laid on their 
desk probably later today. I would ask all members to keep April 9, Wednesday, open for the annual 
CPA dinner and meeting. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 33 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin) moved, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley (Mr. 
Taylor) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 33 showing: 
 

(1) The names, objectives, descriptions and budget of all Department of Co-operation and 
co-operative Development programmes in force on March 1, 1980; (2) whether since March 
1, 1979 there were any programs (a) curtailed, (b) discontinued, and in each instance the 
reasons. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1027 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on the motion which I have before the Assembly — a fairly simple 
motion, I think. It’s not asking that much from this government. But what I have observed, Mr. Speaker, 
is that we have now 562 motions for return (debatable) and I am finding that the Attorney General, as 
House Leader for this government, is taking all questions and moving them to motion debatable. There 
seems to be no desire, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think we better not go on any further, unless we clarify what we’re talking about 
at this time. The question before the House is motions for return (debatable) and it’s that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for Return No. 33, dealing with the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. If I allow the member for Moosomin to discuss the actions of the Attorney General with 
regard to a multitude of items before the House, then obviously I have to allow the Attorney General the 
opportunity to respond. I’m not prepared to allow the member for Moosomin to do that or to allow the 
Attorney General the opportunity to respond. So, the member will have to confine himself to what’s 
before the house at this time. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, if I may just make a note on a point of order then. Are you saying 
that I, at this time, cannot speak on this motion? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The member has begun to speak and when the member is out of order I will 
make an attempt to call him to order. Until such a time as he’s out of order, I’ll allow him to speak. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, then I will proceed. Unfortunately, it would seem that you, as 
Speaker of this House, did not follow my remarks as they were relating to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The member is now commenting on a ruling that’s made by the Chair. He’s 
in effect challenging the Chair and the member is not permitted to do that. The member may speak to the 
motion before the House. If the member is in order, I won’t interrupt the member. As a matter of fact, I 
will make every attempt to prevent other members from interrupting if they try to do that. So I ask the 
member to go ahead within the rules of the House and talk about the item that’s before us. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — All right, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, with reference to the motion that I do have 
before the House, simply asking for names, objections, descriptions, and budgets of all Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development programs that were in force on March 1, 1980; and 
whether since March 1, 1979 there were any programs curtailed or discontinued and in each instance the 
reasons. 
 
I would find, Mr. Speaker, that that would be reasonable information to be seeking from this 
government — reasonable information on behalf of the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. Surely if we’re to do our job as an opposition, then we’re going to be questioning the 
minister with reference to his department. I am, Mr. Speaker, the critic for co-operation and co-operative 
development, therefore it’s understandable that I would ask questions of the minister on this particular 
department. That is why I have put these questions before the Assembly. Those are simple reasons for 
wanting information. Surely, it must be understood by this Assembly that the members of the opposition 
as well speak for the various departments of government and that not just government is the holy master 
of all departments, Mr. Speaker. Surely, with these numbers of resolutions before this House, it is an 
indication to this Assembly that this opposition is clearly concerned 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1028 

about all departments of government and is scrutinizing those departments. 
 
There is no mysterious reason why I seek this information. There is not one of these members who has 
done some evil, some wrong that I am trying to get to and I say that to the Attorney General. This 
information is very clear cut. It is difficult if not impossible to get it any other way from the government. 
That is why it is before the House and that is why I feel this government has a duty, a responsibility to 
the taxpayers, the people of Saskatchewan, to reply — not to move every question in this House into an 
area of delay by making them debatable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to leave the responsibility with this government. I am going to leave the 
responsibility with the member responsible for the department. I have the question before the House and 
want to leave that responsibility with this government and with this minister responsible. If he is 
unprepared to answer these questions, let that be his responsibility. And he laughs and he doesn’t even 
laugh well, I might add, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t even laugh well. He doesn’t dress well. He doesn’t 
laugh well and he doesn’t speak well. He should be in a well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that this government is irresponsible. Count the issues we have put 
before them. Count the issues we have on this government and I say very simply, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
responsibility of government and that is the responsibility I am putting to you today. There is the 
question. It is a simple question and I would appreciate the answer. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move Return No. 33. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 34 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 34 showing: 
 

(1) The names, objectives, descriptions and budgets of all Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan programs in force on March 1, 1980; (2) Since March 1, 1979 whether any 
programs were (a) curtailed (b) discontinued, and in each instance the reasons. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 35 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin) moved, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. 
Berntson) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 35 showing: 
 

(1) The names, objectives, descriptions and budgets of all Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporations programs in force on March 1, 1980; (2) Since March 1, 1979 whether any 
programs were (a) curtailed (b) discontinued, and in each instance the reasons. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — I’ll be asking the members of the House to vote in favor of this 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1029 

motion as we have the others. I do simply, however, want to point out to the members of the Assembly 
that this and the other two orders which we have just passed will necessitate a massive amount of work 
on the part of the governments and the agencies involved, keeping in mind that what’s being asked by 
Return No. 35 are names, objectives, descriptions and budgets of all housing corporation programs in 
force on March 1, 1980 and then a curtailment of that. Mr. Speaker, I fully expect that the 
documentation will be very extensive indeed and large. I fully expect it will take some time for 
preparation. 
 
Those who would argue that this is simply asking don’t understand the process and the breadth and 
depth of this question. I think in some ways, looking at the estimates for the years under review, 
probably coupled with the annual reports, would get all the information necessary for the members in 
this regard. It would be a simple matter of doing your homework and looking at the annual reports for 
1979-80. The annual report when it comes down to 1980-81 — compare the estimates. There you will 
have a budget description of the estimates, you’ve got your information and the questions can then be 
zeroed in. But the member does not see fit to do it that way. The member wants us to in effect set out 
these matters. We’ll do it but I simply tell the members of the House, it will be a very large volume of 
work. We’ll work at it as quickly as we can but it will be quite some time before we can achieve the 
necessary operation. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 36 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown —Elrose (Mr. 
Swan) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 36 showing: 
 

The amount of money the Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development has spent on 
(a) renovating (b) redecorating his office since March 1, 1979. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’ll be introducing an amendment to the motion proposed to be passed by the 
hon. member for Moosomin. The amendment will redirect the sum to the effect of requesting for the 
moneys spent by the Department of Government Services for each capital renovation project undertaken 
as part of long-term regeneration programs of the Legislative Building, project description and total 
project cost. The Department of Government Services I am advised maintains records on a project basis 
and not on the basis of individual ministerial suites. There is as you know a game plan of a long-term 
strategy for renovation of the entire building involving the Assembly, opposition offices, Leader of the 
Opposition’s offices and the like. These are apparently done on a project cost basis and that is the way 
the information can be provided. Over and above that I would simply point out if we were to be 
technical in this answer, I suppose we could agree to it and then answer it as nil since the Minister of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development spends nothing on the renovation of his office; it’s spent 
by the government services ministry. 
 
In an effort not to prolong the proceedings of the House and to get at what presumably members 
opposite want to try to get at, if we can provide that information I would move, seconded by the member 
for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) that all the words after the world “money” be deleted and the following 
substituted therefore: 
 

spent by the Department of Government Services since April 1, 1978, for 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1030 

each capital renovation project undertaken as part of the long-term regeneration program for the 
Legislative Building: (a) project description and (b) total project cost. 

 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Attorney General, your amendment obviously will affect the 
next question on the list because it’s asking for another department. You will either make a similar 
amendment or suggest that it is covered by your present amendment to Return No. 36. If you are 
suggesting that, can you or can the Department of Government Services suggest they did five ministers’ 
offices and the cost for the five of them was X amount of dollars? Can they answer in that way so that 
we can say O.K., for the four ministers’ office they did in this wing the cost was X amount of dollars. I 
believe from my past experience with government services they can answer it that way and then they 
can say O.K., for the three offices in this wing it cost us so much money to redo that wing. Well, when 
you do the whole second floor you, I assume, can suggest how many offices were in it and what the 
costs were. Maybe the Minister of Labour can get in and give us some information. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 37 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 37 showing: 
 

The amount of money the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan has spent on (a) renovating (b) 
redecorating his office since March 1, 1979. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated in previous debates and I shall indicate it 
again here that I’ve given the statement with respect to the information as we think it is available. I 
cannot elaborate any further on that. I would say to the hon. member and the hon. members opposite that 
one way they could handle this is to withdraw these questions — the subsequent questions starting with 
No. 37 of this kind. 
 
Our options, as a government are twofold. We could defeat it on the argument that what information is 
available, as it’s been indicated to us, would be provided in the earlier return, if possible (although the 
ministerial suite matter is a different issue), or we could pass it. If we pass it our answer here would be 
nil, because as I said earlier, the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan does not spend any money on 
renovating; it’s the Minister of Government Services and that’s covered in the amendment. So perhaps 
the members opposite could do us a favor — when these kinds get up, to withdraw. If not, as far as I am 
concerned, it doesn’t matter whether we accept it or otherwise; there’s no real relevance to the thing. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the best situation here would be to defeat this motion and hope that on the 
subsequent ones the members will withdraw them. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 38 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 38 showing: 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1031 

Whether Norcrush Inc. received any grants or loans from the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 39 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for return No. 39 showing: 
 

Whether Norcrush Inc. received any grants or loans from the Department of Highways. If so, the 
amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 40 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 40 showing: 
 

Whether Norcrush Inc. received any grants or loans from SEDCO. If so, the amount and 
purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I would simply like to have it on the record that the government has some 
concerns about the overall policy of answering questions of this nature, as they relate to SEDCO. I am 
not going to urge the defeat of this motion, but I do indicate that members on all sides, government and 
opposition, should contemplate the question of SEDCO — which in effect acts as a banker — revealing 
information that is pertinent to its dealings with business clients. 
 
We have articulated on other occasions our concern on this. If you have some businesses and you are 
involved with SEDCO — and it cuts all ways whether you are in government or in opposition — I think 
a good question really has to be raised as to whether or not, as a principle, the banker should be 
obligated to provide those kinds of details. We have taken the position that this should be very jealously 
guarded, so with respect to this matter I would not want it to be read — I want to make this clear — as a 
precedent, that the government by agreeing to the passage of this particular matter is agreeing thereby to 
a new policy for SEDCO. We will reserve the right to take a position in future cases relating to SEDCO 
information as they should arise on the question of privilege. But I say on a general point, I think it is 
not a desirable direction to head and perhaps members could reconsider thrusts in this area. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t mind making a comment on this. I agree 
with the Attorney General that in banking procedures there are certain things you shouldn’t know. If it is 
current business this is true, but in the case of SEDCO — many times we are referred to the Crown 
corporation of SEDCO, and as you know we can only get information on the year under review. Most of 
the time, or a good percentage of the time, the information we are trying to obtain from SEDCO is about 
an account which has become delinquent. We are not attempting to get into the business of the person 
who has borrowed the money from SEDCO. I just wanted to make this observation because lots of times 
we are referred to Crown corporations and this is the reason a question like this would come up in the 
House, not necessarily referring to this 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1032 

question. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the comments the 
Attorney General made. SEDCO, as I understand it, was structured as, and is, a lender of last resort. It is 
not a bank out in the market, competing for the type of business that other banks or other financial 
institutions compete for. Furthermore, SEDCO is handling taxpayers’ funds, public funds, and when we 
ask for this kind of information I think it is very responsible on our part to do so, to know where and 
what loans and for what purpose they are being made. 
 
I can’t agree with the Attorney General at all in stating that it is a matter not in the public interest. I 
believe any time that the government, through a Crown corporation or any of the departments, is 
handling public funds, it is certainly a matter of public interest. Inasmuch as the Crown corporation of 
SEDCO is supposedly not competing for this kind of business, but is there only to accommodate when 
so needed, I don’t think the Attorney General makes a case at all. 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce: — Referring to the secrecy of some of the 
information with respect to SEDCO, I am concerned as to the types of questions and when the questions 
are asked with respect to certain clients within SEDCO. I don’t think there is any doubt about it that if 
the questions were related to projects referring to SEDCO which are current and not bothersome to the 
point where the client is delinquent and what not that answer would be given. Because the questions are 
related to clients who are in trouble it is very difficult for SEDCO’s information to be made public. 
Owing to the nature of the particular question it might jeopardize the position of that particular client 
and the enterprise which he is involved in. We are there to protect both the client and the enterprise 
which he is involved in. Therefore that is the problem. It is true that we refer you to the Crown 
corporations because at that point in time the people of the organization are there are we can give you 
more information on the year under review. But if you ask a particular question with reference to a 
client’s involvement, that’s his personal business. 
 
I would ask the members opposite if a private banker is involved with an enterprise, if we have the right 
to go and ask the bank about a particular client he has and whether the bank will give you information? 
 
I am sorry about that. I have never had the opportunity to go to a bank and ask the banker about my 
friend opposite, what business he is involved in and any particular interest in his business. But that is 
absolutely not true. 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, and the minister in charge of SEDCO, it seems 
to me that quite often SEDCO puts out news releases pertaining to grants and loans made to various 
business people throughout the province. I see no difference between them releasing information, than 
for the members on this side of the House, as duly elected members of this legislature, to ask for that 
information. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, I think the point the Attorney General 
made is that this was not to be considered a precedent and that all circumstances, this particular 
information, would be given out. The point is there may indeed be circumstances where it’s neither in 
the individual’s interest (be it an individual or a company), nor in the public interest, for that kind of 
information to be provided because of timing or whatever. 
 
With respect to the comments of the members opposite that you can go to a bank and 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1033 

find out how x, y, z company owes to the bank, that’s a bunch of baloney. There is no way I can walk 
into the Royal Bank and ask them how much x, y, z company owes them. There is just no way. That’s 
the kind of question which is being asked here — the amount and the purpose. There is no banker who 
would give you the amount and the purpose of a loan that someone else has with the bank unless you 
had some direct interest and there was a reason why the banker should give it to you. Nevertheless, Mr. 
Speaker, the government has indicated (as the Attorney General said), it is prepared to answer this 
question with the proviso which the Attorney General put on it. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, a question on this point and I think the member for Biggar has set it 
out, that is, sometimes we will give you the information; sometimes we wish to withhold the 
information. The big question becomes, who is to decide what is in the public interest and what is not in 
the public interest? That clearly becomes a question of the minister. That clearly is the whole basis of 
the argument of freedom of information. That is, the bill presently that was put before the parliament, 
was to have an information commissioner, not the government itself, and not the minister who made that 
judgment. That’s what the freedom of information legislation is all about — is that person, whether in 
the classification of an ombudsman or somebody else, would make that decision and not the minister. 
Obviously the minister will make the decision when it is in his interest to do, like the minister said in his 
press release. When it is not in your interest to do it then no information will be forthcoming and that is 
the whole basis of freedom of information. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 41 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 41 showing: 
 

(1) Whether Doug Anguish was ever employed as the executive assistant to the Hon. Neil 
Byers, Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, and if so, the dates of his employment and 
termination. (2) Whether Mr. Doug Anguish was ever employed by another department, 
Crown corporation or agency, of the Government of Saskatchewan, and if so, the location, 
date and capacity. (3) Whether Mr. Doug Anguish has ever been the recipient of any 
contract, grant or loan from any department, Crown corporation or agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and if so, its nature, the amount, the source and date. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Again, I don’t propose that the members of the Assembly defeat this motion, but 
I do simply want to indicate to the House that when the government is preparing its answer, particularly 
under part (3), we will not be interpreting ‘contract grant’ in such a wide basis as to indicate that a Sask 
Telephones contract for the provision of a telephone — which is a government agency perhaps in the 
minds of some. I don’t suppose it is; it’s a Crown corporation, it is not an agency — is the kind of thing 
that should be revealed. I don’t think that’s what’s intended but it does point out, Mr. Speaker, almost 
universally the degree of imprecision with which the questions are phrased, and with which the 
government must struggle to produce an answer — also whether Doug Anguish was ever employed by 
any department, Crown agency, etc. In this case it so happens that by common knowledge we all 
perhaps know who the Doug Anguish referred to is, but when you go back to 1905 and the employment 
record of that, it could be a horrendous job just for this one person. I don’t want it to be  



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1034 

interpreted as a precedent with respect to Mr. Anguish to urge the House to allow this motion to go 
through unamended, but that’s the way all things can be handled with respect to all employees. I put that 
caveat on these and urge the members of the House to vote for this motion. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 42 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 42 showing: 
 

Whether Ile X Construction of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan received any grants or loans from 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 43 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 43 showing: 
 

Whether Ile X Construction of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan received any grants or loans from 
the Department of Highways. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 44 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 44 showing: 
 

Whether Ile X Construction of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan received any grants or loans from 
the SEDCO. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again I want to attach the same caveat with respect to this respect 
on SEDCO information that I have with respect to order of the Assembly No. 40, dealt with earlier — 
that it is not to be viewed as a precedent. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, in some quarters it has been said, I 
have heard, that the proposed PC federal bill on freedom of information would allow an information 
officer to decide, as opposed, to government, whether or not matters related to grants or loans from 
institutions such as SEDCO should be decided. That, Mr. Speaker, for those of you who may have read 
or heard of those arguments articulated elsewhere, is simply not true. That would mean that a 
commissioner of information under Canada’s proposed law would be able to go to federal development 
bank, IDB, or the farm credit corporation and find out all the details. Why it would not be true also, Mr. 
Speaker, is that I could not even believe the PC government would be so duplicit as to allow people who 
deal with the government banking institutions to be at the mercy of politicians while protecting the 
chartered banks on the other show. Mr. Speaker, that proposition simply cannot be advanced. With that 
caveat, with those reasons, I wanted to state again the concern that I have on this as a principle. We will 
deal with it on a case-by-case basis. On this one I would urge 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1035 

the Assembly to pass it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think that I’ll put my caveat on this too. We’ve had comments from both sides of 
the House on so-called legislation which is somewhere, and I think it has very little relation to the 
subject we’re talking about, so I’m going to be very tight on that from now on. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 45 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 45 showing: 
 

Whether Bougie Construction Ltd. of Uranium City, Saskatchewan received any grants or loans 
from the Department of Highways. If so, the amount and purpose. 
 

Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 46 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 46 showing: 
 

Whether Bougie Construction Ltd. of Uranium City, Saskatchewan received any grants or loans 
from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 47 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 47 showing: 
 

Whether Bougie Construction Ltd. of Uranium City, Saskatchewan received any grants or loans 
from SEDCO. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I attach the same caveat and observations which I have with 
respect to the previous orders on this request for information from SEDCO as well, but would urge the 
Assembly to approve the order in this instance. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 48 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 48 showing: 
 

Whether Voyageur Transportation Corporation received any grants or loans from the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. If so, the amount and purpose. 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1036 

Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 49 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 49 showing: 
 

Whether Voyageur Transportation Corporation received any grants or loans from SEDCO. If so, 
the amount and purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I again want to attach the same caveat on the principle with respect 
to this order for return No. 49 as I have on the others and treat this as an individual instance. In this case 
I urge the members of the House to pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 50 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 50 showing: 
 

Whether Voyageur Transportation Corporation received any grants or loans from the Department 
of Highways. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 51 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 51 showing: 
 

Whether the Northland Development Corporation of Uranium City, Saskatchewan, received any 
grants or loans from the Department of Highways. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 52 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 52 showing: 
 

Whether the Northland Development Corporation of Uranium City, Saskatchewan, received any 
grants or loans from SEDCO. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on Return No. 52 I attach the same caveat about the matters related 
to informations pertaining to SEDCO as I have on the earlier orders dealt with today. 
 
Motion agreed. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1037 

Return No. 53 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 53 showing: 
 

Whether the Northland Development Corporation of Uranium City, Saskatchewan, received any 
grants or loans from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. If so, the amount and purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 54 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 54 showing: 
 

Whether Mr. Doug Anguish ever made representations to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan 
on behalf of any of the following: (a) Voyageur Transportation Corporation (b) Northland 
Development Corporation (c) Ile X Construction Inc. (d) Norcrush Inc. (e) Bougie Construction 
Ltd., and if so, the date and nature of the representation. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose a brief amendment, seconded by the hon. 
Minister of Agriculture, the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood (Mr. MacMurchy), that the 
following words be added after the word ‘representation’ in the last line: 
 

and the result in each case. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 55 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 55 showing: 
 

Whether Mr. Doug Anguish ever made representations to the Minister of Highways on behalf of 
any of the following: (a) Voyageur Transportation Corporation (b) Northland Development 
Corporation (c) Ile X Construction Inc. (d) Norcrush Inc. (e) Bougie Construction Ltd., and if so, 
the date and nature of the representation. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move a brief amendment, seconded by the Minister 
of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy), that the following words he added after the word “representation” in 
the last line” 
 

and the result in each case. 
 
Amendment agreed. 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1038 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 56 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 56 showing: 
 

Whether Mr. Doug Anguish ever made representations to SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) on behalf of any of the following: (a) Voyageur Transportation 
Corporation (b) Northland Development Corporation (c) Ile X Construction Inc. (d) Norcrush 
Inc. (e) Bougie Construction Ltd., and if so, the date and nature of the representation. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to this motion, I would also like to make a brief 
amendment, seconded by the hon. member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) that the following words be added 
after the word “representation” in the last line: 
 

and the results in each case. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — I’d like to make a couple of comments here I think 
we’re going to do our very best to answer these questions, but one of the difficulties obviously is 
whether or not any individual — pick any you want — has ever made representations to some body or 
individual. What does one mean by representations? I suppose if you were walking by them in the street 
and a guy said, hey, I hear somebody is trying to get a loan. I hope you’ve give him a good hearing. Is 
that a representation or something more formal than that? Obviously we can only deal with things that 
we have some record of, and it is very difficult in this kind of a broad question to get the answers. We’ll 
do our best and give all the information that we have. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 57 
 
MR. J. W. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for return No. 56 showing: 
 

Whether any of the following people reside in property owned by the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation: (1) Robert Bouvier, Beauval, Saskatchewan; (2) Ron Anderson, P.O. Box 1557, 
Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan; (3) Roger Sicotte, P.O. Box 153, Buffalo Narrows, Saskatchewan; 
(4) Eugene Hood, P.O. Box 24, Beauval, Saskatchewan; (5) Gilbert M. McKay, P.O. Box 62, 
Green Lake, Saskatchewan; (6) Louis Regan, P.O. Box 117, Green Lake, Saskatchewan; (7) Ted 
Ratt, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan; (8) Ken Pederson, Buffalo Narrows, Saskatchewan. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 58 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Souris- 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1039 

Cannington (Mr. Berntson) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 58 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, 
and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 59 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 59 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Continuing 
Education on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 
 

Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 60 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 60 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Social Services 
on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of 
the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each 
instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Some members may argue that being in this Chamber is a gamble. I 
think we should not formalize it regardless of the amount of the sum by placing bets in the Chamber. It 
lowers the decorum. Wise or unwise . . .  
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 61 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 61 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Premier on official 
Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the 
names of the people who 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1040 

accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance the total cost of the trip 
(including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 
 

Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 62 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 62 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Attorney General on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 
 

Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 63 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 63 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Mineral 
Resources on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 
 

Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 64 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 64 showing: 
 

(1) Between March 1, 1979 and March 10, 1980, the methods used for purchasing furniture, 
equipment and appurtenances or other articles for Government of Saskatchewan offices. (2) 
Where purchases were made in bulk, whether tenders were called, and (a) if not, cases in 
which they were not called (b) if so, whether they were by public advertisement or by 
invitation and if by invitation, how the names were supplied. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 65 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 65 showing: 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1041 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his 
destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at 
government expense, and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, 
meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 66 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 66 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Co-operation 
and Co-operative Development on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case 
his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at 
government expense, and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, 
meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 67 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 67 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Telephones on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 68 
 

MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 68 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Return No. 100 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1042 

MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 100 showing: 
 

The amount of money spend by the Minister of Urban Affairs on (1) renovating (b) redecorating 
his office since March 1, 1979. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 69 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 69 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Culture and 
Youth on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 70 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 70 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Health on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 71 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 71 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs (Rural) on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, 
and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 72 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1043 

MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 72 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 73 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 73 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Revenue, 
Supply and Services on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his 
destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at 
government expense, and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, 
meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 74 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 74 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Finance on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 75 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 75 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Provincial Secretary on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 76 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1044 

MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 76 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, 
and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 77 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 77 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Agriculture on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 78 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 78 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of the 
Environment on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 79 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 79 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Government 
Services on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and 
in each 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1045 

instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 80 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 80 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Labour on 
official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, the purpose of the 
trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, and in each instance 
the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 81 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 81 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the number of out of province trips made by the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs (Urban) on official Government of Saskatchewan business. In each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the names of the people who accompanied him at government expense, 
and in each instance the total cost of the trip (including airfares, hotels, meals, etc.). 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 82 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 82 showing: 
 

As of March 10, 1980 the name, salary range and function of each member of the staff of the 
Executive Council of Saskatchewan. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 83 
 
MR. D. G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. 
Katzman) than an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 83 showing: 
 

The amount of money spent by the Minister of Consumer Affairs on: (1) renovating (b) 
redecorating his office since March 1, 1979. 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1046 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the hon. member wasn’t in the House at the time I made 
my remarks with respect to the first one of this kind of question. I think it was item no. 4 on today’s 
order paper. I made an amendment to no. 4 the effect of which was to describe the project and the 
project cost for the entire legislature. The other observation I made was the way the question is worded, 
even if we could answer it, we can’t answer it because the questions all asked how much money was 
spent by consumer affairs and the next ones, Attorney General and agriculture. I spent no money on my 
office. I’m simply saying that what we ought to do here is to defeat the motion because it’s a 
meaningless question. I’m advised, so far as is possible, it has been covered basically by the earlier 
amendment. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The Attorney General indicates that the first motion, and I believe he refers to 
item 4, which was moved by the member for Moosomin earlier today will cover the situation in this 
case. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if that’s totally correct. If I remember your motion said all money spent by 
the government services within the Legislative Building, If I remember on this list of question that we 
are going to see later on, there are some minister’s offices that are not within this building. And his 
motion strictly was within the Legislative Assembly rather than within the Department of Government 
services spending on minister’s offices. Would he be prepared to make an amendment or suggest an 
amendment to cover all offices? Then we would just include the 51 right through to I believe it would be 
about 60 which are not in the Legislative Building. His first motion indicated only for the Legislative 
Building and I put that question to the minister; maybe he can respond if that will solve the problem. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, the member is in a difficult position; he can’t respond because he 
has already spoken once in the debate. I think I can shed some light on this. I believe there is only one 
minister, the Minister of Education, who is not in the building. What I would suggest the members do, is 
for the building he is in — 2220 College Avenue — that you ask a question for that building in a similar 
manner to the amendment the Attorney General made and you will pick up this member. I think the 
problem with these questions is that as they are worded, the answer to all of them I believe is nil. My 
office spends nothing whether it is renovated or not; it is all done through government services and I 
think the amendment takes care of that. I think that perhaps was an oversight on our part but in order to 
look after that particular problem another question or order for return along those lines of the other one 
with respect to that building at 2220 College would look after that particular problem. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in this House must realize the purpose of these 
questions that I have been submitting is to find out information and I will continue to do this. However, 
if they are in the wrong form, that is another matter. As far as the Attorney General wondering if I was 
in my seat or not, I most certainly was in my seat and have been all day today. I was not here yesterday 
and the reason I didn’t rise on it was I wanted to see if you were following the blues. What I will do is, I 
will withdraw these to 101 and will be submitting them in another form. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The question before the House is on Return No. 83. Is he withdrawing it? 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Withdrawing that and withdrawing the subsequent questions of the same nature, 
Mr. Speaker, right through to Item No. 69, Return No. 101. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think I will deal with it in two parts. The member has asked leave to withdraw the 
item which is before us, notice for motion for return. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1047 

Returns No. 83 to 101 inclusive withdrawn. 
 

Return No. 102 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 102 showing: 
 

Whether Jean Paul Bougie of Box 218, Uranium City, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again I’ll be urging the members of the House to pass this request 
for order for return. I would like to tender one relatively small amendment which would allow the 
government to put a date line, a benchmark, on this. The amendment I would like to tender in a moment 
is that we date it to April 1, 1977. Accordingly, if the amendment would be adopted, it would be 
whether Jean Paul Bougie has been employed since April 1, 1977 by the government, etc. as it goes. I’ll 
be doing that for the balance as well — it puts a date line on it. So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the hon. Provincial Secretary, the member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley), that the word “ever” be deleted, and 
that the following words be added after the word “agencies” in the third line: 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 103 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 103 showing: 
 

Whether Ted Ratt of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Biggar (Mr. Cowley) that the 
word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 104 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 104 showing: 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1048 

Whether Louis Regan of P.O. Box 117, Green Lake, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 105 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 105 showing: 
 

Whether Gilbert M. McKay of P.O. Box 62, Green Lake, was ever employed by the Government 
of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 106 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 106 showing: 
 

Whether Eugene Hood of P. O. Box 24, Beauval, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
MR. A.W. ENGEL (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I suppose my first name and the 
member’s last name confused you a little bit. It’s a pleasure today to introduce a class of Grade 11 and 
Grade 12 students to you., Mr. Speaker, from Rockglen. They are accompanied by their teachers, Ted 
Scharman, and their bus driver, (I thought he was there; yes, he’s there Lyle Lamontagne. They are 
touring the building — a similar group was in earlier that’s sponsored by the co-ops and they again have 
a co-op sponsor with them I’m sure their tour is going to be informational and educational. Today is 
private members’ day and we’re dealing with questions as you’ll see in the next few minutes. I’ll meet 
with them later on the day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1049 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Debate resumed on Return No. 106 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 107 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 107 showing: 
 

Whether Roger Sicotte of P.O. Box 153, Buffalo Narrows, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by 
the Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 108 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 108 showing: 
 

Whether Ron Anderson of P.O. Box 1557, Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by 
the Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1050 

Return No. 109 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 109 showing: 
 

Whether Robert Bouvier of Beauval, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 110 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 110 showing: 
 

Whether William Armstrong of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 111 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 111 showing: 
 

Whether Max Morin of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1051 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 112 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 112 showing: 
 

Whether Jim Favel of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 113 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 113 showing: 
 

Whether Louise Tanton of Box 87, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 114 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 114 showing: 
 

Whether M. De La Gorgendiere of 400-337-25th St. East, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan was ever 
employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies and if so, the dates of his 
employment, salary, position and department. 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1052 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 115 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 115 showing: 
 

Whether James Johnson of Uranium City, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government 
of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 116 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of Assembly do issue for Return No. 116 showing: 
 

Whether Leonard Larson of La Loche, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that 
the word “ever” be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third 
line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 117 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 117 showing: 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1053 

Whether Larry Fiss of Uranium City, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, position and 
department. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that the word “ever” 
be deleted and the following words be added after the words “agencies” in the third line. 
 

since April 1, 1977. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — I’d like to amend the amendment or offer a 
subamendment, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter): 
 

that 1977 in the amendment be deleted and 1960 be substituted therefore. 
 
MR. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — I intend to vote against this motion. The members 
must realize that the question with respect to this is, “was ever employed by the government of 
Saskatchewan or its agencies”. Going back 20 years with temporary employees, causal employees, 
changes of departments from DNR and DNS — I think the members must realize that going back that 
far with respect to such a broad sweeping question as this in terms of employment in the government or 
its agencies is extremely difficult if not impossible. It means every single government department, every 
single government agency, would have to search its records with respect to causal, temporary and 
permanent employees and contract employees, presumably all the way back for 20 years. And if you 
think of an agency the size of the Department of Health and how many people have likely worked in the 
Department of Health over a 20-year period, it would number in the tens of thousands with the changes 
that take place. For the member to ask this question, I think, is totally unreasonable; to go back three 
years is a large enough job in itself. I think the members would be irresponsible and misusing public 
funds in the worst way possible if they passed this subamendment. So I urge the members to vote 
against it. 
 
Subamendment negatived. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 118 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 118 showing: 
 

Whether Douglas Anguish of 1348 Grey Street, Regina, Saskatchewan, was ever employed by 
the Government of Saskatchewan or its agencies, and if so, the dates of his employment, salary, 
position and department. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I think an argument could be advanced that this question is 
covered by Item No. 9, Order for Assembly No. 41. I think it really is unnecessary. This will require a 
lot of work as it is. I think the words of the Provincial Secretary on the previous motions were words 
very well spoken indeed. I just simply think if we were denying this information which we’re not — it’s 
been covered in item 9 — we would pass this. Under the circumstances, I think it’s not necessary to 
essentially 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1054 

pass the same thing twice. So again for cleanliness in this thing, I would suggest we defeat this motion. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 24 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 24 showing: 
 

The complete file from the Department of Highways or highway traffic board on Mr. Randy 
Wangler of Wilkie, Saskatchewan, Driver’s Licence number 09755281. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to call on all members of the House to turn down item 
87, Return No. 24. Note what the return asks. It asks for the complete file, which is in the hands of the 
highway traffic board, of one Mr. Randy Wangler. The licence number is listed. I think this would be a 
very unfortunate and dangerous precedent, to say the least, for the legislature to adopt an order to deliver 
the complete file of an individual from the highway traffic board over to the Legislative Assembly and 
thus to the public property. My point can be made by striking out the words “Mr. Randy Wangler” and 
put in the name of Mr. Jim Garner of Wilkie, Saskatchewan. Or if you will, strike out the name Jim 
Garner and put in the name of Mr. Bob Larter or Roy Romanow. 
 
I think this is a practice which really we have never permitted in the situation with respect to 
Saskatchewan, and I think we ought not to permit it in the future. I think our position here is very clear. 
People who come before highway traffic boards, very often, are there for disciplinary reasons or for 
driver testing reasons, for medical reasons. There are files which relate to people who are senior citizens, 
who have examinations which need to be taken in and viewed. Is the precedent such, if we passed this, 
that we would now leave vulnerable every person — senior citizen included — who might have his 
medical record, which he has heretofore felt should be dealt with in confidence by the highway traffic 
board, made public and a subject of public debate? I frankly think that would be doing a gross 
disservice, not only to Mr. Randy Wangler in this particular case, but a gross disservice to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to those who have confidence that matters, which are submitted in confidentiality to 
the highway traffic board, will remain confident on that basis. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, we all are familiar with what the hon. member for Wilkie believes to be the case 
here. I don’t think that is the proper course to follow. I think if an administrative tribunal should want to 
be reviewed, there are avenues for doing this. The ombudsman, as an independent agent of the 
Legislative Assembly, might be asked to view the individual file of Mr. Wangler or somebody else and 
have a report forwarded, which report might very well become fully open and knowledgeable. That’s 
another mechanism which is open I think the position of the PCs here is regrettable to say the least, Mr. 
Speaker, because it in effect indicates that no longer are drivers’ licence files, as the policy of the PC 
Party apparently, to be viewed confidentially. They can place an order on the question paper related to 
virtually anybody’s driver’s licence on this side of the House or the other side of the House or who is in 
the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the principle we are debating here. I think that is carrying freedom 
of information to its ridiculous extremes if I may put it bluntly. That’s not freedom of information, that’s 
an invasion of 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1055 

privacy. That is a setting about of a snooping — of an SS-like police force state to view these matters 
and individuals. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member opposite may very well have not known what he was getting into 
here. I hope he would perhaps realize the question has too many consequences to it. I ask him and all the 
members opposite to defeat the question. May I say before I sit down, on this particular question, that in 
some quarters we hear about freedom of information and this is relevant because those who argue 
freedom of information always fail to argue the other side of the coin —the right to privacy. For every 
mechanism which opens up the opportunity for people to find out information on Mr. Randy Wangler or 
Mr. Speaker, John Brockelbank, or whoever it is in the House, there is the concurrent legal 
responsibility of the rights to privacy. They are always simply stressed in the open, in the broad. 
 
I say that is an undesirable way to go. I really invite the PCs to reconsider what they’re doing here. On 
the Randy Wangler situation, the matter is being reviewed by the highway traffic board and the minister. 
I’m sure some further announcements are to be made in the near future. But as a principle on this thing, 
members of the House should defeat this resolution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — I think perhaps the Attorney General tried to twist the question 
of the member for Wilkie. The member for Wilkie, as everyone knows, has been fighting very 
vigorously for this young man — without an arm, without a limb — who has been denied the right to 
have a vehicle licence to make a livelihood. I think the question the member perhaps would suffix to his 
request is that it is young Wangler who requested that he find this information for him. Clearly, nobody 
is suggesting we should have the right to obtain information. When the Attorney General referred to 
freedom of information —the bill that is presently or is about to be advanced before this House — it of 
course was turned down; but it just today has been published. I wish to read this in response to the 
Attorney General and that relates to section 30. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the member is getting in to an area which I cannot permit. If the member is 
going to relate it directly to this and it’s not discussing something on the order paper, he can go ahead. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clearly in reply to the Attorney General and to state the position 
of the PC Party as it relates to freedom of information and as it relates to the giving of information on 
personal matters. There are various things we propose should not be made public and to spell it out in 
clear detail, section 30 would read as follows: 
 

An agency (and agency means any agency of government) shall refuse to disclose a record, the 
disclosure of which would constitute an invasion of privacy of an individual which is 
unwarranted by the public interest to be served by that disclosure; private letter and writings 
which are donated or delivered to the Saskatchewan Archives Board, provincial library, except in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of which those letters are donated or delivered; a 
record of correspondence of a minister and the agency with the person which reveals the identity 
of that person or which the agency or minister would be entitled to refuse disclosure under the 
provisions of this act. 

 
Now, this act clearly sets out our position and under freedom of information we would 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1056 

simply propose that if the government information be provided, one of the exemptions, one of the key 
and most important exemptions is of personal property. In fact, that’s a reverse of freedom of 
information which basically says you must protect on the one hand the privacy of that information, yet 
on the other hand be able to provide the information that the government holds so secret. 
 
Now I think the member for Wilkie is clearly saying and I think could adjust his motion or his request to 
say that with the consent of Mr. Wangler, which he has, he would be prepared to provide that consent of 
Mr. Wangle that the information should be delivered to Mr. Garner prior to the department or prior to 
any department giving it. Now that is the matter — income tax does that and various other people do 
that before that information from government can be given. I think the member for Wilkie is not 
professing to make anything further of this than to advance that information so that he can better fight 
for the cause of the young man at Wilkie. Maybe in the end the young man can get a licence so that he 
can go out and earn a livelihood and not be prevented from doing that simply because of the fact that the 
man is handicapped by accident, this type of thing. I have other things to say on this and I would beg 
leave to adjourn debate on this matter. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Return No. 25 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 24 showing: 
 

A copy of operating authority or letter of intent from Highway Traffic Board for Voyageur 
Transport. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 26 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. Duncan) that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 26 showing: 
 

Copies of all tenders and contracts let by any department, Crown corporation or agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to the following: (1) Northland Development Corporation; (2) 
Bougie Construction Ltd.; (3) Ile X Construction Inc.; (4) Norcrush Inc.; (5) Voyageur 
Transportation Corp. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be proposing a brief amendment which is consistent with past 
decisions of this Assembly on the question, particularly as I understand it, of releasing of copies of 
contracts. And I think it may also be, although it’s not a uniform policy with respect to copies of tenders, 
but certainly with respect to contracts I am advised that the policy has been not to reveal these. 
Accordingly, I would move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley), that the word “copies” 
after the word “showing “ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

the number and purpose 
 
So, it will read ‘the number and purpose of all tenders and contracts let by. 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1057 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 27 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. 
Duncan) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 27 showing: 
 

1. The number of square feet of building space that was (a) owned (b) rented, by all 
departments and Crown corporations of the Government of Saskatchewan, as of March 10, 
1980. 

 
2. The amount of space owned that is not occupied. 

 
3. The monthly rental rate and location of the rented space not occupied. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be tendering an amendment to this. I think it should still 
provide much of the information the opposition wants in this area but tries to set a bench mark for a 
date, namely March 1 rather than March 10 as the proposed order is worded and a few other wording 
changes. Therefore, I move, seconded by the Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) that all the words after 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

1. The number of square metres of building spaces that was (a) owned (b) rented by all 
departments and Crown corporations of the Government of Saskatchewan, as of March 1, 
1980. 

 
2. The amount of space owned by location that is not occupied, the date of last occupancy, the 

reason for the vacancy and the expected future use. 
 

3. The amount of space leased by location that is not occupied, date of last occupancy, the 
reason for the vacancy and the expected future use. 

 
MR. TAYLOR: — There is one area here that was omitted and that is the rental rate of these leased 
areas. There is no mention of that. Could that be included? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The member for Indian Head-Wolseley put a question to the mover of the 
amendment. I would ask would he accept our putting forth an amendment asking for the rental rates as 
well as the information which he left out in his amendment? He’s indicated the change in date; that’s 
acceptable. But he’s left off the monthly rental rate in his amendment. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, in a 
minute I’ll have a motion for you — an amendment for the amendment. 
 
I move, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington (Mr. Berntson) that the amendment be amended 
by adding the words: 
 

the monthly rental rate for each thereto. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — We are dealing with the amendment to which a subamendment has been offered. 
Moved by the member for Rosthern, seconded by the member for Souris-Cannington that the 
amendment be amended by adding, ‘the monthly rental rate of each’ thereto. 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1058 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Return No. 28 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. 
Duncan) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 28 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979, the amount of money each minister including the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, spent on entertainment such as receptions, banquets, dinners, 
luncheons and any other form of official entertainment that was paid for by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. (2) The manner in which this money was spent, the dates and the purpose. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 29 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. 
Duncan) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 29 showing: 
 

(1) The occasions when a cabinet minister employed or otherwise arranged for the services 
of a free lance or contract speech writer or speech writer of any kind. (2) In each case (a) 
minister, (b) fee, (c) occasion of the speech and location made, (d) writer. (3) Total cost to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for all speeches mentioned in part 1. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to make a big deal out of it but I do want to again 
simply point out the difficulty which many of these questions present to the government. Take for 
example, the one we are dealing with — proposed Order for Return No. 29. We are asked to give to the 
House, the occasions when a cabinet minister employed or otherwise arranged (whatever those words, 
otherwise arranged, mean) for the services of a free lance or contract speech writer (whatever the 
differences are between free lance or contract speech writer) or, get these words, Mr. Speaker, speech 
writer of any kind. Now I don’t know what the opposition means there but maybe they are judging my 
speeches as the hon. member for Indian head says. I hope he is not judging my speech by using his 
standard of speeches in this regard. But you see the difficulty that’s there. In each case the fee, the 
occasion, the location, the writer, the total cost. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us think rationally and calmly about that question for a moment. I think I must 
have 10 speaking engagements a week on the average — I’m sure of it — at openings or any kind of 
government function. When I ask my executive assistant to prepare me a little note as to what I should 
say about the particular opening I don’t know whether or not that is ‘a speech writer of any kind.’ I can 
tell you one thing for sure, I do not know all of the occasions at which I may have uttered something or 
other which can be classified as a speech or otherwise. Furthermore, I am obligated by this order for 
return, if it passes unamended, to go back to 1905 and check to see what all the cabinet ministers from 
1905 on did with respect to these speech writers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can say they didn’t intend that. It can be said about a previous 
debate which some may have heard about, we didn’t intend that about 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1059 

Mr. Randy Wangler but these are questions which are asked precisely for a purpose. Just to find out 
information, mind you. They are not looking for anything, it is just finding out information. So, what I 
am going to do is go all the way back to find out what speech writer of any kind has assisted me. The 
second point I would like to make (the first point being the obvious convoluted, misdirected nature of 
almost all of these questions necessitating, we will see when they are tabled, in volumes of work ) is that 
I will not want to be bound by speech writer of any kind. I’m hoping that the hon. members opposite 
don’t mean those words literally because if they mean those words literally we have no other option but 
to defeat this motion, Mr. Speaker. Because I don’t know how one can describe the number of people 
who may have contributed to any kind of a speech, some being employees and some being free lance or 
contract employees. I’m assuming that what they really want is all of those many occasions where we 
have engaged high-powered, high-priced fee for service contract speech writers, which I can almost with 
certainly predict not to the members opposite will be zero. Nevertheless I am assuming that is what they 
want and I am also assuming, Mr. Speaker, that they won’t take too much offense if I put a time limit on 
this, namely to April 1, 1979. I would be very interested in knowing (some day we should ask, I suppose 
it would be against the rules) who it is that they have hired, employed or otherwise arranged for the 
services of their free lance or contract speech writers or speech writers of any kind. I would be very 
interested in knowing who they are and what contractural arrangements they have made and when they 
have been written and just go down that. I invite the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to use this 
test. I invite the press to use this test. Pick up 92 and say O.K. it is asked of the government. But let’s 
turn it around and ask the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to answer that question. If he can tell 
me in each case, the fee, the occasion, the location, the writer of the speeches he has made, I’ll eat this 
book. He can’t do it. It is ridiculous so. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Particularly when he ran as a political leader. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — And he ran as a political leader, he must have spoken all over the province. I 
don’t have to date it to 1905; if I dated it to 1977 you can see the direction of this question. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you will notice what the government has done on these motions. Almost all of them 
have gone through with very little amendment. That is the policy we intend to follow wherever we can. 
But that is an example of the kind of hard-hitting, tough researching, pointed and direct opposition 
which this government is faced with today. Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t want to 
blame the hon. member for Qu’Appelle. Frankly, he is one of the better guys on that opposite side. I 
realize, Mr. Speaker, that somebody in the backrooms has whipped up all of these motions for them 
without thinking very much. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know it is not the member for Qu’Appelle 
because he would not be involved in this kind of an escapade. He has been around political circles too 
long and he’s too wily to get into that kind of situation. 
 
I do say to the hon. member for Indian Head, I don’t blame him personally, I know they just drop these 
things in front of him; he signs them without thinking about it. That is the problem we have on this kind 
of occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the member for Indian Head treats my remarks in the spirit in which they are given 
— friendly advice, friendly co-operation, in my capacity as a friendly House Leader to the members of 
this Assembly, in my many years of great service to both government and opposition — great service, 
Mr. Speaker, if not consistent 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1060 

service. 
 
I am going to make one small amendment which will at least put a time line on this and limit it to April 
1, 1979 which will be a massive task in itself. I say that quite seriously to the members opposite. 
 
I would move, therefore, seconded by the Provincial Secretary, Mr. Cowley, that the following words be 
inserted after the word ‘occasions’ in the first line: 
 

since April 1, 1979. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 119 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. 
Duncan) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 119 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or 
commissioned by the Department of Urban Affairs involving the expenditure of public funds 
and, in each case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, (c) date of the 
poll, (d) subject matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In 
the same period, the total cost of all polls involving public funds that were commissioned by 
the Department of Urban Affairs. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I will be urging the members of the House to adopt this one, 
however I do want to put a caveat into the record otherwise I would have to bring in an amendment. I 
suppose that is what I should do to be absolutely precise lest somebody somewhere down the road 
accuses me of apparently misleading them. There are a couple of aspects of this question which we will 
do our best to answer as fully as we can, wherever it is applicable. They may or may not be applicable, I 
don’t know. 
 
I note, particularly (e) actual result of the poll (whatever the words actual result mean). If there is a poll 
and there is a result of the poll, that result will be given and that is the interpretation that we intend to 
attach — the result of the question. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, this will require a certain degree of interpretation of applicability. That question, 
with that understanding and perusal, short of redrafting it the way that we would want it drafted and 
clearly understood by the members opposite . . . I would suggest that the members adopt this motion. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 120 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Maple Creek (Mrs. 
Duncan) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 120 showing: 



 
March 25, 1980 

 

 
1061 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or commissioned 
by the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources involving the expenditure of public 
funds and, in each case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, (c) date of 
the poll, (d) subject matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In 
the same period, the total cost of all polls involving public funds that were commissioned by the 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 121 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Qu’Appelle (Mr. 
Lane) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 121 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or commissioned 
by the Department of Social Services involving the expenditure of public funds and, in each case 
the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, (c) date of the poll, (d) subject matter 
of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In the same period, the total 
cost of all polls involving public funds that were commissioned by the Department of Social 
Services. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 122 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. 
Muirhead) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 122 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or commissioned 
by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation involving the expenditure of public funds and, in each 
case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, (c) date of the poll, (d) subject 
matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In the same period, the 
total cost of all polls involving public funds that were commissioned by the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 123 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Berntson) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 123 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or commissioned 
by the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission involving the expenditure of public funds and, in 
each case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, (c) date of the poll, (d) 
subject 



 
March 25, 1980 
 

 
1062 

matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In the same period, the 
total cost of all polls involving public funds that were commissioned by the Saskatchewan Land 
Bank Commission. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 124 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Berntson) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 124 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or 
commissioned by the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services involving the expenditure 
of public funds and, in each case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, 
(c) date of the poll, (d) subject matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of 
the poll. (2) In the same period, the total cost of all polls involving public funds that were 
commissioned by the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 125 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Berntson) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 125 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or 
commissioned by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Crown corporation involving the 
expenditure of public funds and, in each case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the 
fee involved, (c) date of the poll, (d) subject matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, 
and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In the same period, the total cost of all polls involving public 
funds that were commissioned by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Crown 
corporation. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Return No. 126 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 
Berntson) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 126 showing: 
 

(1) Since March 1, 1979 the number of public opinion polls ordered, performed or 
commissioned by the Department of Rural Affairs involving the expenditure of public funds 
and, in each case the (a) name of the pollster, (b) amount of the fee involved, (c) date of the 
poll, (d) subject matter of the poll, (e) actual result of the poll, and (f) cost of the poll. (2) In 
the same period, the total cost of all polls involving public funds that were commissioned by 
the Department of Rural Affairs. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Request for Driver’s Licence re Handicapped Case
	Western Response to Quebec Referendum
	MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, when Premier Levesque and his party came to office in Quebec, you stated that all provincial leaders should assist Quebec Premier Rene Levesque in bringing good government to Quebec. Did your governm...
	Closing of Kerrobert Courthouse
	MR. R. L. ANDREW (Kindersley): —A question to the Attorney General. On March 20 in this Assembly, in reply to a question of mine, you indicated that your department had no intention of closing the Kerrobert Courthouse and further that employees (in pl...

	MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary to that, Mr. Attorney General. The latest statistical information on the use of various courthouses in the province of Saskatchewan in various functions — 13 in number — would indicate that the use of the sheriff’s office i...
	Attitude of Federal Government
	Future of Judicial Centres
	Sale of Draglines
	MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, a few short months ago Sask Power Corporation purchased two 90-yard draglines to the tune of $70 million or something...

	Drop in Price of Yellowcake
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
	SPEAKER’S RULING ON A POINT OF ORDER

