






















































Hansard: May 21, 1980


 
3283 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 21, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
  
On the Orders of the Day 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Proposals re Constitutional Change 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — A question to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. We haven't 
seen any action yet and that is what I am going to ask you about. I think it is clear to all after last night's vote 
that there is a sense of urgency and that there is an opportunity now for constitutional change with the 
support of the vast majority of Canadians. Will the Attorney General now admit that it is time for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to table before this Assembly and before a constitutional conference the 
specific proposals for constitutional change that the Government of Saskatchewan may be committed to? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the position of the government is that a 
number of proposals have been advanced during the course of past federal-provincial conferences on the 
constitution. The proposals which I can think of, I have no particular objection to showing the hon. member 
or tabling. It must be clearly understood, however, that in constitutional negotiations some positions of 
necessity must be fluid. In other words they change depending upon the give and take of the discussions. Our 
position has been that we have three or four items which are very important to the province of Saskatchewan 
and to the West. Subject to that, however, other matters could possibly be worked out given the total 
package. Therefore, when the member phrases his question in the context of saying, put forward 
Saskatchewan's positions, there is an implication of rigidity to those positions. I simply want to indicate to 
the member that in negotiations there is a certain give-and-take. As a result, these so-called positions of 
necessity may change with the exception of three or four. I think we could probably produce those in the 
next little while for the hon. member opposite, at least the position taken by the constitution committee of 
ministers ending in February, 1979. 
 
MR. LANE: — It is interesting to note, Mr. Attorney General, that the Quebec Liberal Party has proposed a 
rather comprehensive constitutional package. The Government of Alberta has proposed the same; the federal 
opposition, the Government of Canada — all believe that negotiations and change to their position are 
proper and necessary. Does the Attorney General not feel that Saskatchewan, attempting to have a leadership 
role in this debate, has at least a moral obligation to Saskatchewan and Canada to table, as have other 
jurisdictions, a comprehensive constitutional reform proposal as other jurisdictions have done? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not correct to say that other jurisdictions have done this. It is 
correct that in Quebec, the white paper, so-called by Mr. Levesque, was tabled and Mr. Ryan's counter paper 
was also tabled. British Columbia has tabled a comprehensive set of booklets. Alberta's I would not 
categorize as a set of comprehensive proposals. But short of that, I don't believe any other province has. I 
think there is a danger inherent in doing this. The danger that is inherent is that one tends to get locked into 
the positions which are advocated, quite frequently as a 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3284 

discussion basis or a point from which future discussions can take place. I think Saskatchewan's key 
elements are well known to the members of this House and to the public: our position on resource ownership 
and control, our position with respect to communications and a greater role for communications and our 
position that there needs to be some western Canadian input into the central decision-making institutions and 
institutions of our confederation. We've taken those positions in detail and in general terms in the past. 
Subject to that, however, other provinces bring other matters which are a priority to them and we may not 
have as strong a view on those areas. 
 
We take the position that we need to take a look at the entire package and, with the exception of the three or 
four items I've raised, adjust the give-and-take, depending upon the flow of the negotiations. And therefore, 
putting out a rigid paper has some inherent dangers in it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary. The Attorney General has given four rather limited areas of proposals, 
compared to the totality of the constitutional change that is being considered. Will the Attorney General 
please give, for example, the province's present position (and I have a press release from the Executive 
Council), on the entrenchment of fundamental rights in the constitution. You very pointedly left out any 
discussion. Does Saskatchewan have a position on the entrenchment of the fundamental rights? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, our position has been, and still is, that we would prefer not to 
entrench the charter of rights as proposed by Mr. Trudeau in C-60. We don't know what new proposals, if 
any, in this area are forthcoming. There were none forthcoming from former Prime Minister Clark. There 
may or may not be any proposals coming forward as a result of this current round. 
 
Our argument for that has been very simple. If you look at the United States' experience where there is an 
entrenchment of a fundamental bill of rights, there have resulted two things. The first is the transference of 
rights from the elected legislatures to the appointed judiciary. I think that is something that should be looked 
at very carefully. Secondly, the United States' experience on an entrenchment of bill of rights has not been all 
that favourable in terms of the protection of liberties and human dignities. 
 
Having said that, let me close, Mr. Speaker, by saying that is our current position and now I advocate 
supporting the line I have taken in the earlier questions. That is our position, but if, in the course of the 
negotiations, a package of constitutional reforms were produced, of which one may be some form of 
entrenchment, in a modified or a limited way, of rights, we'd be prepared to consider that and change our 
position. 
 
MR. LANE: — Question to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. Of course what you've just said is 
contradictory to what Premier Blakeney said in his speech to Queen's University law students; here he 
indicated that the new constitution will require (and I'm just going by a press release put out by information 
services) perhaps entrenchment in the constitution of certain fundamental rights, including minority language 
rights. 
Mr. Attorney General, will you not admit that your position of sitting back, except for the four areas, and 
waiting to see what happens, is a bit of a cop-out; it really takes away any opportunity for the province of 
Saskatchewan to show leadership by tabling, before this Assembly and the people of Canada, its outline and 
its guidelines and its proposals for constitutional reform? 
 
Do you not feel it's about time that you, as a government, fulfilled your obligation to lay 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3285 

out a comprehensive package? We know it's for discussion; the other premiers know it's for discussion; the 
other leaders know it's for discussion; the people know it's for discussion. It's about time you laid a 
comprehensive proposal before this Assembly. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, no, I do not agree with the hon. member. First of all let me say that 
there is no contradiction, because the Premier has indicated in past first ministers' conferences, as I have at 
the ministerial level, that we would be prepared to consider some form of entrenchment of language rights 
and consider this in the context of the totality of constitutional packages which may or may not be 
forthcoming. And that is the direction of that press release, with respect to Premier Blakeney at Kingston, in 
Ontario, a few weeks ago. 
 
On the question of putting forward a set of proposals by the province of Saskatchewan, I do say with respect 
to the hon. member that the first obligation does lie with the Canadian government to put forward its 
proposals. It did so with respect to Bill C-60 in Trudeau, phase one (if I can describe it that way), and that 
prompted the provinces to get together and to say in effect: we react to those proposals in this way and here 
are our counter-proposals. I think the member will recognize that this is a very fluid situation. It's one that 
results in changing of positions and one which requires a high degree of flexibility for negotiation if we're 
going to keep the country together. I say again to the hon. member that to put forward a set of specific 
proposals locks a province into a situation where it is not able to do the kind of giving and taking which I 
think is going to be necessary in order to achieve a renewed federalism for this country. 
 
MR. LANE: — Final supplementary. Are you then saying that the constitutional position of the Quebec 
Liberal Party locks them in firmly and that there may be no negotiation between a Ryan government (should 
it happen), and the Lougheed government which is opposed to entrenchment of the Bill of Rights? Are you 
saying they are now locked in because they have given those proposals and that the whole exercise is one of 
futility? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member either conveniently forgets or forgets that the 
so-called beige paper of Mr. Ryan is a paper of an opposition party, not a paper of a government party, and 
there is a very substantial difference. May I say that if the hon. member advocates for us to take a set of 
concrete positions on the constitution, he ought not to be accusing us of failing in our job when he and his 
own party (he being the president of the Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative Party) have not put out a 
similar position in detail as to where they stand on language rights, on reform, or where they stand on the 
operation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — After all, Mr. Ryan is no more and no less than a leader of the opposition in Quebec 
and that is the same situation of the Leader of the Conservative opposition here, or of the president of the 
Progressive Conservatives. He hasn't done that and I presume that they haven’t done it because they find, as I 
hope they do, a lot of merit to the argument that I've been advocating. 
 

Representation at Constitutional Conference 
 
MR. R. L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the Attorney General. The Premier this morning at his 
press conference indicated, and I think correctly so, that all citizens of this country must be involved in the 
constitutional debate. As well, last night Mr. Broadbent indicated that he felt it was important that the 
constitutional debate not be 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3286 

restricted simply to the heads of the various governments within Canada, but also should involve the various 
opposition parties and perhaps some other interest groups. Now in view of your comment with regard to the 
question from the member for Qu'Appelle, would you support the position advanced last evening by Mr. 
Broadbent that any future constitutional conference also involve the federal opposition parties and the 
opposition parties in the various provinces? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I did not view Mr. Broadbent as saying that. I believe Mr. 
Broadbent is arguing for the establishment of something commonly referred to as a constituent assembly. I 
may misunderstand his position. I do not personally subscribe to the view of a constituent assembly. I think 
how you pick a constituent assembly is very difficult to determine — who takes part in it, the various 
conflicting positions which may take place, all make that kind of a proposal difficult to pursue. As to the 
question of whether or not an opposition party should be represented on an official provincial government 
delegation in federal-provincial discussions, we would certainly be prepared to look at that favourably. I do 
not want to make a commitment at this stage to the hon. member because so much depends on the nature of 
the conference, the terms of the conference, whether it's an open conference and the degree of the 
negotiations. I can tell the hon. member, in my two years as chairman on the provincial side of the 
continuing committee of ministers in the constitution, this kind of mechanism would not have worked. Quite 
frankly, there is simply too much detailed analysis which takes place at an official's level which makes it a 
very cumbersome mechanism. We did offer to the member for Nipawin, the former leader of the 
Conservative Party, now the Leader of the Unionest Party, the opportunity to join as at one of the 
federal-provincial conferences with observer status. He saw fit to choose not to go with us at that time. So, 
we have done this in the past and we'll have to consider our options in the future, depending on what takes 
place from here on in. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — It seems to me, Mr. Attorney General, that what you are saying basically is this: the 
constitutional debate that is going to unfold in the next two or three years is going to be a constitutional 
debate between the Prime Minister of Canada and the 10 premiers; those are the people who are going to 
decide the constitution. It strikes me this is far from involving the citizens of this country in such a serious 
question as a new constitution. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what the member is asking. He is saying that the process 
should involve as many Canadians as possible, I suppose. To that I would agree and I'm sure Premier 
Blakeney would very much agree. We need to get the concerned and informed involvement of Canadians 
everywhere. As I said, and I would only reiterate, we would be prepared to consider bringing with us official 
opposition representation to these conferences depending upon the nature of the conference. I think as well, 
while I'm answering this question, Mr. Speaker, we would want to consider what is being done in other 
provinces — what governments are taking along their oppositions and which are giving representatives from 
the opposition side a voice on their delegations as well. I'm not closing that door. I think, however, the nature 
of the process is, fortunately or unfortunately, for the time being, one which is going to involve primarily 
government to government discussions. 
 

Indian and Metis Representation at Future Constitutional Conferences 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. In line 
with what the Attorney General has just said and in line with what Mr. Broadbent said last night when he 
said there should be representation from all interest 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3287 

groups and as many Canadians as possible at these constitutional conferences, would it be the Premier's 
position to have representation at these conferences from such interest groups as the Indian and Metis groups 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. A. E. MR. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, we have had them as part of our delegation in 
the past and we would, I'm sure, consider similar arrangements in the future. 
 

Use of Kenosee Park as Pasture Land 
 
MR. D. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. 
Yesterday in our questioning we agreed that southeastern Saskatchewan had a very dry situation last summer 
and also I understand 1,000 cattle went through Yorkton yesterday. I mentioned last year, Mr. Minister, there 
are nine sections of land in Kenosee Park on the east side of No. 9 Highway. I understand this land only 
needs four miles of fence built to have the capacity to run about 300 cattle. Will your department look at 
turning this into a pasture for this summer to help these livestock men in southeastern Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member for 
Moosomin raised the issue yesterday, this issue of availability of lands under tourism and renewable 
resources in parks. I indicated I would bring this to the attention of the department. May I report, Mr. 
Speaker, that as I indicated in the discussion on the drought situation yesterday, we are calling together the 
farm organizations. Such a meeting is being held tomorrow morning. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, do you realize that in Moose Mountain Park the cattle 
have not been allowed to graze within six miles of the campsites? Would you consider extending the grazing 
this year and letting them in closer because it is a considerable number of acres and good grazing ground. 
Would consideration be given to that? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat once again, I'll bring this issue to the attention of the drought 
committee which has been put together and I'm sure they will look at all options in terms of making use of 
available pastures for livestock. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Final supplementary on this question. In my constituency on the Sakimay Reserve, what 
was formerly a PFRA pasture has been taken over by the Sakimay band and is leased to one individual. One 
individual has this whole pasture and a capacity to run 500 head of cattle. This certainly has cut down on the 
availability of community pasture for the people in the constituency. Do you realize, Mr. Minister, that with 
this taking place there is a need for your department to be bringing in every available acre for future 
community pastures in eastern Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I think there is the issue of public lands. In my answers both 
yesterday and today, we are attempting to address this. There is the issue of private lands and there is the 
issue of reserve lands. These are different issues than how properly to utilize public lands. I would assume 
that the land in the question which the hon. member raises is land under the jurisdiction of the band. They 
will decide as they see fit how to utilize that land. 
 

Financial Assistance — Well Drilling 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3288 

MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. I understand that in the last few days there was a meeting of various levels of government 
dealing with the drought problem. There was to be some assistance offered as it relates to transportation 
costs for feed, cataloguing of feed and an encouragement of well drilling. I am sure the minister knows the 
existing policy as it relates to well drilling is not much, particularly when it costs $100,000 to $150,000 to 
drill a deep well. I wonder if the minister would consider, through his FarmStart program, providing loans 
jointly to two or three or four or five farmers who could use a common well. In areas where they have to go 
for deep water this is a very significant cost; I say upwards of $150,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
Minister of the Environment just isn't aware of what is going on out there. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, part of the package that was put together by the task force, the task 
force involving the federal government and the four western provinces, included in it a well program, 
including a deep well program. If the hon. member will check the record in Hansard yesterday he will note 
we had a fairly thorough discussion on this subject in the House on questions raised by the hon. member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley and the hon. member for Moosomin. At that time I indicated that I didn't think it 
proper to approve the package put together by the task force, in so far as the Government of Saskatchewan is 
concerned, until an opportunity had been had to have the farm organizations or representatives of the farm 
organizations take a look at the package to see whether it was complete. Such a meeting, as I indicated a few 
moments ago, is being held tomorrow morning. Out of that meeting hopefully we can make an 
announcement, or at least part of an announcement to ease some of the concerns of the cattle producers. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, the minister hasn't answered my question. I am not aware of what all 
was in the package. The fact is, in the absence of any assistance as it relates to these deep wells, $150,000 a 
crack minimum, would you provide (in the absence of any assistance from any of these other task forces or 
recommendations) loans through your FarmStart program, so that farmers may jointly develop one of these 
wells and use it commonly? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that the hon. member doesn't listen to my answers. I 
indicated to the hon. member that within the package put together by the task force, which we are checking 
with the farm organizations tomorrow, is a well program, including deep wells. I think we should ask the 
farm organizations to look at this package. Is it sufficient? If it isn't what wells should be added so we can 
begin negotiations on what should be added if necessary. 
 

Cabin Lot Fees in Provincial Parks 
 
MRS. J. H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources. The reassessment of cabins in the provincial parks was completed, I believe, late last summer or 
early last fall. Can you indicate to the Assembly when your department will be announcing the new cabin lot 
fees for this year? 
 
HON. R. J. GROSS (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the 
member, I think last week, that the assessment was just completed three to four weeks ago. The 
recommendations are in. I indicated then that I thought in roughly two to three weeks we would have a 
recommendation on cottage lots. I expect 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3289 

momentarily the information and will be making recommendations accordingly, Mr. Speaker. So we still 
don't have them available but they're on their way. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Can you give assurances to this House that you'll announce those rate increases while 
we're still in session? 
 
MR. GROSS: — It depends on how long we're going to be here, Mr. Speaker. I have no idea how long we're 
going to be here or when the package will be complete. 
 

Harvesting Birch Wood in Provincial Parks 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources regarding another provincial park. Mr. Minister, do you have a hard and set rule for cottage 
owners harvesting birch wood in the parks? 
 
MR. GROSS: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not aware to which park the member is referring. There's a difference in 
lots of parks in terms of what you can harvest. In lost of parks we don't allow harvesting at all because of the 
limited trees and forests. If he would indicate a park that he has interest in, we could maybe identify that and 
I could check it out later and provide the information on the harvesting of birch. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. This is in Moose Mountain Park. Apparently some of the 
parks in the North let the cottage owners cut birch wood with supervision. In this park, they're not letting 
them do it and there is a lot of birch wood going to waste as there's plenty of it there. I wouldn't mind if you 
would check into that. 
 
MR. GROSS: — Mr. Speaker, I will check into the situation in Moose Mountain. I'm not aware of the exact 
details of why we allow or do not allow birch wood cutting. 
 

Grazing Fees in Provincial Parks 
 
MR. J. W. A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources. Mr. Minister, it has been brought to my attention (one example being the Cypress 
Hills Provincial Park) that cattle have already been put into the park and that the lease fees have not been 
brought forward nor has it been stated to the producers what it will cost them for their grazing fees for the 
upcoming year. Have you set the grazing fees for any provincial park and especially the Cypress Hills 
Provincial Park? 
 
MR. GROSS: — Mr. Speaker, there are no lease fees in provincial parks. They're granting permits that we 
have in the parks. They will be announced very shortly as well. We expect to have a simultaneous 
announcement of the cottage rentals and the grazing fees. Patrons with the permits have been advised of that 
and will be notified accordingly. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that it was about $2.16 a 
month for a cow-calf unit last year and since we have very much lower cattle prices in the last three months 
along with the drought problem, could you not assure this Assembly now that this permit or lease fee 
structure will remain the same and will not be an added burden to the producers? 
 
MR. GROSS: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot assure the member that we are not going to change the permits. It is 
our intention to review them and bring them up to date 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3290 

because they haven't been reviewed for many, many years. That's where it's at. I can't assure him that the 
prices will go up or the prices will go down because we haven't announced the policy on permits. 
 

Airline Service for Prince Albert 
 
MR. G. S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Agency. In light of the fact that the city of Prince Albert presently does not 
have adequate airline service for a city of its size, and take into consideration your press release in which you 
stated that Saskatchewan has always assisted Prince Albert in efforts to obtain service by one of 
Saskatchewan's two major carriers, and also take into consideration that part of the problem stems from the 
fact that Prince Albert airport is in dire need of expansion, could the minister tell this House what 
representation he has personally made to the federal Minister of Transport to hold the federal government to 
its commitment to upgrade the Prince Albert airport, and would he also inform us whether the Government 
of Saskatchewan is prepared to assist the city of Prince Albert, financially or otherwise, in its efforts to have 
the Prince Albert airport upgraded? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I think the situation with respect to air service to Prince Albert has changed 
dramatically within the last two months. I think we're pleased, as a government, and I know that the city of 
Prince Albert, the council and the Chamber of Commerce are very pleased with the renewed interest in the 
city of Prince Albert with respect to air service. Aero Trades, a company out of Winnipeg, has made 
application, as well as PWA, to serve Prince Albert on a Winnipeg-Prince Albert-Calgary run. So there's a 
renewed interest in Prince Albert and I think we're very pleased with that. 
 
There have been ongoing commitments by the federal government. I think during virtually every election 
(and there's been a fair number within the last while), there's been a promise or a commitment by the 
government in power to upgrade the air terminal at Prince Albert. I think the hon. member will agree that 
this is clearly a federal responsibility and we should lay the responsibility there. 
 
One of the interesting aspects of the applications of both Aero Trades and PWA is that the aircraft they 
intend to use to serve Prince Albert will be able to fly in and out of the city on the strip that's presently there. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 

Quebec Referendum 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have a statement on the referendum that I would 
like to give. It is a little longer than the usual statement and I hope that members will bear with me. 
 
No one, I am sure, will be surprised to hear my say that I am pleased with the outcome of the Quebec 
referendum. After a long period of reflection, after a vigorous campaign the people of Quebec have chosen 
to remain in Canada. I rejoice in the wisdom of that decision, which I believe will benefit Quebec and the 
whole country. I congratulate the people of Quebec for their vote of confidence in Canada. 
 
The referendum was probably necessary and inevitable, but in itself it solves nothing. It 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3291 

is the beginning, not the end, of the real national debate. It is obvious to me and I hope it is obvious to 
everyone, that Quebecers have given Canada a vote of confidence, not for what it now is but for what can be. 
To think otherwise would be a tragic mistake. 
 
It is now up to all governments and all citizens to act decisively to prove to Quebecers that they were right to 
vote no. We must act now to renew our federation, rebuild our nation, and fashion a new and modern 
constitution for all our people. That constitution must ensure that French Canadians, and particular French 
Quebecers, are free to be themselves in what is their country, as it is ours. 
 
But the new constitution must also satisfy the real desire for change in other parts of Canada, including 
western Canada. I have said many times in the past that while the recognition of dualism between French and 
English, or between Quebec and the rest of Canada is perhaps our most visible constitutional problem, it is 
not the only problem to be solved. We in the West have our own serious grievances, which are well known 
by now, but still unresolved. Clear control over our natural resources and greater say in the field of 
communications are high on our list of priorities. But we also want changes in other areas and it's quite clear 
to us that comprehensive changes in the constitution are required, and not mere tinkering with the current 
BNA Act. 
 
Canadians must not assume that this task will be easy. Westerners can expect that if we want changes to 
meet our needs and aspirations, other Canadians, too, will want changes — changes which we may not want. 
In the interests of the Canada we all love, difficult compromises and tough decisions will be necessary. I 
hope the people of Saskatchewan will, in the interests of a better Canada, give their support to these 
compromises and decisions. 
 
Last week I sent a letter to Prime Minister Trudeau urging him to reactivate the constitutional negotiations 
without delay. Specifically I recommended the following steps: 
 
1. A meeting of first ministers within the next few weeks to get the process under way; 
 
2. The creation of a new committee of ministers of the constitution which should begin its work as soon as 
possible; 
 
3. A first ministers' conference in the fall to receive a report from the ministerial committee and if possible to 
reach final agreement on a first list of significant constitutional changes. 
 
Substantial progress was made in the 1978 and 1979 conferences, both in changes in federal institutions and 
changes in division of powers. I would anticipate that agreement on such a first list could be achieved before 
year end. I believe that Canada is now at a turning point in its existence as a nation. The demand for change 
can no longer be ignored. We must begin now the process of renewing the fabric of our nation. That process 
will demand great courage on the part of all governments and all Canadians. It will require patience, 
persistence, determination and most importantly, a willingness on all sides to be flexible and 
accommodating. 
 
Canadians will be called upon to make compromises to reach agreement. Persons who profess to support a 
united Canada but who oppose the compromises which will certainly be needed to preserve that unity are 
poor servants of their country. I am confident that Premier Levesque will respect the democratic decision of 
the people of 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3292 

Quebec and will now play his full part in reaching a constitutional settlement that will meet the aspirations of 
Quebecers within a federal context. We understand some of the feelings of those 1.5 million Quebecers who 
voted for the yes option and recognize the need to be aware of their deep commitment to their home 
province. I know that the Government of Quebec will work hard to obtain the solution best for its province 
and I fully accept that. 
 
I think people of Quebec may be surprised at the responsiveness of other governments and other Canadians. 
For my part and on behalf of the Saskatchewan government, I pledge my very best efforts to strike a new 
confederation bargain which will serve the interests not only of the people of Saskatchewan but of all 
Canadians. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — I thank the Premier for a copy of his statement given to the press about 
an hour earlier. I think the Premier indicates some lack of respect for this Assembly, quite frankly, in not 
following its traditions in such a statement first being made in the Chamber. 
 
The Premier in his statement has what we believe to be a serious shortcoming; that is the repeated failure of 
the Government of Saskatchewan to show the leadership we believe incumbent upon it to table its 
constitutional proposals and its proposals for reform and the direction that it believes the Canadian 
confederation should take. We find it a serious oversight (and I suppose oversight is a weak word) for the 
government to talk only in terms of more meetings and the creation of more committees and not to table 
before this Assembly and the people of Canada a comprehensive package. 
 
We believe that the comprehensive package of reforms is not a strait jacket for negotiations. We believe that 
a comprehensive package of reform would not in any way restrict the Government of Saskatchewan in its 
negotiations. On the contrary, we believe that a comprehensive package of proposals from the government 
opposite would be a firm commitment on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan that change will not be 
merely words but will in fact be action. We think the symbol of a reform package from the government 
opposite would have both great merit and great weight. 
 
The statement of committees, meetings, the fall tentative dates, really are the fear that was expressed by 
many after the vote last night. And I'm going to paraphrase the comments of Mme. Chaput-Roland who 
when interviewed this morning said you have one year — one year — to make the fundamental changes. She 
is one who was an advocate of the federalist position. That's how little time the people of Quebec believe we 
have. And I think it is a fair statement. I think it is one more chance for confederation, and I believe that we 
can no longer procrastinate. I believe as well that the Government of Saskatchewan should be in the position 
to have a constitutional conference, be ready for one on July 1 — a date which would add to the symbol for 
change. The Government of Saskatchewan should be prepared for an immediate constitutional conference. 
 
I believe the areas of difference from the provinces' point of view are narrowing; there is some pretty 
fundamental agreement among the provinces. We share the concern expressed by the Premier on his open 
line this morning that perhaps, and he used the phrase advisedly and cautiously, since the federal position to 
date has been one of reluctance to discuss a division of powers and they have more or less directed their 
attention to reforming federal structures it may well be that the holdup to fundamental 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3293 

constitutional change may come from the federal jurisdiction. That would be a matter of deep concern to all 
Canadians. And I would like to say the federal government would rue the day that it continued its past 
position. 
 
I am sure the statement made by the people of Quebec and the statement made by leaders across Canada in 
the last day is that change is wanted; fundamental changes are needed; and fundamental changes are needed 
now in the Canadian constitution. We do not believe that putting it off for further meetings or further 
committees is desirable. The time for action is now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, in responding to the statement by the Premier and the 
subsequent statement by the member for Qu'Appelle, I'd like to dwell just briefly on the statement by the 
member for Qu'Appelle. 
 
Naturally I do not agree with the member for Qu'Appelle that the situation in western Canada . . . that the 
Premier of Saskatchewan nor, in fact, any other premier of a province in Canada should allow one area of the 
country to dictate terms to others, and by suggesting that somehow the people of the province of Quebec say, 
you have only one year to make changes that are satisfactory us or we are going to split, is quite simply 
unacceptable to any thinking western Canadian. 
 
In response to the attitude expressed in the Premier's statement, let me say first of all, I do not hold the same 
kind of view the Premier has, that changes are going to be forthcoming. If the Premier is suggesting, in his 
conciliatory attitude expressed in the statement toward bilingualism, that he is going to accept compulsory 
bilingualism in so far as the Government of Saskatchewan is concerned (and that is what I read into his 
statement), then, Mr. Speaker, I say he is betraying the interest of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. That policy cannot work, will not work and could never work. If the Premier is prepared to 
compromise on that issue, then the Premier is short-changing the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The second major issue, Mr. Speaker, that I see is as a result of yesterday's referendum. Quite frankly, I don't 
see anything different in yesterday's vote from what occurred in the federal election in February of this year. I 
don't see any change in position. Mr. Trudeau fought against Mr. Levesque. Mr. Trudeau won 60 per cent or 
58 per cent yesterday. Mr. Trudeau won about the same percentage in the province of Quebec in the 
February election. The fact is, this will give Mr. Trudeau, I believe, added impetus to his desire to centralize 
in Ottawa the decisions that should be made by the people in the regional governments of Canada. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, the first thing Mr. Trudeau is going to do is to come west and take on Peter Lougheed 
and take on the oil law that passed by the legitimate Government of Alberta. I predict there is even a 
possibility that he will attempt to ram through the Government of Canada a law which nullifies legitimate 
laws made in the province of Alberta. I predict that Mr. Trudeau will take his centralist approach, having 
won the referendum in Quebec on a personal basis, as a means to continue to strengthen his hand and steal 
from the people of the province of Saskatchewan and in fact all western Canadians, their heritage with 
reference to resources. If the Premier is suggesting . . . Because he was not very strong on resources. All he 
said was, it is one of our top priorities. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier of Saskatchewan is going to 
sell out the heritage of the people of the province just to make compromises because the 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3294 

people of Quebec have expressed their view, then he is short-changing the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and denying them their right to a proper future. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 118 — An Act to 
establish the Department of Economic Development. 
 
He said: The bill before us is a very brief bill. It deals with the creation of a Department of Economic 
Development. I think members will know that last year (about a year ago) a Ministry of Economic 
Development was established, with myself as the minister. This simply puts into place a piece of legislation 
which allows the department to hire staff, prepare an annual report, etc. 
 
The ministry has been created for a year now. I understand some members opposite think it's some kind of 
new agency which is going to take over several other agencies which are around. All I can suggest to the 
members is, if they look at the record in the past 10 months, they will find no large bureaucracy has been 
created. Indeed the only member of the staff of the Ministry of Economic Development as it now exists is 
myself, and I must say I do find some distinct advantages in that I have very little trouble with my staff. Our 
staff meetings are brief; they can be held at a moment's notice and I never have any back talk from them. 
 
It is not our intention as a government to create a large bureaucracy with the Department of Economic 
Development, but rather to use the existing staff from other agencies. In the past several months we have 
used people from the Department of Industry and Commerce. I've worked with the minister there, Mr. 
Vickar. We've seconded people from the Crown Investments Corporation. In the case of one project we 
worked on with Sask Tel and fibre optics and the plant in Saskatoon, we worked with the new minister, my 
colleague, Mr. Cody, and the Crown corporation, Sask Tel. We seconded people from various agencies and 
it worked very well. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the intent of the department is to try to co-ordinate some of the activities which from 
time to time come along and cross over several agencies. It is not the intent to replace or duplicate the 
Department of Industry and Commerce, which will continue as it has in the past with its promotional 
activities, with its activities with respect to business and SEDCO. We will work with departments such as 
the Department of Agriculture, Sask Tel, SPC, and various other agencies to try to ensure a co-ordinated 
approach in terms of, primarily, major economic development prospects which may come along for the 
province. 
 
I think in terms of the various parts of the act, it's a very straightforward and a very simple bill. I don't think 
it has any powers which are unusual for a department, nor does it have any long flowery descriptions of all 
the things we intend to do. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I think what we hope is that the record of the department 
two or three years from now, or whenever is the appropriate time, will be sufficient in terms of explaining to 
the public the need for this particular agency. Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of An 
Act to establish the Department of Economic Development. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Just a brief question. It struck me that the Provincial 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3295 

Secretary in moving second reading of this bill, rather than setting out the reasons for the need for the 
department, set out the reasons why we did not need the department. I think this department, basically, is a 
reflection on the government's concern about the weakness of the Department of Industry and Commerce 
and perhaps the weakness of that minister in not being able to attract major industry to this province. We 
heard the Premier, only a few days ago in question period, indicate that industry and commerce is indeed 
moving west. But the bulk of that industry is going to move into the province of Alberta, and Saskatchewan 
cannot probably hope to get many spinoffs from the resource industry. It can probably get very little 
manufacturing and very little petrochemical and that type of industry. 
 
So I really question the need, even though the minister advances the argument there will not be a large 
bureaucracy, that it will be simply him and someone else. I suggest what we are doing here for the industry 
and for the businesses of this province is simply creating another department that should be operating under 
the Department of Industry and Commerce. I think the members on this side of the House would strongly 
support the government if it were to upgrade, to strengthen that Department of Industry and Commerce so 
we could develop more manufacturing in western Canada, particularly in the province of Saskatchewan; so 
we could develop small businesses; so we could have a strongly secondary industry in this province. 
 
I suggest that should be done through the Department of Industry and Commerce; it could co-ordinate the 
development of various things in the Department of Industry and Commerce and it is foolish to simply set up 
another department. If you want a different minister then transfer that minister over to the department. I 
suggest we are simply creating another vehicle by which infighting can take place among departments. I 
wonder in the end if the people of Saskatchewan will benefit from this type of legislation? 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, last night during the estimates of the Department of 
Industry and Commerce, I expressed my sentiments about this particular bill and I haven't had any reason to 
change my opinions since that time. The introduction or establishment of this department to me (and to most 
people I would suggest to the minister) would be just an admission of failure of both SEDCO and the 
Department of Industry and Commerce. In his own words, the minister indicated it was a very simple bill 
and that there was only one other individual employed in the department. Well anytime I hear those words, a 
simple bill and only one person, that tells me there's an awful lot of room for expansion. And that's exactly 
what will probably happen with this particular department. 
 
I can't understand why the government feels it needs this department to do the job that should be performed 
today by the Department of Industry and Commerce and by SEDCO. The only reason I see why the 
government wants this department is that the connotation of industry and commerce, by its term and by its 
name, is private enterprise. The connotation of this department to me means more government interference, 
more government ownership and less and less private involvement (as I said last night). If the government 
were sincere about the development of our province, economically, in the manufacturing sector or whatever 
sector we want to talk about, they would see to it that the Department of Industry and Commerce did its job. 
They wouldn't have to establish another bureaucracy. I will call it a bureaucracy. The minister doesn't want 
to call it a bureaucracy because he only has one person employed plus himself. 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3296 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Just myself! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Oh, just yourself. Knowing the habits of ministers, the next person hired will be a 
private secretary and then it will go down the line. We will need assistants for the secretaries and then an 
executive assistant for the minister and it will go on and on and on. That's why I say, there's lots of room for 
expansion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is really nothing to speak about on this bill other than to say we can't possibly support it. 
You would have to establish and to decide whether or not you are admitting failure in industry and 
commerce or SEDCO, and would have to do something about one of those two departments (which you 
haven't been doing for so many years). 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not be supporting this bill. 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of comments. I notice the 
members are making nice little political speeches on this and I suppose that's fair game. I certainly wouldn't 
want to enter into that kind of a debate, being a non-political individual. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, in my opening remarks, it seems to me that people of this province periodically make 
judgments on the government of the day with respect to its role in economic development. They do that, of 
course, at election times. I think if one looks around the province, in 1978 or in 1975, the people in both 
cases made very positive comments with respect to this government's economic development policy. 
 
The members make some comments about there being a Department of Economic Development in 
Saskatchewan and a Department of Industry and Commerce as well. I would only suggest to the members 
opposite that they might look to see what kind of organization the Conservative governments have in 
Ontario, in Manitoba or in Alberta, or a Social Credit government in British Columbia or a Creditiste 
government in Quebec, or a federal government. I'm not familiar with the situation in the Maritimes. All I 
can say is obviously whatever they have there hasn't been too eminently successful to date and it probably 
would not be a good model to copy. 
 
I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, the intention in terms of this department is not to create a large bureaucracy 
but rather to use the very skilled and talented people. We already have an existing agency to bring them 
together to deal with certain projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move second reading of this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division and bill read a second time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman (Minister 
of the Environment) that Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act be now read a second 
time. 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3297 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, a group of students some 10 in number from ages 12 to 
15. I'm introducing them on behalf of my colleague for the Cumberland constituency. These students are 
from Sandy Bay School, a long way from here. They are sitting in the Speaker's gallery, and are here 
representing their area. I would like to inform them their member, Mr. MacAuley, is now in Great Britain 
representing our provincial government on a British parliamentary tour, and that is why he is not here to 
introduce you at this time. They are with their chaperones, and I am sure it is our wish, Mr. Speaker, that 
their visit here to their provincial capital and their Legislative Building proves knowledgeable and pleasant 
for them. I say, as I have said before, that this is just another way for them to participate in helping all of us 
celebrate Saskatchewan's 75th birthday. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I too, want to welcome the students from Sandy 
Bay to the Chamber this morning. It's pleasant to have them here. I want to indicate to the members that this 
is the second time this year we've had students from northern Saskatchewan in attendance at the Assembly; 
it's good to begin to see students coming from northern Saskatchewan to this legislature. It's been a long time 
in the process, and I trust that they will not be the only ones but others will be following them from time to 
time. We welcome you to the Assembly, We regret that your member, Mr. MacAuley, is not here but we 
hope you have a good day and a good stay in Regina, and that you have a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS (continued) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman (Minister of the 
Environment) that Bill No. 114 — An Act to amend The Department of the Environment Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
MR. G. S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I've been through this bill very carefully, and in 
general we'll vote with you on second reading of this bill. There may be amendments in committee of the 
whole. It depends on how you answer the questions. I have some questions I want to ask you on item 12, 
item 7, and item 14, and one on items 10, 18 and 11. Just for your information, we see nothing wrong with 
the bill at the outset but it depends on how you answer the questions in committee of the whole whether we 
have amendments to this act or not. That's all I have to say at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Snyder (Minister of 
Labour) that Bill No. 117 — An Act to amend The Pension Benefits Act be now read a second time. 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3298 

Motion for second reading agreed. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley (Provincial 
Secretary) that Bill No. 95 — An Act to amend The Real Estate Brokers Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of further comments to the remarks made by 
the member for Kindersley. We will be supporting the legislation and we commend those involved in the 
real estate industry for their efforts to discipline themselves. We understand that it has not been universally 
accepted among many of the agents but those in the industry concerned about self-discipline and the 
discipline of their profession have taken, I think, some rather significant steps in this legislation. 
 
I know that the legislation has the approval of those concerned and that it's more or less a negotiated piece of 
legislation. We commend them for their efforts. I hope they will continue to discipline themselves so that 
they eventually have universal respect among those dealing in property and that the people dealing in real 
property have full confidence in the operation of the proposals and those people in the profession. Again, we 
welcome their efforts and I have every confidence that those involved in the industry will continue to 
improve and to maintain the discipline of their profession. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy (Minister 
of Agriculture) that Bill No. 109 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I have just a very few brief remarks before I take my 
place. I mentioned earlier to this legislature that this isn't the way to approach the farm ownership problem 
and that there will be ways around this legislation as well. I warned the minister the last time that there 
would be means found to circumvent the legislation and it would not solve the problem. In spite of these 
particular amendments he is making now, he's going to find himself in exactly the same category in another 
year or two. There will continue to be people who will look for loopholes in the legislation. 
 
If the minister really were serious about dealing with this very serious problem in Saskatchewan, he would 
consider far more strongly a non-resident tax on all non-resident owned land, which would be acceptable to 
everyone in Saskatchewan and would minimize the effect of the non-resident ownership of our land. To try 
to do it this way will not work, and I give the minister fair warning. 
 
MR. E. A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want to comment just briefly on 
this bill. Our policy as a party for several years, since 1973 or 1974, as it relates to non-resident ownership, 
has been a non-resident tax to make it unprofitable to own land in Saskatchewan as a non-resident. This tax 
would be administered at the municipal level and I think it's a far more effective way to deal with the 
problem. Bearing in mind that non-resident owners contribute very little to the community the land is in or 
adjacent to, I think the R.M. should have the right to get that extra tax. 
 
The intent of the bill, as I understand the minister when he introduced it, is to negate the use of farmland in 
Saskatchewan as a speculative commodity. I think the intent is 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3299 

honourable and we will be supporting the bill and looking for some clarification on certain points in 
committee of the whole. As I say, the route you're taking is the wrong route, but the principle of the bill is 
that agricultural land in Saskatchewan should not be used as a speculative commodity by foreign investors, 
or government, for that matter. 
 
One problem that your amendment does not deal with is land-bank land acquired after the five-year option, 
being used as a speculative commodity by resident owners. This is the situation we talked about in the 
Middlemiss case, where land was acquired through exercising the five-year option from land bank and rolled 
over immediately for a fairly sizeable capital gain to a Saskatchewan resident, a resident in the community. It 
doesn't deal with that problem and I think you're going to have to tighten up your land bank. 
 
One suggestion that has been brought forth in this House (not in this House but in another committee of this 
House) that I think deserves a little thought as it relates to the capital gain loophole in land bank, is to follow 
the Manitoba pattern. On any public land sold to an individual, they have a 100 per cent capital gain tax on 
it, if it's resold in the first year. And then the capital gain reduces every year thereafter until finally he does 
have the advantage of other landholders. But I think it's wrong that public land purchased with public 
dollars, should be used to line the pocket of (in most cases) good, solid NDP supporters. 
 
I also have concerns as it relates to your residency definition here. I know, in my own community, there are 
several young people — sons of farmers in my community — who are working in Alberta, on the oil rigs, to 
try to raise enough money to buy a quarter section of land. Because they're living in Alberta, under this act, 
they can't now buy land in Saskatchewan. If we are serious about helping our young people get onto the land, 
we should make some provision for these people who are working in Alberta. They buy a quarter section of 
land; it's not enough to make a living on, so they can't live here. They go to Alberta to work on the oil rigs or 
whatever, get enough money to buy another quarter section of land, and eventually they could have a viable 
unit. But under this legislation they will be prohibited from buying anything over 10 acres in Saskatchewan, 
and I think that's wrong. 
 
You have, I think, given us the assurance that land left to a non-resident in estate will not be affected. That is 
right and proper; but we do have some serious concerns about the bill. We will be dealing with them item by 
item in committee of the whole. The intent of the bill is to deny land use for speculative value or as a 
speculative commodity by foreign investors. It has an honourable intent and you will have our reluctant 
support on second reading, but I would urge you to follow the Conservative policy (and the day we are the 
government in Saskatchewan it is the policy that will be in place) of a non-resident tax administered at the 
R.M. level. 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words with regard to this 
bill. I know the minister reflected the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan, and I am sure the concerns of 
the members of the legislature, when he introduced this amendment to the farm ownership control 
legislation. 
 
My concern, Mr. Speaker, lies with third party interests — innocent third party groups or individuals, 
whichever it may be. I think the concern is expressed by the minister and has been expressed by our 
agriculture critic that we need to have adequate control on 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3300 

the foreign ownership of land. But certainly, Mr. Minister, there are many areas where innocent third party 
individuals are treated unfairly by this legislation. It is with those particular areas that I have concerns. 
 
I won't belabour the point certainly, but will echo the comments made by our agriculture critic that we will 
be supporting the bill in its overall intent, which, of course, is what second reading is all about. But I would 
strongly urge the minister to take into serious consideration some of the amendments the opposition may (I 
am sure, will) propose in committee of the whole. I would just suggest to the minister that this is likely one 
of those few bills which come before the House that is less than controversial, one which we all have more 
or less the same concerns about. In that vein, I would ask the minister to seriously consider the amendments 
we may be drafting in committee of the whole. Mr. Speaker, I thank the Assembly for the time. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the comments from the 
hon. members opposite, both the Leader of the Unionest Party and the Leader of the Opposition and the hon. 
member for Moosomin. I note the position that they share with the government and the people of 
Saskatchewan and the concern with respect to non-resident ownership, albeit the approach they offer as a 
solution is different from this legislation. I note the position of the Leader of the Unionest Party and the 
Leader of the Opposition is the same, that a graduated land tax approach is a solution better than the 
legislated approach. I note also the Leader of the Opposition said that when they come to power they will 
repeal this act and introduce a graduated land tax. 
 
I find that very interesting and very important. I note that this legislation came about originally as a result of 
a committee of this very legislature (albeit there weren't any Conservatives in the legislature at that time) 
after very considerable debate. And the bill was introduced with very considerable debate. 
 
I note that the present amendments come as a result of motions passed virtually unanimously at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention asking for amendments, not asking for a 
graduated land tax to address the issue of non-resident ownership, to the very legislation that has been in 
effect in Saskatchewan over the last five or six years and is now due for amendment. And the amendments 
put forward come as a result of those resolutions passed. 
 
I note also, and I think the members opposite should note, that the amendments received very strong 
approval from large numbers of farm organizations in the province. As a matter of fact, the calls and the 
letters coming to my desk on the legislation have been in very strong support of the amendments and the 
approach taken. 
 
In terms of the issues raised by the hon. member to situations in Saskatchewan on the basis of ownership, I 
think that's a separate issue and is not addressed in this piece of legislation. This piece of legislation 
addresses itself specifically to non-resident ownership of land. 
 
I point out to the hon. member for Souris-Cannington, the Leader of the Opposition, that if anything, the 
flexibility in these amendments for the person living in Alberta to purchase land in Saskatchewan is 
increased rather than decreased. In fact, there is a broader opportunity for the young fellow living in Alberta 
to purchase land, to continue to live in Alberta until he gets on his feet in order to move back and farm, than 
was the 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3301 

case before. Before there were limitations placed on the farm ownership board which administers the act in 
respect of the time frame that the young man would have before he took up residence. It is a resident bill and 
on the basis of that, we have to provide more flexibility than we had in the previous legislation and that is in 
fact put forward. 
 
I'm pleased to see the reluctant, as it's described, support for the legislation. Certainly I will welcome the 
debate and the proposals that may come forward in committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 39 
 
Blakeney Feschuk Birkbeck 
Pepper Byers Larter 
Allen Rolfes Lane 
Bowerman Cody Taylor 
Snyder Lusney Rousseau 
Baker Prebble Swan 
Skoberg Johnson Pickering 
Shillington Nelson Garner 
MacMurchy Engel Muirhead 
Mostoway Poniatowski Katzman 
Banda White Duncan 
Kaeding Solomon Andrew 
Kowalchuk Berntson McLeod 
 

NAYS — 2 
 
Collver Ham  
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cody (Minister of 
Telephones) that Bill No. 90 — An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cody (Minister of 
Telephones) that Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
MR. J. W. A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, paragraph 2, section (a), black Bill 13, and we start 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Woodrow Wilson once said, and I quote: 
 

Liberty has never come from government. The history of liberty is the history of the 
limitation of government power, not the increase of it. 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3302 

I contend, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 13 is without a doubt a limitation of liberty and a severe 
restriction of freedom. We on this side of the House say that there must be a conscious philosophical 
prejudice against any intervention by the state into our lives, for by definition such intervention 
abridges liberty. 
 
The present administration, Mr. Speaker, is carrying out the plan of the socialist Regina Manifesto in that 
they have a desire to control every avenue of communication in the province. I say that in pursuing such a 
policy, this government is in the same league as Hitler and Goebbels in the Germany of 1930 and 1940, the 
reason being that in both instances there was and is a mentality geared to the complete control of 
communication followed by a propaganda machine. 
 
We see in Saskatchewan today a government which through Bill No. 13 seeks to legislate itself into 
complete control of communications. Then Mr. Speaker, we see the present government turning the 
government information services into not only a propaganda wing but one that monitors the media 
throughout the whole province. Freedom, Mr. Speaker, is being threatened in this province by the socialist 
technocrats. When we are witness to an instance such as the arbitrary scrambling in Saskatchewan of the 
opening of the federal parliament, then I shudder to think what may happen if Bill No. 13 is to pass in its 
present form or with the amendments. 
 
What is being done by the Blakeney government could be summed up in the words of Sukarno as 'guided 
democracy' in which freedom of the individual is diminished and the power of the government is multiplied. 
 
In speaking on Bill No. 13, Mr. Speaker, I contend that we in Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition have an 
obligation to check and control the excessive powers that the government may wish to confer upon itself. 
The Right Hon. John Diefenbaker wrote in his book, Those Things We Treasure: 
 

It is only the opposition, functioning as a recognized part of parliamentary proceedings, that 
stands opposed to the degeneration of the governmental system into a form of arbitrary 
direction of public affairs by the executive and bureaucracies. Without it, minorities would 
stand unprotected. Freedom would wither. Individual liberty would be in jeopardy. 
Unwarranted and oppressive invasion of private rights would grow unchecked. 
 

I contend this applies directly to Bill No. 13. Mr. Speaker, if we allow Bill No. 13 to pass this Assembly, I 
contend that it will be a step in the wrong direction. Bill No. 13 is a threat to freedom and freedom is the first 
victim of regimes such as those of Hitler, Stalin, and Mussolini. This is why we are engaged in this lengthy 
debate against Bill No. 13, Mr. Speaker. It was Professor Harold Laski who wrote that the alternative to the 
talking shop is the concentration camp. The present government of this province is dedicated to control of 
communications, a real threat to the freedom of every citizen of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 29, the Progressive Conservative opposition called for full public hearings into the 
proposed amendments to The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. These hearings are necessary because 
of the dangerous nature of Bill No. 13. We on this side of the House have been urging the government to 
reconsider it. While we welcome the fact that the minister responsible for Sask Tel has introduced some 
amendments, we contend that they are only window dressing in the hope of appeasing 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3303 

an angry public. If the minister is indeed serious about more public input into this legislation, the best way to 
do it is to have a special committee of the legislature and hold public hearings on the changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for Sask Tel has announced the amendments to Bill No. 13 and will 
put his powers in the form of regulations instead of tariffs. This would give ultimate authority to the 
provincial cabinet instead of Saskatchewan Telecommunications Corporation. Just what does this mean, Mr. 
Speaker? It means that the socialists on the other side of the House are still determined to control every 
aspect of telecommunications in the province today. They seem to think that by putting the ultimate authority 
with the cabinet, somehow the public will feel safe and comfortable with Bill No. 13. The fact of the matter 
is, they are the same gang who subscribe to the goals of the Regina Manifesto — the ultimate control of 
everything in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I warn them; the public will not be fooled by such a move. I contend it is both unethical and 
immoral for the minister in charge of Sask Tel to bring about Bill No. 13. The only difference will be that the 
power will be with the socialist ministers instead of the technocrats. I sincerely ask how the public would 
have any input in such a system. Nothing could be more unrealistic than to believe such a statement by any 
minister or by any government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even with the amendment, Bill No. 13 will give Sask Tel and the government sweeping 
authority over the telecommunications industry in the province of Saskatchewan. I serve notice to this 
legislature that we, on this side of the House intend to take that message to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Even with the amendments, Bill No. 13 is a danger to the freedom and the rights of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They should have a referendum. 
 
MR. GARNER: — I hear a member hollering, they should have a referendum. Well, I will tell you, any 
member who would make a statement like that after the referendum we have just gone through, which has 
united our Canada, should leave this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are they afraid of with a special committee? Why won't they allow a committee of this 
legislature to have hearings in places like Saskatoon, Lloydminster, Prince Albert, North Battleford, Yorkton 
and even a good Tory seat like Estevan, indeed, Mr. Speaker, anywhere in Saskatchewan? The answer is, 
because they do not want the people of Saskatchewan to be too well-informed so they can sneak this 
legislation in the back door. Well, it is not going to wash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge this government right now to set up a committee of the legislature from both sides 
of this House. I challenge them because I know they lack the intestinal fortitude and moral conviction to 
bring Bill No. 13 to the people. They know Bill No. 13 will restrict the freedom of the people of 
Saskatchewan. When I speak of restricting freedom, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to touch 
upon Sask Tel's actions in restricting the delivery of cablevision signals in Saskatoon. 
 
I have a letter dated April 24, 1980 from Mr. Ken Hancock, the Canadian Cable 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3304 

Television Association. For the record, Mr. Speaker, I will read it in. 
 

Canadian Cable Television Association, Suite 405, 85 rue Albert Street, Ottawa, Canada. 
(Just for the witch hunters on the other side in case they want to get in touch with him.) 

 
Dear Mr. Garner: — 

 
Further to your conversation with Mr. Michael Hind-Smith this morning, I have put together 
some points regarding earth station ownership, interconnection and Bill No. 13 for your 
information. I am also enclosing a number of references as evidence and background material 
to the points made: the distant insensitivity of distribution by satellite permits, the carriage of 
cable TV with other video signals to all parts of Saskatchewan at a cost expected to be 
considerably less than Saskatchewan Telephones $56 million fibre optic system. 

 
With the availability of Telesat domestic satellite system for long distance video 
transmission, the provision of a fixed long distance fibre optic video transmission system to a 
comparatively small number of fixed points is a step backward rather than forward. 

 
I just want to unquote here for a minute, Mr. Speaker. This is a letter I am reading — not necessarily my 
thoughts on fibre optics. Just in case one of the government members wants to start twisting this around and 
putting it in another context. 
 

The advantage of fibre optics is a local trunk distribution. The satellite antenna and receiver 
purchased by Saskatoon Telecable Limited was part of a bulk purchase by cable satellite 
network, CSN from Sed Systems, a Saskatoon manufacturing company. This was part of a 
million dollar order that brought business and jobs to the province of Saskatchewan. This 
bulk buy which provided ground stations to the cable companies throughout Canada reduced 
the cost of individual ground stations to a level which is probably less than Saskatchewan 
Telephones could purchase them, their requirements being a lot smaller. This bulk buy makes 
it cost effective for private cable television companies to bring satellite service to their 
subscribers in the province and at the same time support Saskatchewan industry. A condition 
of the CRTC licence to Saskatoon Telecable Limited is that it should own its own antennas. 
The TVRO or ground station is, of course, an antenna to receive the signal of the satellite. If 
Saskatchewan Bill No. 13 is used to prohibit the use of cable company-owned antenna to 
feed the signals to the cable distribution system owned by Sask Tel, this would appear to 
conflict with the federal requirements. 

 
However, the matter is a complex legal one and we have obtained a legal opinion on this 
matter. You will see that as with most things of this type, there are arguments on both sides. 
 
On April 15, Mr. Forrester of Saskatoon Telecable received a letter from Mr. Stephan of 
Sask Tel. This letter stated that Sask Tel has provided a ground station and associate facilities 
to deliver the House of Commons signal from the satellite to Saskatoon Telecable headend. 
Mr. Stephan confirms an offer of Sask Tel to purchase the earth station owned by 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3305 

Saskatoon Telecable at the cost to Saskatoon Telecable. 
 

Finally, Sask Tel confirms that their delivery charges would not exceed the cost which 
Saskatoon Telecable would incur if it provided the required delivery facilities itself. In other 
words Sask Tel has provided a ground station, is offering to buy Saskatoon Telecable's 
ground station and committing itself to charging an unknown fee for the delivery of the 
House of Commons service to Saskatoon Telecable regardless of the cost to itself. These 
offers would appear to be substantial. Subsidization of this service out of funds which could 
have been provided by subscribers to Sask Tel as a whole with the objective of overcoming 
competition to Sask Tel. Such subsidization of a special service from a basic service in the 
interest of overcoming competition is surely not in the Saskatchewan public interest. 

 
The final thought on this matter is with regard to Bill 13 itself, and the restriction of an 
interconnect. While many arguments can be put for and against the interconnect of foreign 
equipment to the normal telephone network and just as many arguments against them, Bill 13 
covers all telecommunications equipment and services as distinct from telephone equipment 
and services. Telephone services use what is basically a narrow band network primarily 
designed for voice traffic. When the definition is broadened to telecommunications, this 
takes into account all types of electronic tariffs, including data and video signals. The latter 
require a broad band network such as terrestrial or space microwave, coaxial cable or optic 
fibres between all users. Broad band systems are more expensive than narrow band systems 
and while Sask Tel has some broad band distribution services in place, it is not in a position 
at this time to distribute video services to all communities in the province. 

 
Bill 13 would therefore delay the provision of some broad band services such as cable 
television to many Saskatchewanians, if it were enacted in its current form embracing 
telecommunications rather than telephone service. As mentioned, the cost of providing video 
distribution signals to most Saskatchewan communities can most cost-effectively be carried 
out by the use of a national satellite distribution system, coupled with local coaxial 
distribution system. In no way could the provision of such systems by a private enterprise be 
called cream-skimming, an allegation frequently made by Sask Tel. I hope these comments 
are of assistance to you in your fight against Bill 13. Please fee free to contact me if I can be 
of any further help to you. Yours very truly, Ken Hancock, Consultant, CCTA. 

 
Mr. Speaker, next I would like to bring to the attention of this legislature a letter from Mr. Robert Buchan, of 
the firm Gowling and Henderson, barristers and solicitors of Ottawa, to the Canadian Cable Television 
Association. This letter makes it very clear how powerful Bill 13 really is. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is almost 
frightening to realize the real implications of Bill 13. For the record the following is the text of the letter 
outlining the legal implications of Bill 13: 
 

Dear Mr. Hind-Smith: On April 1, Ken Hancock asked me, on behalf of the CCTA, if I 
would give some thought to the issue of satellite earth station ownership in Saskatchewan. 
He briefly explained that Saskatchewan Telecommunications (Sask Tel), consistent with its 
long-standing policy on plant ownership for cable undertakings operating in Saskatchewan, 
has 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3306 

taken the position that Sask Tel (presumably in conjunction with Telesat Canada) should 
own and operate all the television receive-only (TVRO) earth stations in the province, 
including those that would be used in conjunction with federally regulated cable systems. 

 
Ken went on to explain that officials of Sask Tel have gone so far as to suggest that Sask Tel 
would invoke the provisions of Saskatchewan Bill 13 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act, if and when that bill is enacted and comes into force, to block the 
interconnect of any TVRO not owned by Sask Tel or Telesat to the telecommunications 
system operated by Sask Tel. 

 
I presume from your letter of April 1 to Clint Forster of Saskatoon Telecable Limited that the 
interest of the CCTA in this matter relates to the particular situation of CCTA member 
companies including Saskatoon Telecable. 

 
You will remember that following protracted negotiations between Sask Tel and the federally 
licensed cable systems in Saskatchewan, Sask Tel was able to convince the Canadian 
Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) that Sask Tel would be 
allowed to provide on a full system lease basis all transmission and distribution plant used by 
Saskatchewan cable operators with the exception of the local headends, signal modification 
and studio equipment, channel modulators, antennas, and inside wares. 

 
The CRTC decision 78-93 containing the requisite amendment to the licence of Saskatoon 
Telecable Limited, Regina Cablevision Co-operative and Prairie Co-Ax TV Limited is 
attached for ease of reference. The wording of the condition of licence in that decision is 
particularly important to the issue at hand. 

 
One other CRTC decision which is relevant is CRTC 77-529, also attached, relating in part 
to the change in location of the shared distant headend facility from Outram, Saskatchewan 
to Tolstoi, Manitoba. The distant headend is, I understand, operated by a consortium which 
includes the federally licensed cable operators in Saskatchewan, who are members of the 
CCTA. 

 
The key terms for our purposes used in those two decisions would appear to be antennas and 
distant headends. The federally licensed cable operators in Saskatchewan are obliged by a 
specific condition of their respective licences from the CRTC to own the antennas used in 
conjunction with their respective systems and to share in the ownership of the distant 
headend at Tolstoi, Manitoba on a consortium basis with other federally licensed cable 
undertakings. 

 
Officials of Sask Tel would appear to be asserting, however, that Sask Tel must own and 
operate any earth station that may be licensed by the federal Department of Communications 
for use in conjunction with these same cable systems. Presumably, Sask Tel is of the opinion 
than an earth station is neither an antenna nor a distant headend. If it is either, then the 
federally licensed cable companies will have to apply to the CRTC for a further amendment 
to their respective licences. 



 
May 21, 1980 

 

 

 
3307 

A review of the Broadcasting Act, RSC 1970, C.B. and regulations pursuant thereto and of 
the Radio Act RSC 1970 and regulations pursuant thereto does not provide us with a 
definition of either term. However, in the cable television regulations pursuant to the 
broadcast act, the term local headend is defined to mean in relation to a licence the location 
where signals transmitted by local television stations are received by the licencee's 
undertaking. 

 
Webster's New Third International Dictionary defines antenna as usually a metallic device, as 
a rod, wire, or arrangement of wires for radiating or receiving radio waves. 

 
Chamber's Twentieth Century Dictionary Revised Edition defines antenna as, in wireless 
communication, a structure for sending out or receiving electrical waves, an aerial. 

 
Other dictionaries consulted provided similar definitions. Therefore, it would appear that it is 
open to the federal licence carriers to take that position with the Department of 
Communications, the CRTC and Sask Tel, that they are obliged by conditions of licence, 
CRTC 1978-93, to own all antennas, including the earth stations to be used in conjunction 
with their respective systems, notwithstanding the fact that the satellite signals to be received 
at the earth stations would be point to point telecommunication signals rather than traditional 
off-air broadcasting signals, such as those currently received at existing distant headends. 

 
Both types of signals are, of course, program-carrying radio communication signals, but the 
distinction of law between a broadcast signal and a point to point telecommunication signal 
should not be overlooked. Presumably Sask Tel will assert to the DOC that the signals being 
point to point telecommunications signals are to terrestrial microwave signals and that the 
radio apparatus to receive them should be owned by Sask Tel. If Bill 13 is enacted and comes 
into force, the bargaining position of Sask Tel on this matter would be even stronger. 

 
The operative section of the bill is section 6, which would add the following sections after 
existing section 44 of the Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act: 

 
44.1: in sections 44.2 to 44.4, 'attachment' means any wire, line, equipment or any acoustical, 
electrical, mechanical or other device not owned by the corporation. 

 
44.2: no person shall attach or connect to, or use in conjunction with, any part of a 
telecommunication line of the corporation, any attachment without the express written 
permission of the corporation. 

 
44.3: no person shall advertise or offer for sale to the public any attachment whose primary 
or advertised purpose is to attach or connect to, or to be used by any person other than the 
corporation in conjunction with, a telecommunication line of the corporation unless that 
attachment is specifically permitted by the corporation to be attached, connected to or used in 



 
May 21, 1980 
 

 

 
3308 

conjunction with a telecommunication line of the corporation under the terms of the schedule 
mentioned in subsection 9(2). 

 
44.4: (1) the corporation may seize any attachment mentioned in section 44.2 from any 
person who contravenes that section. 

 
44.4: (2) has been amended, Mr. Speaker, so I won't put it into the record and I appreciate the minister doing 
it. I think (as I have stated before) it's a step in the right direction, but just a small step and maybe we'll keep 
walking toward that right direction. 
 
If Sask Tel refused its written permission to the federally licensed cable operators to attach a non Sask 
Tel-owned earth station to any part of a telecommunication line owned by Sask Tel, the only recourse of the 
cable operator would appear to be to attempt to obtain a court order in Saskatchewan to force Sask Tel to 
make such an attachment. 
 
The line of legal argumentation to be used by the cable operators would be that with which they are familiar 
from past court disputes in Saskatchewan regarding control of the streets and lanes and right of ways by Sask 
Tel. That argument, simply put, is that the provincial legislation may not interfere with the corporate powers 
or the status or the capacity of the federally incorporated and regulated companies, and any attempt to do so 
would be ultra vires. 
 
The leading authorities in support of the proposition are John Deere Plow Company, (1915), A.C. 330 and 
Great West Saddlery Company versus The King (1921), A.C. 901, page 114. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I remember that page. 
 
MR. GARNER: — You remember that page. The hon. member says he remembers that page. He goes back 
to 1915; he goes back a long time in Saskatchewan. 
 
AN. HON. MEMBER: — That was the year of the blue snow. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Blue snow — well, maybe we'll have blue snow after we get Bill 13. 
 
However, in answer to the general proposition cited above, there is another general proposition of 
constitutional law that validly enacted provincial statutes of general application are binding on federal 
companies. Sask Tel and the Government of Saskatchewan could argue that the relevant positions of Bill 13 
are of general application as provision to control the interconnection of foreign attachments of all kinds to 
the telecommunication networks of Sask Tel, and that they are not intended to apply only to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It being 12 o'clock, I do leave the chair until 2 o'clock this afternoon. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 


