
































































Hansard: June 02, 1980


 
3849 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 2, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Last Mountain-Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, through you and to all the 
members of the Legislative Assembly I want to introduce some 50 senior citizens from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood constituency from the communities of Nokomis, Govan, and Semans. They are 
on a tour of the legislature and a tour of facilities here in Regina. They are on a bit of a celebration. I’m 
sure that all members will want to welcome them, and hope they have a very enjoyable stay here in the 
legislature and likewise in the capital city. I am going to be joining them for tea and some pictures very 
shortly, and I look forward to seeing them. I extend on behalf of all members a very warm welcome here 
to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. R.G. LONG (Cut Knife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland, I’d like to introduce to you and to this Assembly this afternoon, 31 Grade 8 
students from Grosvenor Park School in Saskatoon. They are seated in the west gallery and I would like 
to welcome them to the Assembly this afternoon, wish them a good journey home and hope they’ll enjoy 
themselves in the goings on in the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Transportation Subsidy for Domestic Grains 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. In talking with officials of your department this morning, I’m told that the policy is now in 
place for your feed transportation subsidy in your drought program. I was wondering if the minister 
could explain why there will be a subsidy allowed for processed feed and hay, but no feed transportation 
subsidy allowed for transportation of domestic grains such as barley, feed oats, etc.? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer the hon. member. 
I’ll have to check with the task force or the committee responsible for the program here in the province 
to give the hon. member an answer. I would assume that at this point in time it’s felt that the stocks 
would be available in the country elevator system and, therefore, at least be close to the concerned 
farmers, but I would have to confirm my answer, and I’ll be pleased to do so and respond to the hon. 
member. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In conversation with officials of your department it 
was indicated to me that the feed transportation subsidy was the only point of the program that had 
policy in place yet. They indicated to me that there’s a 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3850 

great deal of difficulty in formulating policy because it’s all contingent upon federal funding. They also 
indicated to me that that federal funding has not yet been committed. Can you indicate to this House 
when we can expect that commitment, and in absence of that commitment can we expect a commitment 
from this government to go ahead with the program with or without federal funding? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been attempting to respond to the hon. member and to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan that indeed we’re convinced that a commitment is in place as a result of 
meetings as long as three weeks ago. I note very positive statements, press statements, coming from the 
minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board. I report to the hon. member that I will be meeting 
with the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board tomorrow in Victoria. Part of the meeting 
will be to discuss what we are seeking to pursue (federal transportation policy). As I indicated to the 
hon. member, I will be pursuing the issue of drought with him. I note, Mr. Speaker, that there seems to 
be trouble with the federal government in getting itself together with respect to making an 
announcement as a government on the drought assistance program. I note that the Government of 
Manitoba has made some announcements with respect to transportation policy. I note that the committee 
here is getting those policies in place, and I note that also we made an announcement about a week ago 
about transportation. 
 
I am not sure where the federal Minister of Agriculture is. I understand he is out of the country 
presently. He probably felt that he could pray for rain outside of the country as well as he has been 
praying for rain here in Canada. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister has finally admitted that, at least at 
the federal level, there is not yet a commitment. Will you now, instead of waffling around this issue, 
commit your government to this drought relief program with or without federal funding? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, we are not waffling around the issue at all. I want to say to the 
hon. member that I take the word of the deputy minister of agriculture from Saskatchewan who was 
present when an agreement was achieved. I note the comments of the minister responsible for the wheat 
board. I am confident. Perhaps the Leader of the Opposition isn’t confident, but I am confident there will 
be federal cost sharing for the drought situation, not only here in Saskatchewan but right across western 
Canada if it is in fact necessary. 
 

Low Hog Prices 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. Saskatchewan hog producers are voicing deep concern as it relates to their low priced 
produce on the market, resulting in their losing approximately $40 per hog. Does your department have 
any immediate contingency plans to promise aid to the hog producers in this province at this time? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, we have already made two announcements in the legislature here 
on the benefits accruing to hog producers in Saskatchewan as a result of SHARP (Saskatchewan Hog 
Assured Returns Program). We anticipate a further announcement effective the end of this month, the 
end of June and so on, under SHARP, and I think that the hog producers in Saskatchewan are pretty 
pleased with Saskatchewan’s long-term approach to bringing stabilization to that particular industry. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister aware that Alberta 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3851 

recently announced a $25 million emergency stock loss program for the hog producers in that province, 
which will ensure each producer $28 to $35 over and above his feed costs? Would the minister assure 
this Assembly that he will act immediately and place such a program in this province because of the fact 
that many of these producers are on FarmStart loans? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the figures in front of me with respect to the 
comparison between the Alberta program and the Saskatchewan program. But my information is, as I 
recall it, that the benefits to Saskatchewan hog producers under SHARP far exceed the benefits coming 
forward in the Alberta program. I will point out to the hon. member that while all of the producers in 
Saskatchewan didn’t join SHARP (Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Program) when it was 
introduced, I receive reports that they are now getting a new interest in SHARP and are very rapidly 
joining that program. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that many of 
the hog producers do not belong to SHARP and many will be out of business because it takes a complete 
year to phase themselves in? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, SHARP is a volunteer program. Now if the hon. member is 
suggesting that it should be a compulsory program, he should stand in his place and say so. If the hon. 
member is suggesting that SHARP is not a good program, then he should stand in his place and say so. I 
have indicated to all hon. members that it is a volunteer program; hog producers can join today or can 
join tomorrow and have in recent months been joining in very high numbers. 
 

Royal Commission to Study Crowrate 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. You have indicated that 
you’re going to be meeting with the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board tomorrow and 
it’s our understanding that there’s going to be an announcement of an appointment of a royal 
commission to study the crowrate. Have you had any representation or have you made any 
recommendations to the minister as to whom that royal commission should be and who is he, etc.? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll respond to the hon. member on his last question, etc. Mr. 
Speaker, I have no knowledge of a royal commission to be established by the federal government to look 
at the crowrate. I saw a press report which was, I anticipate, a rumor. The purpose of the meeting will be 
to try to seek the policies of the new federal government with respect to solving our transportation and 
grain handling difficulties and it may be that such an announcement will come forward. I would hope 
not. I would hope not, Mr. Speaker, because we have had a number of commissions and studies done 
with respect to the grain handling and transportation system and if the federal government (and I am 
sure the hon. member will join me in this position) would implement the Hall commission 
recommendations, they would have no need for any royal commission on the crowrate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. The impending 
announcement of a royal commission on the crowrate and your lack of knowledge would indicate that 
you have not been advised; and the failure to get some consensus on whether or not we have a drought 
program would indicate there’s a 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3852 

complete breakdown of communications between you and the federal government on the drought 
program and the royal commission on crowrates. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, there can’t possibly be a breakdown on communications between 
the federal government and the western governments with respect to the policy of the federal 
government since this is the first opportunity we have had, as four western provinces, to meet with the 
federal government collectively. This meeting comes as a result of a request from the western ministers 
for such a meeting and its intent is to hear from the federal government what its policy intentions are 
with respect to grain handling and transportation. 
 

Provincial Election in Quebec 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to direct a question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, in light of the announcement by the Parti Quebecois House Leader that there are 
no immediate plans for the provincial general election in Quebec, at least not until after constitutional 
talks, indicated that the constitutional talks or the changes would be used as the basis for an election 
platform. Do you believe that this was just another example of Quebec blackmailing the rest of Canada? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the announcement and 
accordingly I wouldn’t be able to characterize it with any such description as is offered by the hon. 
member for Swift Current. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, since the federal government has established 
the double standard in Canada – one for Quebec and one for the rest of Canada, especially the West – 
how do you intend to resist federal government pressure, with regard to oil prices as an example, while 
at the same time to accommodate Quebec? 
 
MR. LANE: — Oh, ask me that. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the erstwhile leader of the Conservative Party asked that the 
question be directed to him. I will, however, attempt to answer it. I believe that the federal government 
has policies which vary, clearly, from province to province, because the circumstances of each province 
vary. For example, they have a province with respect to offshore fishing rights which is an issue that 
does not particularly heavily impinge upon Saskatchewan. So there will always be differing approaches 
by any federal government to the problems of individual provinces. I do not think that it necessarily 
means that the federal government is favoring a particular province, or acting with less than appropriate 
sympathy to the problems of a particular province. We clearly feel that on the issue of resources the 
federal government is not sufficiently responsive to the desires of Saskatchewan. We continue to press 
our interests in that regard. No doubt other provinces feel that the federal government is insufficiently 
responsive to concerns which are uppermost in their minds. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Does the Premier agree with the Prime 
Minister of Canada that the entrenchment of French language in the constitution of Canada is 
non-negotiable? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, clearly he is giving the position of the federal government that it is 
non-negotiable on their part. I would anticipate that that was an 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3853 

opening statement in the course of some proceedings at which he intends to negotiate a great deal on this 
point. I would be frankly surprised if in the course of the next number of months, when constitutional 
negotiations are discussed, the federal government did not put forward this proposal and attempt to 
recruit support for its particular proposal, as we obviously will with our proposals. That may be saying 
that it is non-negotiable but, in fact, is acting as if it were negotiable. 
 

Ward System 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the Minister of Education. The minister has announced that Dr. deVlieger 
is doing a study on the possible imposition of the ward system. A press report in the Regina Leader-Post 
indicated that when Dr. deVlieger was accused of having a pre-set position, i.e. in favor of the ward 
system, he denied it and then gave a vigorous defence of the advantages of the ward system. Would you 
not admit that your study is, in fact, weighted in favour of the ward system? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — No, I would not, Mr. Speaker. I discussed this 
question with Professor deVlieger prior to his undertaking the study. I was satisfied that he wished to 
undertake a full and complete inquiry into this whole question with the objective of obtaining all 
possible sides to the argument. I don’t think there is any evidence at all to support the suggestion that 
Professor deVlieger has made up his mind one way or another on this question. 
 
MR. LANE: — Your news release – and concerns from school boards that have already opposed your 
position – indicates that the deVlieger committee is to study and communicate to the Saskatchewan 
Urban Law Review Committee a position on the ward system. Of course, if there is no ward system, no 
position need be communicated to the Saskatchewan Urban Law Review Committee. Would that not be 
further evidence that in fact your department and the government opposite are firmly committed to a 
ward system in the school boards and that the deVlieger’s commission is a sham and a phoney thing to 
try to get the government’s position out to the public? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, if I already had a position on this subject I would not have 
commissioned Professor deVlieger to undertake this investigation; I would have simply made my 
feelings known directly to my colleagues. I have not done that. I have asked Professor deVlieger to 
undertake an investigation. I think this is an appropriate time to be doing so, given that the urban law 
review committee is looking into the whole question of urban election procedures, organization and so 
on. I think it is only right that we should have an open investigation into this question with some 
opportunity for people to make their views known. I know that Professor deVlieger will listen to those 
views and give us an objective accounting of the possibilities and so on with respect to the ward system. 
 

Additional Highway Lanes 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Highways I will address my question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, the Minister of Highways has 
expressed repeated concerns for the safety of the motorists in this province and is at present considering 
the reduction of speed limits on our highways. In light of the very tragic accident which happened last 
week at Webb, Mr. Premier, do you now realize that double-laning one of Saskatchewan’s most 
travelled highways, the Trans-Canada Highway, would be a most positive step to ensure the 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3854 

safety of many Saskatchewan residents and of visitors to this province? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that the double-laning of all highways might well 
be a positive step toward the safety of motorists both local and out of province. I believe the Department 
of Highways operates on the basis of a traffic count and where particular stretches of highway have high 
traffic counts they build into their plans potential four-laning. I believe that particular highway west of 
Swift Current has a traffic count which is somewhat lower than the standard now being applied by the 
Department of Highways. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. Mr. Premier, I am talking about the complete Trans-Canada 
Highway and in view of your minister’s map on traffic counts, it is one of the highest in the province. 
 
Your government, Mr. Premier, continually boasts of the profits from potash and other resources. Would 
you explain to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan why your government has seen fit, in 
these supposedly fine times Saskatchewan is in, to cut the capital budget for highway construction 
(which would be a great improvement) to that important transportation artery, right through the 
province, the Trans-Canada Highway and therefore safeguard the lives of many of the people of this 
province? Would you explain why you cut these in times when there is bounty in this province? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, there are of course other highways which have significantly higher 
traffic counts than the Trans-Canada Highway west of Swift Current or west of the intersection between 
the No. 1 Highway and the Leader Highway. There are, in fact, parts of the Yellowhead Highway which 
have significantly higher counts, which are still two-lane as opposed to four-lane. I know there is some 
support from my colleague, the member for Redberry, to having a four-lane between Saskatoon and 
North Battleford and no doubt support from my colleague, the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, to 
four-laning a highway from North Battleford to Lloydminster and so on. 
 
I go over to Alberta and see many, many two-lane highways in a province which has a very substantial 
income. I think any government must make judgments as to where money should be spent. It is never 
infinite in its supply and the Department of Highways has made a judgment as to the traffic count which 
justifies four-laning. I believe it is certainly one of the lower average yearly census figures in Canada 
justifying four-laning, and accordingly it will be seen that our standards are, in terms of promoting 
four-laning, among the highest in Canada. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, if the answer to this question is yes, I hope the Premier accepts our 
congratulations for truth in advertising on the Saskatchewan highways and transportation construction. 
The question is: is the ‘slow’ sign on the front of this pamphlet indicative of the policies and programs 
by the Department of Highways and Transportation? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the answer is yes, if by those policies you mean urging 
motorists to proceed slowly and with caution. We certainly do not doubt for one moment that motorists 
proceeding slowly and with caution on highways, whether two-lane or four-lane, is the best way to 
promote traffic safety and to lessen the number of injuries and deaths on the highway. I hope, therefore, 
that message conveyed by the Department of Highways will be taken to heart by all motorists. 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3855 

Oil Pricing Agreement 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, we now have less than 
one month in which to arrive at a new oil pricing agreement before the present oil pricing agreement 
ends. It appears we are now in a situation of a Mexican stand-off between Ottawa on the one hand and 
the producing provinces on the other hand. Could the Premier advise this Assembly as to whether or not 
any behind the scenes negotiations with regard to oil prices would give any encouragement to the fact 
that perhaps the parties are coming closer to an agreement? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I have to answer the hon. member by saying, no, so far as I’m concerned, and I 
have recently consulted with my colleague, the Minister of Mineral Resources. I do not believe there are 
any negotiations to which we are privy or aware of, which would encourage one to believe there will be 
an early settlement on the matter of oil pricing. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Premier, press reports would indicate that the confrontation could be coming, 
in particular between Alberta and Ottawa, Your government has always advocated a planned 
development of our resources, including the theory that perhaps the resources are better left in the 
ground. It would appear from press statements that Alberta has brought in legislation in the form of Bill 
50 which could have the effect of curtailing production of crude oil in Alberta by as much as 20 per 
cent. Could you advise the Assembly as to whether or not your government is in support, in principle, of 
that type of procedure, or that type of legislation by the Government of Alberta? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, our government is in agreement in principle with provinces having 
the right to regulate the rate at which a resource is produced. It has been the position of our government 
that the provinces should have the right to regulate the rate of production or any particular resource, both 
with respect to conserving the resource and having it developed in an appropriate way, for maximizing 
the use of the resource, and with respect to being able to regulate, in part, the impact upon the provincial 
economy of producing the resource. 
 
We have put forward this point of view with respect to potash; we have put forward this point of view 
with respect to uranium in a policy statement last year, saying we would attempt to promote a staged 
development of uranium. Accordingly, as a general proposition, we believe provinces ought to be able to 
regulate the rate of production of resources, to conserve their resource and to get the maximum 
beneficial impact upon the provincial economy. 
 

Payment to Unionest Party 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the Government House Leader. Last Wednesday I asked you a question 
about the payment to the Unionest Party. You made the statement and used the phrase that the public 
should not assume that any payment was being made. You indicated secondly that you were having the 
matter investigated by your officials. Press reports indicate that a payment was made to the Unionest 
Party. Would you now be prepared to table the report that you received and how it authorized the 
payment? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, I would not be prepared to table it. 
The Department of Finance, whose department in the end result authorizes payments of financial sums, 
wanted to have a legal opinion from the Department of the 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3856 

Attorney General as to whether or not the payment was obligatory given the fact that retroactive 
legislation is currently being debated by the House. That was the nature of the legal opinion. I have not 
seen the legal opinion myself and I don’t know whether the payment has been made to the Unionest 
Party or not. I assume it has been made. It is not the policy of the government to outline the details of 
legal opinions which are tendered, obvious in a privileged basis, as between the Department of the 
Attorney General and other departments. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you and through 
you to the House, Mr. Simon de Jong, the member of parliament for Regina East. Mr. de Jong was first 
elected in 1979 in what must be regarded as an upset election. He was re-elected in 1980. We share not 
only a common calling and a common riding but also we share common responsibilities. Mr. de Jong is 
presently critic for science technology in the arts and in the last parliament was critic for 
multiculturalism as well. 
 
In this crucial time in the cultural life of our nation, I know all members will feel relieved that we have 
in Ottawa a penetrating critic of the competence and energy of Mr. de Jong. I am sure all members will 
want to join with me in welcoming him. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I would like to join the hon. member in welcoming the member of 
parliament. I suppose the first question is, what’s he doing here? And secondly, I would hope that as the 
NDP critic for science and technology he could make some representations on behalf of the people of 
Saskatoon to allow them to receive cable television through the cable operators and perhaps discourage 
Sask Tel from jamming the television signals in Saskatoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Mr. Speaker, since we’re all welcoming the 
member of parliament, Mr. de Jong, I would like to add my welcome to him. I would say that Ottawa’s 
gain was Regina’s loss; it seems we’ve lost one of the best restaurants in town. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Additional Morning Sitting 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I would like to introduce, and I shall do so on the 
completion of a few very brief remarks, a motion for extended hours. The motion I think is 
self-explanatory. It would extend the hours of sitting by two more hours a week, involving private 
members’ day, which of course is Tuesday. The extended hours would start tomorrow and every 
Tuesday thereafter. The legislature has completed virtually all of its work with the exception of one 
small matter on the private bills committee which, I think, can be adequately looked after by the House 
within half an hour or one hour at the most in advance of the 10 o’clock sitting and would permit the 
members to debate more fully the various matters which are still on the order paper. Mr. Speaker, I trust 
that members opposite will see fit to agree to this, Accordingly I move, seconded by the 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3857 

member for Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman): 
 

That notwithstanding Rule 3(1), this Assembly shall, commencing Tuesday, June 3, 
1980, and each Tuesday thereafter, meet at 10 o’clock a.m. and there shall be a recess 
from 12 o’clock p.m. until 2 o’clock p.m. 

 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — No, Mr. Speaker, the Assembly is not ready 
for the question. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this motion for extended sitting hours is obvious and 
apparent to anyone. It is an attempt by the Government of Saskatchewan to drag out the hours in order to 
try to prevent the member for Swift Current and the member for Nipawin from extending their 
discussion of Bill No. 105 and attempting to convince other members of this Legislative Assembly of 
the necessity to re-examine their position in terms of Bill No. 105. 
 
I was interested to note, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General appears to be the master of BS. I was 
looking the other day at the Regina Leader-Post and the headline said, Collver Loses Bid to End Debate. 
How in the world the Attorney General could convince a reporter that an adjourned debate was ending 
the debate is beyond my comprehension. Furthermore, outside the Assembly the Attorney General said 
to this reporter that it wasn’t an NDP plan to prevent the adjournment of debate, but only because the 
members were tired of listening to the member for Nipawin. Now, if the members were tired of listening 
to the member for Nipawin they would have allowed the adjourned debate. And they could have gone on 
with the rest of the business of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point is that this introduced motion, as I said, is nothing more than an attempt by the 
government to prevent that from happening and to ram its bill through. However, to prove to the people 
of Saskatchewan that this issue is extremely important, to prove to the people of Saskatchewan that this 
kind of move by the government is not going to stop us, I am going to support this motion. I am going to 
show the Attorney General and others this kind of extension of hours is not going to prevent us from 
fighting this bill as much as is humanly possible. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — There is a lengthy tradition usually followed when we have the 
extended hours motion at the end of the session. There is some negotiation and some understanding 
between the party whips that the government, at some point, indicates it is not bringing in further 
legislation. I see another bill today. There were further bills on Friday. We saw the move of the 
Government House Leader last Thursday to put Bill No. 13 prior to Bill No. 105, and in fact having a 
closure of Bill No. 13 to allow debate on Bill No. 105. 
 
I would suggest to the Attorney General that given the House traditions there should be some indication 
from the Government House Leader as to whether there is going to be another packet of bills. Because if 
there is, it in fact means that you are trying to hurry them through the House. You are trying to put 
pressure on the opposition to get government business hurriedly through the House. I hope the Attorney 
General in his closing remarks will indicate that the government is at the end of bringing in legislation, 
except for The Statute Law Amendment Act. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would make two very brief comments in rebuttal. First of all, 
with respect to the Leader of the Unionest Party, this is not an attempt to add additional hours in order to 
make it more difficult for him to extend the discussion (as he words it) on Bill 105. I think all members 
would agree that an additional two hours, given especially the fact that there is a two hour luncheon 
break and a two hour dinner 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3858 

break, certainly would allow full discussion of all of the legislation that is involved. Indeed I must tell 
the hon. member that what I did indicate to the reporters outside is substantially correct, as outlined, and 
many members of this House are anxious to see some resolution to Bill 105. That is in fact the situation. 
 
The second comment I would make, Mr. Speaker, relates to the member for Qu’Appelle. I cannot give 
him any commitment at this time that there will not be any further legislation. I don’t believe that there 
is any more substantive legislation to come forward that has not made the blues or the whites, with the 
possible exception of the appropriations bill at the end. I don’t think the hon. member was including that 
in his comments because that is a standard bill. The fact of the matter is the longer the House sits, 
members must appreciate, the longer the pressure exists on government, now that we’re into June, to 
introduce legislation as required. 
 
The thinking of the government was very simple. It is not an attempt to push the opposition along to 
deliberations. While I would very much like to see a speedy end to the session, I think it can be done 
without destroying the respective roles that we have. The fact is we sat on Tuesday for Crown 
corporations committee or public accounts committee, or private bills. None of these committees is any 
longer sitting and so it is a mere transference of work that we would have done in committee to work 
that we would do here in the Legislative Assembly. I think that’s it for the bills. For the hon. member’s 
edification, I think that’s pretty well it; but I do not want this to be undertaken as a commitment in the 
eventuality that two, three, or four weeks from now some issue arises which would necessitate an 
introduction of another piece of legislation, the said legislation will not be introduced. I thank the hon. 
members for the co-operation and I look forward to passing this motion. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

MOTION FOR INTERIM SUPPLY 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, in the absence of the Minister of 
Finance, the Acting Minister of Finance, and the Acting, Acting Minister of Finance, this committee has 
the pleasure of being stuck with the Acting, Acting, Acting Minister of Finance. Not being one to give 
up an opportunity to act, I shall now put on my Minister of Finance garb. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move the following four traditional motions for interim supply: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $163,959,070, being approximately one-twelfth of the 
amount of each of the several sums to be voted, as set forth in the estimates for the fiscal 
year ending March 31, 1981, laid before the Assembly at the present session, be granted 
to Her Majesty, on account, for the twelve months ending March 31, 1981. 

 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — This is one-twelfth, I presume, of the total 
budget. Is this money allocated for the month of April? Is this the one that applies to the month of April 
or has that already passed this House? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — That has already passed this House. This is related to the month of June, I 
believe . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I guess it goes back to May. April has 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3859 

passed. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — It’s my understanding that a bill or a motion has passed the Assembly, the 
committee, to grant interim supply to the end of June. Is that correct? This is merely going through the 
committee of finance up until the end of the month of June? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No. Mr. Chairman, this is the standard procedure which members of this House, 
unfortunately the longer the session drags out, have to follow. On a month by month basis we vote funds 
for the civil servants to be paid, for the government projects to be continued. This works for the month 
of May. This is to vote the funds for the month of May, I’m advised by the Minister of the Environment. 
If he’s wrong, he’s the one who is going to take the blame for it. I thought it was for the month of June. 
In any event, it doesn’t matter whether it’s past or present; it works on a month to month basis. So if we 
are still sitting in July – heaven forbid! – we will be coming about the same time again for another 
one-twelfth whether it’s for June or for July. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, the point is that once again the Attorney General is attempting to 
flimflam both the members of this Assembly and the members of the press by getting interim supply 
prior to grievance rather than grievance prior to supply. The Attorney General knows that the budget 
could very simply be passed in this Assembly by merely calling the departments of finance – the various 
departments of finance. He could get that kind of motion to this Assembly. We could get through very 
quickly with all of the business of the House. 
 
The Attorney General presents to us today a list of business to do. Today! And he has a list of adjourned 
debates a mile long, committee of the whole a mile long, and another page of second readings. But he 
sticks Bill No. 105, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, right at the top. It is the 
Attorney General’s intention, through this flimflam method, to try to convince the people in the province 
of Saskatchewan that somehow it is the debate on Bill No. 105 that is holding up the business of the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the reason why he brings these kinds of things forward 
in this order. Why attempt to get interim supply at this point when, in fact, you can bring forward the 
necessary departments of finance and in very short order get them through this House? So the Attorney 
General is attempting to use this method and he says he had three or four of them. I don’t think very 
many people in this Assembly would feel too badly about the interim supply for the month of May since 
the month of May has already passed. 
 
I would also like to know under what legislative authority, if this is for the month of May, did the 
Attorney General issue cheques in the month of May? This is June 2. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, first of all the hon. member is in error with respect to his 
understanding, with all due respect, of the rules. I just finished mentioning to the member for 
Qu’Appelle that the traditional debate on the sums, the wrap-up debate, comes with the introduction of 
the appropriation bill (to meet your argument about the sufficient funds). That is, after we have dealt 
with the vote by vote consideration of the various departments we then introduce the appropriation bill; 
it is a two day debate (up to two days; it doesn’t have to be two days). Traditionally we have about a 20 
minute debate at the end of the session, because we are all talked out. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Does it have to be at the end? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — It doesn’t have to be at the end. It is the tradition of the House to deal with the 
entire package of legislative spending. It would allow the opposition to get 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3860 

an overview of the explanations or the lack of explanations which the government has or has not 
provided on all the departments. That’s the way the appropriation bills have taken place. 
 
The fact of the matter is, as much as I would like to see the Department of Agriculture and a few other 
departments yet to do in estimates get finished before Wednesday or Thursday, when the deadline for 
this appropriation bill is met, I don’t think it’s possible. I could be wrong but I don’t think it is possible. 
If I am wrong, I will be the happiest man in this House. I don’t want to take the chance as House Leader. 
We need to get the money out to the local governments and to the local school boards. We have to get 
the money out to our civil servants. We have to get the projects going. This is the traditional method of 
doing interim supply. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I see no other option here but to proceed on this basis; otherwise nothing moves. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — I have just a couple of questions on the comments 
by the Attorney General. You indicate this is the payment for May for which you are getting the money. 
It seems strange to me. How did you make these payments if the money wasn’t approved and if the 
people received their payments for May? Was the payment made before the money was approved 
(which seems a bad practice to me)? I remember last month during questioning in the House that civil 
servants were late in receiving their pay cheques. They were told the interim supply didn’t come forward 
soon enough. If my memory serves me right, it was April 26 when it was brought in. I wonder why 
interim supply wasn’t brought in last week so that the money could have been appropriated before the 
bills were paid, if they have been paid? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I get advice from the man who undoubtedly would have to have 
the definitive word on this, the former minister of finance, the member for Biggar. He advises me that in 
his experience as minister of finance, the money comes about the beginning of the month. It works 
retroactively for payment of wages and the like for the month of May. There is a slop-over of some days 
and some functions into the next month. You have a grace period of three or four days from the time the 
end of the month strictly runs out. Accordingly, there would be sufficient funds for the processing of the 
cheques. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Following that, the answer given to the employees last month, when they phoned 
the Department of Finance to find out why their pay cheques were not there and it was said it was 
because the interim supply had not been passed, was then not true. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, again the situation is, with respect to the first month, that it was 
true because there was a drying up of funds. On that first interim supply we needed the injection of fuel, 
or the injection of money, into the system. Now the pump has water in it; it’s running dry, but we are 
pumping more water into it. But the first interim supply had no water whatsoever; therefore there was no 
money from which to see it paid. It would be true that in due course, if we delayed this and passage was 
prevented of interim supply, then we would be facing the same problem which we did a few days ago. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Would it not seem logical, if the payments for the government are at the end of the 
month and there is this spill over which I understand you are talking about here, that you would ask for 
the money prior to the end of the month? It seems 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3861 

strange to me that you would be coming in June wanting the money for May. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member tells me, and of course I know this of my 
own experience, that there used to be a time when we would come into the Legislative Assembly and 
introduce the interim supply for three-month periods. You would do it once every quarterly period. This 
was felt through some mechanism, rules committee or otherwise, not to be sufficiently responsive and 
therefore we changed over to the one-twelfth mechanism, which is what we use now. Accordingly, the 
introduction of interim supply is done on the advice of the officials of the Department of Finance given 
the supply of money and their obligations. 
 
I am advised that we are now heading into the first of June, and it’s the appropriate time to cover off 
May and to cover off those portions of June necessary in order to keep it going. If we are here until July, 
we will be following the same regular basis thereafter. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, pursuant to that question from the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley, would it not follow then that April is actually a dry well all through 
the month until that appropriation is done at the end of the month? You are paying bills. For example, 
you would be paying salaries either on a weekly basis or bimonthly basis; so there would be some 
payments in the interim that would have to be made with a completely dry well since it’s a new fiscal 
year. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I think the hon. member is basically right and (we have Mr. Costello here with 
us who is the acting deputy minister of finance) April would be a dry month in essence. You introduce 
the first interim supply in May. You pay off all the obligations retroactively for April and some ongoing 
obligations and then you come back in again in June. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, in that case, it would also be a reasonably dry well in the month of May 
because you are talking about one-twelfth of your budget which you are spending on a monthly basis. 
So, therefore, your weekly or bimonthly salaries being paid in the month of May would have to come 
from an overdraft at the bank or however else you generate those funds. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I would just like to check this for a moment but we think that the first interim 
supply was for two-twelfths, April and May, which should answer the problem. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — If I recall the motion last month, it was for the same amount of money, which 
brings me to another question while you are checking that one out. Would the Chairman mind repeating 
the amount of money involved please? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — $163,959,070. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, that amount does not work out to one-twelfth of the budget, the 
cash outflow, and I am asking now why the variance? Your yearly cash outflow budget is $2,019 million 
which works out to about a little better than $168 million, not $163 million. Why the discrepancy in 
those two amounts? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised by finance people that the figure, the number, is 
given on the basis of appropriation plus loans and advances. That is how the one-twelfth breaks down. 
It’s one-twelfth of the combination of those figures and you are looking at the appropriation figure 
alone. 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3862 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would the Attorney General please give us the figure of appropriation – the total 
for the year? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, it’s in the blue book. The hon. member has it as easily as 
anybody does. I don’t know if I have my blue book here or not, but it’s there. Here’s the blue book; I’ll 
have one of the officials check it out for me. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I direct the hon. members to page 9. The estimated for 1980-81 to be voted is $1.96 
billion plus loans and advances. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Is your interim supply dry every month since you are making payments during 
every day of the month, right from the beginning? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised by the acting deputy, Mr. Costello, that we took 
interim supply early in April for one-twelfth. We then took another supply in early May for two-twelfths 
and these are not necessarily on a calendar month. They are proportions broken down into twelfths of 
the expenditures. This is the third interim supply which is an additional one-twelfth and essentially is 
required for the fire suppression and other matters related to this. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, the answers you’ve been giving all along, then, have been 
incorrect. Now we’re finding out that this is four-twelfths. We’re into our third month and you’re paying 
the bills from behind, so you’re two months ahead. Surely you’re not looking at $330 million for fire 
suppression? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I wish that government could be so simplistic that it was simply a 
matter of paying cheques for the employees at the end of the month. The fact of the matter is that there 
are ongoing obligations. For example, fire suppression – there’s a requirement for money to look after 
the payment for the expenses involved in the suppression of fires. Some of those may be ongoing; some 
of them may not be ongoing. They don’t necessarily end up neatly at the end of months. What we are 
doing here is on a twelfth basis allocating funds, some of which may be on an ongoing basis, some of 
which may not. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, what I would like to know from the Attorney General is this. 
Having received already three months interim supply, for April, May and June, he’s now asking for July 
interim supply. Now let’s be honest about it. This motion is not specifically designed to pay May interim 
supply at all. He had the legislative authority through interim supply before to pay the May bills. I’m 
sorry that the Attorney General finds himself in this position of having to answer finance questions 
before the finance people were next to him and so I’m not trying to embarrass him. But we’re actually 
talking about July interim supply. 
 
Now the fact remains, Mr. Chairman, the only reason that we are not now finished the budget, that we 
are not now completed with the budget, is because of the Attorney General’s own choice as House 
Leader for bringing in bills to this Assembly. He is now bringing in bills that normally his department 
would accumulate and bring into the fall session. That’s a fact. What the Attorney General is trying to 
do is continue this sitting to ram through legislation because we’re at the end of the session and to ram 
through legislation that is against the best interests of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is absolute and utter nonsense to suggest that the Government of Saskatchewan 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3863 

needs another one-twelfth interim supply when it has already received one entire quarter of the year 
interim supply. We are now talking about July. So what the Attorney General is trying to do is to 
blackmail every member of this legislature. I think that is what the Attorney General is trying to do, 
because he can finish the budget; it’s the Attorney General who decides the order paper and the Attorney 
General decides what comes on in this House. He can call finance; he can develop finance and we can 
finish the budget. Why then, does the Attorney General need another interim supply at this stage when 
he’s already received one-quarter of the entire year? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I must say, with all due respect to the member for Nipawin, that 
he is not conversant with what interim supply is all about. I’m saying to the hon. member that as 
requirements arise for government to pay bills, some of which are foreseen, some of which are 
unforeseen (I use the fire suppression as a very good example of an unforeseen and expensive run on 
finances) a quarter of the functioning with respect to government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Of 
course it isn’t $160 million, but there are other ongoing obligations. That’s but one example. You have 
to continue the pay and rations of the civil service for one reason. You can continue to do that. And the 
fact of the matter is that this is not done on a monthly basis; it is generally thought of, or perceived of, 
for the month of May or for the month of June, but it is not compartmentalized into neat quarters. As I 
indicated to the hon. member for Regina South these are non-moneys which are in effect sliced straight 
across the budget and are used for the services of the government. 
 
For example, we have voted social services money already. We can’t use that money, already voted, for 
fire suppression. We have not yet voted Department of Northern Saskatchewan. We have not yet voted 
Department of the Environment for that matter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly, and therefore 
that comes now to your next argument which is wrong, and that is to say that somehow this bill isn’t 
needed. This bill is needed because I don’t know when the appropriation bill is going to be introduced 
and debated. I am saying the appropriation bill goes on the order paper after we introduce and pass the 
various estimates of the departments of the government. We are not doing any estimates for today 
because we have the very urgent and pressing matter of Bill 105 to deal with. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — There you are. You see Mr. Chairman, what he’s trying to say is that the urgent 
and pressing matter of Bill 105, the suppression of civil liberties of citizens of this province, is more 
important to the Government of Saskatchewan than paying its bills. What he’s saying is that it’s more 
important to suppress civil liberties than it is to go through and put the departments on here. It’s more 
important to bring in this slicy and dicey little interim supply, to get supply before grievance. I would 
merely ask the Attorney General, has he ever heard of that expression, grievance before supply? Does he 
believe that the function of a legislative chamber is to grieve before the government has money, not 
after? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, of course everybody would understand grievance before 
supply. That is one of the cornerstones in general terms of our parliamentary system. The fact of the 
matter is that this process now is melding the two by permitting grievance and supply on an interim 
basis. We are not here introducing twelve-twelfths of the budget . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But 
listen, we are into June which is virtually unprecedented, I dare say unprecedented, in the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan right now. What are we trying to do here? We are trying to 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3864 

accomplish the two objectives of making sure the government has enough funds around to be able to do 
its job and to do the business of the House. All I can say as House Leader is that I try to draw a balance 
between those bills which you think are important (you, meaning the opposition), and those that you 
think are unimportant, and those estimates which you think are important and those that you don’t think 
are important, and the ones that we think are or are not important. Sometimes that balance works and 
sometimes it doesn’t. Right now you don’t happen to agree with the balance. Well, just call them the 
way you call them and act the best you can. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to say this and then I’m going to take my place. I’m 
prepared to accept the Attorney General’s one-twelfth for the month of July. If the Attorney General, 
who said he has three or four of them to bring in today – of these motions for interim . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, standard. Oh, just one-twelfth, no more than one further twelfth, just pertaining to 
one-twelfth? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Right. I tell the hon. member what we do today is all pertaining to one-twelfth. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I’m saying to the Attorney General in my judgment, in my opinion, in my 
estimation, it is not necessary. If he brought forward the necessary departments to be discussed in this 
Chamber, he would find that it would go very, very quickly and the appropriation bill would go very, 
very quickly. He would get the budget and then he would have grievance before supply instead of 
supply before grievance. With one-twelfth I’m prepared to accept it. But let me assure the Attorney 
General of this one thing. If the Attorney General attempts by ramming through legislation, suppressive 
legislation, that he thinks is important, ahead of the budgetary requirements of the province of 
Saskatchewan, if there is another attempt to bring forward another one-twelfth, I can assure the Attorney 
General that I will tie that, in no uncertain terms, to Bill 105 and we will continue the fight in terms of 
not only Bill 105 but also interim supply. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

Be it resolved that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of 
certain expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1981 the sum 
of $163,959,070 be granted out of the consolidated fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $52,664,580, being approximately one-twelfth of the 
amount of each of the several sums to be voted, as set forth in the estimates for the fiscal 
year ending March 31, 1981, laid before the Assembly at the present session, be granted 
to Her Majesty, on account, for the twelve months ending March 31, 1981. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, one final motion: 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3865 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty, on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1981, the sum or $52,664,580 
be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
MR. COLLVER: — What fire suppression or other urgent matter has to be granted out of the heritage 
fund? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the interim supply in the last number of years has involved 
passage of one-twelfth of consolidated and one-twelfth of that portion committed from heritage to 
consolidated. That is what this last motion is doing. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry the Attorney General doesn’t accept what I said earlier. 
The point is the Attorney General said the $168 million to be granted out of this committee was in order 
to meet the urgent needs of government, to carry government forward another little time and to meet the 
commitments they have already made such as fire suppression and such as other unknown expenditures 
– to meet the grants and that sort of thing that have already been met. 
 
My question was quite reasonable. What urgent matters are being paid out of this fund? If this is the 
case, the government doesn’t need this $52 million until it passes the appropriate budgetary items and 
until it passes the appropriation bill. In other words, if there’s no urgency for this money, why in the 
name of heaven should this Assembly grant interim supply? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, the policy of the Minister of Finance and the 
government has been, rightly or wrongly (and I think it’s been a right policy), to come forward on 
interim supply for both consolidated and heritage on a one-twelfth basis for each, separately, in order to 
keep the two accounts, in effect, roughly up to date and current. If we were to bring them in 
concurrently, or blended (although the funds are used in a concurrent and blended way) it would make it 
more difficult for proper accounting. 
 
Secondly, the point that I have just alluded to is the case. The funds, whether they come from the 
consolidated or from heritage, go to the administration of the province in its various needs, some of 
which may very well be ending up in fire suppression or in the other ordinary operations related to 
government. 
 
It would be very difficult for the officials, perhaps not impossible, to determine with precision what 
funds from heritage are being directed specifically for what purposes, unless there was some particularly 
obvious or glaring need identified from the heritage fund. We don’t have that identified in this 
one-twelfth call. What we are simply doing is identifying the one-twelfth, which is what we normally 
did in the other two interim supplies – the same way for the same no special circumstances, the same 
bookkeeping for the kind of an operation which we have identified. The same approach is being taken 
here. It, in effect for budgetary purposes, is cutting off the one-twelfth of the two sources of supply at 
the same time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I might not understand what the Attorney General is saying – 
one-twelfth of the heritage fund to the consolidated fund, as the payment made from one to the other. If 
that is the case, I’d say that motion should be for about $32 million, not $52 million. What I see here 
under the inflow for the consolidated fund is $387 million coming from the heritage fund. 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3866 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find this process interesting. I find it interesting from the 
Conservative side; the Unionests I could almost understand because of their determination on Bill 105. I 
find it a little more difficult on the Conservative side, their now asking these questions on interim 
supply, this having been the third time this session it comes up on this standard procedure. All of a 
sudden the member for Regina South is asking these questions and seizing on every word that I raise. 
 
I shall try here to explain to the hon. member. I said the consolidated fund. It’s true I used that word. I 
should have more accurately, and not anticipating the extreme care by which the Conservative members 
are following this process, have said that that money of the heritage goes to consolidated and also to 
development programs (development funds as identified on page no. 121 of your estimates book) and 
thereafter and as voted on by department by department as we come to it, an example being Department 
of Culture and Youth, restoration of Saskatchewan House. The hon. member will remember that one, or 
the Northwest Territorial House, because of the overruns. It is marked right at the very bottom, 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund budgetary expenditures. Those two into the consolidated and into what I 
will categorize as the developmental functions are what that one-twelfth from heritage is comprised of. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What page are you on? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What? I said I’d draw your attention to page no. 121, Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund budgetary expenditures, resources division. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — With deference to the Attorney General and I am not trying to embarrass him 
again, I will say that. But Mr. Attorney General, be embarrassed. On the one side, you are telling us that 
the Department of Finance requires one-twelfth of the total consolidated fund expenditures. So that is 
what you told us to divide by 12 and come up with this one-twelfth. Now you are telling us it needs 
another one-twelfth of the heritage fund that goes into the consolidated fund. 
 
So what you are asking for is more than one-twelfth of the operating fund or consolidated fund in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That is what you are asking for. If you wanted interim supply, you would 
have interim supply based on one-twelfth of the consolidated fund expenditures plus one-twelfth of the 
difference between heritage fund expenditures and the amount which goes into the consolidated fund. 
Then you would get one-twelfth of the appropriation per annum . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, yes. 
If you would pass me your book, Mr. Member for Regina South (which I asked for earlier), I would be 
happy to show you the figures . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Why? Would you rather I borrow an NDP 
book? Is it red instead of blue? Goodness gracious sakes alive! 
 
Total budgetary cash outflows, Mr. Chairman, in the province of Saskatchewan estimated for 1981 is 
$2,019,345,400. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What page are you on? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I am on page no. 9. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s including statutory. Take the appropriation. 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3867 

MR. COLLVER: — Yes. Less this. Pardon? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Take the $1.9 billion and something. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — To be voted $1.965 billion. Divide that by 12 and you come up with the amount 
the Attorney General had in his former motion. That is one-twelfth of the expenditures of the 
consolidated fund. Am I correct on that? So you took one-twelfth of $1.965 billion and that is how you 
came up with that first motion. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I explained to the hon. members that the first one-twelfth 
required for the consolidated fund is one-twelfth of two figures: (a) the figures on page no. 9 which you 
are citing, and (b) the figure related to loans and advances, etc. One-twelfth of that is the first set of 
motions. The first number is $1.965 billion, page no. 9, to be voted. The second, on loans and advances 
– I say to the member for Nipawin so we don’t take more time than we need to . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I don’t know what you are doing, Roy. I think you are getting away with 
something here. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — First of all, it is one-twelfth of the figure on page no. 9, $1.965 billion, then 
one-twelfth of loans and advances, which figure is not summarized in the book. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And that is the second one you are dealing with? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No. That is one-twelfth of the first motion. It is comprised of two things, the 
$1.965 billion plus loans and advances. That is out of the way. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could just pass this along to the Attorney General that 
$1.965 billion divided by 12 is $163 million. That is a portion of the expenditure. Now what the 
Attorney General is telling us is that over and above that he wants one-twelfth of the income of the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, a portion of which goes into the consolidated fund. The member for 
Regina South doesn’t understand the difference between income and expense. On this side is . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll explain it once more and hopefully, even the members opposite will understand. 
What the Attorney General, in principle, has said to us today is that he wants one-twelfth of the 
consolidated fund plus one-twelfth of the ability to expend moneys from the heritage fund. But, Mr. 
Chairman, by including the moneys he is apportioning over to the consolidated fund, he is getting 
one-twelfth of that too much. Now surely anyone can understand that. A portion of the outgo of the 
consolidated fund is the moneys received from the heritage fund. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You did this when you were the Leader of the Conservatives too. Remember 
that? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — No. I didn’t do that. On an interim supply, what I did when I was in another group 
was entirely different than this, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, perhaps a little 
classroom study is in order here. Perhaps the Government of Saskatchewan had better realize the 
principle of grievance before supply, instead of the supply, and take what they will. 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3868 

I’m going to try one more time to explain it to the member for Shellbrook. O.K.? The member for 
Shellbrook will agree that what the government wants is one-twelfth of the consolidated fund plus 
one-twelfth of the heritage fund expenditures. Is that correct? Let’s have an answer. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member for Nipawin and the hon. member for Regina 
South don’t have their acts together. The hon. member for Regina South got up in his very first series of 
questions and said, one-twelfth of $1.9 billion doesn’t work out. Why doesn’t it? So I said to him, the 
first set of resolutions is one-twelfth of two things: (a) the $1.96 billion on page 9 plus (b) one-twelfth of 
loans and advances equals one-twelfth. The Department of Finance people will go back to their 
calculators and just see whether or not it works out. They advise me it does. But that’s what the first set 
of resolutions deals with. 
 
The second set of resolutions deals with one-twelfth of the heritage fund, for those expenditures which 
are identified on page 121. But there are other expenditures laced throughout the field. I will give you an 
example on page 119, energy security division, grants and rebates to the petroleum and natural gas 
exploration and conservation development. These are expenditures which come out of the heritage fund, 
expenditures due and owing to the various companies which are involved. 
 
So I say to the hon. members again lest they become further confused in this whole operation, what I’ve 
been trying to say now for the last hour, namely that we are voting here two sets of funds. They are two 
sources of revenue. One goes into consolidated, one-twelfth made up of those two figures I’ve 
mentioned. The other is one-twelfth heritage expenditures, example being the one I just gave you. We 
are passing four motions. The first two deal with consolidated based on that computation; the next two 
deal with one-twelfth of the heritage fund. That’s the standard procedure which has been going on now 
for this the third interim supply operation. 
 
Now how much plainer I can make it I don’t know. If the hon. member for Regina South says, well, 
your figures don’t calculate it out, I will ask the committee to sit for a minute or two until we get the 
Department of Finance to rush all the way back to check on their figures. It’s possible they made a 
mistake but they tell me the computations and the figures are accurate. I am working on that assumption. 
I am surprised, quite frankly, that this committee has adopted itself into the position of being chartered 
accountants, in effect to work out one-twelfth amounts, rather than to look at the policy and principle of 
interim supply. I can only ask, why is this taking place? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I will go back one more time to try to explain to the Attorney General. In an 
appropriate explanation perhaps the Attorney General can end this entire discussion quickly and we can 
get right on with what the Attorney General considers to be the most important issue facing the people. 
We will get on with that as soon as we get an answer to this. 
 
On page 8 of your blue book and I now have a blue book which doesn’t belong to the members to my 
right, which says 1981 on it and I hope that is all right for the benefit of the member for Regina South; it 
didn’t turn red in my hands – on that page the Attorney General will find the total budgetary cash 
inflow, expected by the Government of Saskatchewan for the year 1980-81, is $2,019,345,000, of which 
$387 million comes from the heritage fund. Now is that clear enough for the Attorney General? If you 
want one-twelfth of the total, you want one-twelfth of $2,019,345,000 plus one-twelfth 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3869 

of the difference between what the heritage fund puts into this fund and what it expends in other areas. If 
you take one-twelfth of $2 billion, plus one-twelfth of all of the heritage fund, you are taking a double 
one-twelfth on the $387 million. Now surely even the Attorney General can understand that. If what you 
are trying to say is that you need that money in total, then say so. But you haven’t said that. What you 
have said was, we want one-twelfth allocation. Well if you want one-twelfth allocation, let’s have 
one-twelfth allocation. 
 
I ask the Attorney General, since he is doing this bill and trying to usher it through in a hurry, to take 
$163 million and multiply it by 12; take the $57 million in this motion and multiply it by 12. Is that the 
total budget of the heritage fund plus the consolidated fund? The answer is no. You are $300 million 
high, which means that you are going to be $25 million more in this interim supply than you should be. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t here when the Attorney General mentioned two other interim supply 
motions this year or I would have brought this to his attention at that time. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where were you a year ago or a couple of years ago? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — The member for Shellbrook says I didn’t two years ago. How much was the 
heritage fund two years ago? For the information of the member for Shellbrook the heritage fund was 
zippo two years ago. But $387 million, one-twelfth of it is a very material sum of money. That’s $25 
million. I have heard the member for Rosthern, for heaven’s sake, question the government on 
expenditures of $150. Here we are talking about granting the government $25 million more than they 
would have otherwise received, if we were taking one-twelfth. Now would the Attorney General kindly, 
if my numbers are wrong, explain why they are wrong? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will try one more time. I say to the hon. member, what 
we are doing (please without interruption), if you can sit tight and listen for a minute or two it might 
solve things a little bit. And this is also to the Conservative member for Regina South. 
 
We are dealing here with approval for the government to expend one-twelfth of expenditures. I direct 
the hon. member’s attention first of all to page 9, budgetary cash outflows, $1.965 billion – one-twelfth 
of that. It does not quite come out to the exact figure in the resolutions because of loans and advances, 
but if you compute loans and advances in on the assumption that the boys have done their numbers, the 
first two resolutions should amount to that $163 million. Forget about, for the time being, page 8, cash 
inflow. We’re not dealing with that. 
 
Now turn to page 119 of your blues. We’re dealing with the heritage fund. You are computing 
one-twelfth on $387 million – the top figure. I am computing one-twelfth on total budgetary 
expenditures to be voted — $496,175,000, not $645,529,000; one-twelfth of that should, if the boys 
have done their numbers, roughly amount to that $56 million or $57 million the figures show. And we 
are therefore passing four motions to cover off two sources of expenditures, or funds if you will: the 
consolidated, made up of that figure on page 9 plus loans and advances, and the heritage, made up on 
this page of 465. That’s the way it was done in April; that’s the way it was done in May; that’s the way I 
hope it will be done in June. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll just go through it one more time. I’ll take the 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3870 

numbers the Attorney General gave me and maybe, just maybe, some of those NDP backbenchers, 
especially the ones who used to be cabinet members and are now backbenchers, would pay attention; 
maybe they’d learn something and they could get back in the cabinet again. Here’s the point, Mr. 
Chairman. How much, as a result of these motions, will the consolidated fund get as a result of interim 
supply? How much? I’ll tell the Attorney General how much. The Attorney General will know . . . Well, 
he’s not listening so . . . I listen to him with bated breath. 
 
How much as a result of these motions will the consolidated fund receive? The consolidated fund will 
receive one-twelfth of the total expenditures, $1.965 billion plus one-twelfth of $387 million, which 
means that the consolidated fund receives more than one-twelfth of its expenditures. Now you see, Mr. 
Chairman, that’s the point. One-twelfth of $387 million is some 30 odd million dollars. The consolidated 
fund will receive $163 million plus $30 million; the consolidated fund will receive $193 million, which 
means we are granting more than one-twelfth. 
 
You can’t because it’s called in business, for the benefit of the member for Regina South (who has been 
shaking his head at what I am saying), an intercompany account or an interdepartmental account or an 
interagency account. Whatever you call it, when you consolidate a fund or when you consolidate 
accounting methods, you . . . (inaudible interjection . . . 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the point is that the Attorney General is suggesting that somehow this is going to 
be acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. He says it was done in May. He says it was done in April. 
Three-twelfths has already been done. So therefore I say to the Attorney General that he’s already 
received $90 million extra in the consolidated fund, $90 million over and above what one-twelfth 
interim supply amounts to. Then why do we need this motion at all? He doesn’t need this. It was too 
much in April; it was too much in May by double; it’s too much again. It’s more than one-twelfth of the 
annual expenditures. Now am I correct in that, Mr. Attorney General? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, speaking to the heritage fund – I’m checking with Mr. Costello 
to make sure that I fully understand this. I’m convinced that I do and the hon. member opposite does not 
so I don’t want to say this in inflammatory terms but . . . What we are doing is voting (I repeat again) 
one-twelfth out of heritage as a dividend, if you will, to the consolidated. Included are two functions – a 
consolidated vote function as voted and a provincial development expenditure fund as voted. We need 
funds from heritage combined with funds from consolidated to meet the combination of those two as 
voted. For example, the one I gave was the $49 million set aside and voted on, with respect to royalties 
and grants for exploration companies out of the heritage. There are other examples under the 
development. Now that’s the function, the process and why we need it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s time we had a question on this motion as I’m prepared 
to vote on it. I just want to tell the Attorney General that I do understand what he has been telling us 
with one exception which I’m sure is an error on your part – that is the one-twelfth of the budgetary cash 
outflow in the consolidated fund, not part of the loans, advances and investments. If you’re talking 
loans, advances and investments of the Crown corporations, that’s a totally separate amount. I don’t 
know whether you’re talking about that or not, because that is 400 and some million dollars. However, I 
do understand the other exercise the Attorney General has put us through and I think it’s time for the 
question. 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3871 

MR. COLLVER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t think it’s time for the question at all. Would the 
Attorney General ask his official if this session happens to drag on – and he already has (supposedly) 
four-twelfths of the total expenditures of government – and the Attorney General keeps ramming these 
bills in, in advance of the budget, would the Attorney General or his official agree that by the time you 
would attempt to get ten-twelfths of the expenditures of government, you would have overspent the 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan? Is that correct? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised by my officials that we would not have overspent 
the total budget. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — That is very interesting, Mr. Chairman, because I would like to see how the 
Attorney General does this little mathematical game. You have $55 million here from the heritage fund. 
Is that correct, $52 million? Multiply that by 12, a very simple number, which comes to $624 million, as 
I add it. Multiply 163 by 12 and that comes to $1.965 billion for a total of $2.589 billion altogether . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They are two separate budgets. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Pardon? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They are two separate budgets. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — They are two separate budgets? Oh, I can understand that quite simply. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Member for Regina South. But if you have $2.589 billion and you only have $1.965 
billion and you have only $496 million altogether that comes to $2.361 billion. Now how can you 
multiply your one-twelfth by twelve and come to $200 million more than the total expenditures in your 
budget? Would you explain that to me, Mr. Attorney General? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member keeps confusing his figures. Then you keep 
reverting to the top figure of $387 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you said that in the 
preface of the question. Plus non-budgetary . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, again I want to just comment to the members of the committee because I find this 
an interesting process. It’s a fascinating political process to watch, Mr. Chairman. We are not here 
debating expenditures in the sense of policy expenditures and interim supply which is what we are 
approaching to do. We are, several of us, the member for Regina South, the member for Nipawin in 
particular, trying to play accountant. They are saying this figure is wrong, one-twelfth of that figure 
doesn’t work out, send your officials out to figure that out. I suppose that’s what this Chamber should be 
used for – that kind of accountancy – but for my part I would sooner trust the officials of the Department 
of Finance who computed these figures, than to trust, with all due respect, the hon. member for Nipawin 
or the member for Regina South, in their on the spot computations. 
 
I am going to try one more time, Mr. Speaker, to explain, if I can, how the figures are arrived at; if I 
don’t succeed then I am, frankly, burned out because you can take any other figure going from there, 
and give your interpolation of that and say the figures don’t match. But here is how the process of 
government works in coming to this Legislative Assembly for interim supply. I repeat again, on basics. 
We are voting here; we are giving permission to the government to make expenditures for up to one- 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3872 

twelfth. Expenditure is what we’re voting on. We are voting out of two categories – two funds in effect. 
One is the consolidated. Here we have an appropriation of $1.965 billion (that is indicated on page 9) 
plus approximately 1.8 of loans, advances, and investments other than the loans, advances and 
investments which are identified under specific special categories somewhere toward the back. Those 
are voted on every time we come to the committee of finance. You take those two figures (I’m still 
dealing with consolidated funds), $1.965 billion and loans, advances, investment of 1.8. You come to a 
figure of $1.967 billion. One-twelfth amounts to $163,959,070. Now, it’s taken one hour and fifteen 
minutes to get the hon. member for Nipawin to agree to that set of figures – exactly what I was telling 
him 20 minutes before and he didn’t buy that. 
 
Now I come to the heritage fund. The heritage fund is comprised of, or there are two kinds of 
expenditures. One is the appropriation, which is $496,175,000 – that is on page 119, total budgetary 
expenditures to be voted, which I have explained – plus loans, advances and investments, which 
amounts to, in various places, $135,800,000 additional. If you total those two up, it is $631,975,000. The 
hon. member says the figure, taking 52 times 12, doesn’t match with $387 million. On $631,975,000, we 
take one-twelfth which amounts to $52,664,000. The boys have gone through their computers and 
calculators again, Mr. Chairman, and lo and behold (I hate to shock the hon. member for Nipawin and 
the hon. member for Regina South) the same figures come out the same way for the sums which are set 
out in the blue book. That is the procedure, and we are doing the one-twelfth for the two funds – the 
consolidated and the heritage – at the same time. But the funds are in effect blended. They are used for 
consolidated or specific developmental projects or specially identified on the one-twelfth basis. I have 
given the example of the $49 million, which is heritage fund, out of the one-twelfth there. A portion of 
that may or may not be used, I don’t know, for the satisfaction of outstanding obligations with respect to 
royalties and the like. It may even be the payment back of the Cigol case. I don’t know, but that’s an 
example. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, that’s what we are doing, simply put – one-twelfth. I don’t know how many more 
times I can explain that to the hon. member opposite, but there it is. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I’m glad the hon. member for Regina South agrees; I do not agree. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the point I am trying to make to the Attorney General and to his officials is quite simply 
this. I have made it before in this legislature many times. It is not incumbent upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to expend moneys unless it is legislatively approved. Now the purpose for this interim 
supply is to await the legislative approval of the final and formal budget. When you take one-twelfth of 
expenses on the heritage fund, but you include in that an interbranch or interdepartment transfer between 
the heritage fund and the consolidated fund, you in fact are taking one-twelfth more than you need. Now 
when you add and compound that by suggesting you also need one-twelfth of borrowings, you are 
saying you need one-twelfth of borrowings plus expenditures. But you might borrow to pay 
expenditures. You might borrow to give appropriations. 
 
So the point is you are trying to mix apples and oranges. I don’t object to your mixing apples and 
oranges if that is what you say you are doing. If you say to this Assembly, we are not attempting to get 
one-twelfth of the budget, we are attempting to get this much cash money for the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan to work, then I will sit down, take my place and that’s the end of it. But if you try to 
say to the people of Saskatchewan, we are trying to take one-twelfth of the total budget through these 
allocations, then you are misleading the people of Saskatchewan and misleading this Assembly. 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3873 

I don’t object to the Attorney General saying we need $163 million. I don’t object to him saying we 
need $52 million out of the heritage fund. But I object to him saying this represents one-twelfth of the 
total, because it does not represent one-twelfth of the total for the information of the Attorney General 
and his officials. It cannot represent one-twelfth of the total, since you are double counting on heritage 
fund transfers into the consolidated fund. Fair enough, but that means we are not talking about moneys 
up to the end of July; we are talking about moneys on into August, in terms of the total budget and the 
budgetary expenditures which need to be voted on. I don’t object to the Attorney General saying, as of 
today we need moneys going into August. 
 
But I don’t think it is fair to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, nor do I think it’s fair to the 
members of this Assembly, for the Attorney General to say that this is one-twelfth and that it goes until 
the end of July. That’s all. So if the Attorney General wants to end this debate, he should merely get up 
and say to the people of Saskatchewan, what we’re looking for is this money on interim supply. It 
doesn’t represent one-twelfth but this is what we need. Fair game. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve said to the hon. member on many occasions that this is 
not an allocation of funds on a month compartmentalized by month basis. It is the voting of funds from 
heritage or consolidated on, if you will, a block basis as needed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you 
can continue all you want. I want to tell the hon. member that by so doing – well, he does whatever he 
wants to do; we’ll make a conclusion on that. 
 
I’m saying to the hon. member here that the one-twelfth of the heritage fund is, again, the slicing of the 
heritage fund (one-twelfth blended into consolidated and interdevelopmental) plus one-twelfth of the 
consolidated in order to allow this government to operate for this one-twelfth period – not in a 
compartmentalized way, but in a block way. 
 
That’s the way the process has worked for three years. The member has voted that in the past and has 
consented, with all due respect to the hon. member. Short of wanting to make this an issue because of 
Bill No. 105, he fully understands how the budgetary process operates and I say to him, he ought not to 
hold up interim supply and the very many worthwhile expenditures which are attached to that – not 
worthwhile, absolutely mandatory expenditures tied up with that – because of other motivations. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas – 32 
 
Blakeney Kaeding Lingenfelter 
Pepper  Hammersmith White 
Bowerman  Feschuk Larter 
Romanow  Byers  Taylor 
Messer  Vickar Rousseau 
Kramer  Cody Swan 
McArthur  Lusney  Pickering  
Gross  Long  Muirhead 
Shillington  Nelson  Katzman 
 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3874 

 
MacMurchy Engel Andrew 
Banda Poniatowski   
 

Nays – 2 
 
Collver Ham  
 
The committee reported resolutions. 
 
Resolutions agreed to and read a first time on division and read a second time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 135 – An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of money for the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1981 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read the first, second and third time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley 
(Provincial Secretary) that Bill No. 105 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — No, not quite yet, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I was going to make a few remarks today before I went on with this, but fortunately during the 
course of the discussion on the motion to extend the hours I was able to make those remarks. I don’t 
want to extend this, drag out this discussion anymore than is at all possible. I know the gentlemen to my 
right and the gentlemen opposite will notice how we granted leave on two occasions prior to the 
introduction of interim supply. We certainly said it was acceptable this time, but next time we wouldn’t 
permit it to go on quite so easily. But I know members will feel that spirit of warmth and will want to 
definitely get on with this lengthy list of business. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you will know, and all members of this Assembly will know, that the Attorney 
General and the House Leader provide a list of business to be conducted in terms of the Government of 
Saskatchewan – such important items as for the Attorney General, Court of Queen’s Bench, district 
court, provincial court, defamation, unified family court, small claims court. I am sure the Attorney 
General wants to get on with that work, and of course through a simple manoeuvre of accepting a leave 
to adjourn debate, we can get right on with that business. Now, Mr. Shillington I am sure wants to get on 
with the heritage fund; Mr. Snyder with The Labour Standards Act, I am sure of that; Mr. Tchorzewski, 
the heritage fund and the corporation capital tax and income tax No. 2; Mr. Robbins with Queen’s 
Printer and Department of Revenue; Mr. Bowerman with drainage control(I’m sure he wants to get on 
with that bill); Mr. Smishek with urban municipalities. And then on the list for today is committee of the 
whole, to get on with Mr. Smishek and the assessment of real property, capital works projects, planning 
and 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3875 

development. There is the Department of Municipal Affairs and the Department of Urban Affairs. I’m 
sure we want to get on with the important business of the House. Because the members of this Assembly 
are so worn and because they saw that I granted leave to them to bring in interim supply today so they 
wouldn’t have to wait for 48 hours and perhaps be late with some cheques, I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked leave to adjourn debate. Is leave granted? 
 
Motion to adjourn debate negatived. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, I didn’t really expect it. I don’t think there is any spirit of co-operation in 
these people. You see, Mr. Speaker, the point is that what they are attempting to do . . . 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — On a point of order – am I correct or incorrect? I understand you ruled prior that 
no member who has asked for leave to adjourn debate once can ask for it again? Is this incorrect or 
correct? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It was not granted; therefore he didn’t get the adjournment of debate. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Yes, for the benefit of the member for Rosthern, I sincerely appreciate his 
interjection. During the course of today and perhaps later on this evening, and for as long as the member 
for Rosthern wants to interject on points of order on my remarks, I would be most happy to hear them. I 
am sure Mr. Speaker would be happy to rule on them and I’m sure the House Leader would also like to 
hear them. 
 
I’m not going to repeat myself because I know there is only one person in this Assembly who fiddles 
with his drinking water, Mr. Member for the Battlefords and we all know who that is. I’m not going to 
go back over my review again because I know every member of this Assembly is anxious, no, in fact, 
eager. 
 
I have had several members come to me wanting to find out the disposition of the Berger case as quickly 
as we can possibly get to it, in order that we can get on with the case of the five New York socialists, 
and see the kind of degradation into which the members of this Assembly are sinking by moving a bill 
which would attack a political party merely because of what it believes in. 
 
This, of course, is unacceptable. If the political party were countenancing the violent overthrow of the 
country, or if in fact the political group were countenancing some kind of insurrection, or if the political 
group were countenancing that we act outside the laws, then of course such action might conceivably be 
taken. In fact, under the Criminal Code of Canada, there is a charge of treason which can be laid under 
those circumstances. That charge, of course, has not been laid nor will it be laid in this country. Anyone 
who is prepared to live within the laws should be allowed to think the way he wants to; he should be 
allowed to associate with others who also wish to think that way; and he should be allowed to react in 
accordance with the beliefs he may have, albeit unpopular. 
 
I have been emphasizing, over the past little while, the unpopularity of the Unionest Party in the 
province of Saskatchewan. However, I might inform members opposite and members to my right, that I 
am going to have to very soon remove that stigma from our ranks. I am afraid we are becoming much 
more popular, not only in so far as the presentation of what we believe to be the best option for western 
Canadians is 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3876 

concerned, but also because western Canadians are starting to recognize the truth of what we are saying 
– Canada is, in fact, breaking up; there is no hope for the future and therefore we must look to the best 
possible option in order to protect ourselves, our children and our grandchildren. 
 
Now I want to emphasize this to you before I get on with the Berger case. I know all the members in this 
Chamber are anxious to hear what transpired in terms of the Berger case. But I want to emphasize to you 
that the kinds of actions Mr. Trudeau has taken recently, the kinds of statements that the Premier of 
Saskatchewan issued in this House today will not enable western Canadians to stand behind whatever 
happens in terms of the near future. The point is, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Trudeau has already promised 
the people of the province of Quebec that he would enshrine language rights in the constitution. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, what does that mean? What does that mean to western Canadians if language rights are 
enshrined in the constitution? What that means is that every Crown corporation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, because it is a government corporation, must be bilingual. That doesn’t mean they have 
to have an interpreter available. It means that every person of French-speaking descent has a right from 
their government to be able to speak the language of their choice. That’s what it means to enshrine a 
language right in a constitution. 
 
The Prime Minister of this country has stated unequivocally that this is not negotiable in terms of the 
coming constitutional talks. The Premier of Saskatchewan said today in answer to a question that it was 
negotiable. Now how in the world can you negotiate a non-negotiable item? The Prime Minister says 
we’re not going to put it on the agenda; it’s non-negotiable. We have promised the people of Quebec it 
will be enshrined. When are the people of western Canada going to get the facts from their 
representatives? 
 
Now here’s the point, Mr. Speaker. The facts of this case are, in no uncertain terms, that enshrining 
language rights in the constitution will mean that all Crown corporations, all government operations, all 
government organizations in the province of Saskatchewan will have to be and must be bilingual – 
French and English. What does that do to the feelings of the people who are of other cultures and 
language backgrounds? I’ll tell you what it does. It makes them feel like second-class citizens, that’s 
what it does. We in western Canada have a multicultural heritage. No one could have attended Regina’s 
mosaic recently without seeing that we have a multicultural heritage, and are proud of it. Those of us in 
western Canada are very proud of that heritage. 
 
What about those in central Canada and Quebec? Well, my relatives (I’ve mentioned before in this 
debate) live in Simcoe. What do they think? They don’t believe in the multicultural heritage, Mr. 
Speaker, at all. They believe in the English heritage. To them there is only one Canada, and that is 
English Canada. And the people of the province of Quebec? No one could have witnessed the debates 
which occurred in the province of Quebec recently during the referendum debate without knowing that 
the people of Quebec believe there is one Canada – a French Canada. So in order to try to bring those 
two views together the Liberal Party of Canada (and for a time the Conservative Party of Canada) 
decided that the only possible approach to it would be two founding cultures – two nations. So that was 
their policy – two founding cultures. Well, if we in the western part of Canada want to lose the very 
essence of western Canada, which is its multicultural heritage, we will accept the view that somehow, in 
some way, French and English are the only two important cultural heritages to enshrine in a constitution. 
That’s what we’ll believe. I don’t think there’s a living person – well there might be a few – but very, 
very few people in western Canada are prepared to accept that. I was talking 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3877 

to a young man the day before yesterday and he said (as a matter of fact he was a member of the press 
corps) until I spoke to the Saskatchewan French community and recognized what it was that they 
wanted, I wasn’t prepared to accept any other thought besides that of a united Canada with these 
language rights enshrined in the constitution. But, he said, I’m of Ukrainian heritage and when I spoke 
to them and realized what it was that they wanted, and realized what it was that Mr. Trudeau was trying 
to say to people, and realized what it was that Mr. Trudeau had promised the people of Quebec . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, the member for Shellbrook asks me what this has to do 
with Bill No. 105. I’ll tell you exactly what it has to do with Bill No. 105. Bill No. 105 is an attack on 
the rights of a political party in this legislative Chamber. That’s what it is. 
 
In order to properly and appropriately understand what Bill No. 105 is doing to the province and to this 
legislative Chamber, the members had better understand what the position of the Unionest Party really 
is. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to tell them what the position of the Unionest Party is and 
to explain to them why they are making such a mistake in passing this kind of retrogressive, repressive 
and wrong legislation. Now, language rights enshrined in the constitution won’t work. That is going to 
attack the feelings of western Canadians. It is going to attack the feelings of western Canadians of 
anything but French and English heritage, and it is going to attack the feelings of those of us who 
happen to have had an English heritage but who believe that our multicultural society is the right 
approach and the correct approach to a country. 
 
Do we want to develop the attitudes they have in Ontario? Do we want to develop the attitudes they 
have in Quebec? Because if we do, we will enshrine those language rights in the constitution and 
demand that all those inefficiencies be placed throughout our governmental system, our court system, 
and our Crown corporations. There was great debate in here, Mr. Speaker, about Sask Tel and the power 
therein. I wonder what Sask Tel will say when and if those language rights are enshrined in the 
constitution and the few (and I say few) people of French-speaking origin in the province of 
Saskatchewan demand that that corporation be bilingual in nature. Once it’s in the constitution, if you 
believe in the rule of law, then you believe that law must prevail. The Prime Minister says it’s 
non-negotiable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I intend to get to another aspect of Unionest Party policy in a moment. To start with I want 
to point out how ridiculous that approach is, how that cannot possibly work and how in the long run – 
and I don’t mean by that, 10 years 15 years or 20 years – over the next four or five months that issue will 
become more and more prevalent in western Canada as it becomes more and more apparent that the 
people of the province of Quebec are demanding precisely that. That is precisely what they are 
requesting and I say it will take the very heart right out of western Canadians; the belief that we are a 
multicultural, multiracial society, that we can all get along together and that we don’t have to enshrine 
one group or another in our constitution. 
 
Now that having been said, Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a quick look at what the Government of 
Canada is doing today prior to any constitutional discussions and what others are doing today with 
reference to how this country is in fact going to break up. The Government of Canada is saying (because 
Mr. Trudeau and his people promised the people of Quebec), that the world oil price will never be in 
terms of western Canada. Now, he didn’t say anything about world hydro-electric price; he didn’t say 
anything about the world nickel price; he didn’t say anything about any of the other things that are 
manufactured in Ontario. He didn’t mention anything about the protective tariffs for 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3878 

Ontario and Quebec industries; he didn’t mention any of those things. What he said was that we have to, 
we must, support the energy needs of eastern Canadians at below world price because, Mr. Speaker, they 
need it. That’s the point he’s making. 
 
When we needed it, when our young people had to leave western Canada to go looking for jobs in 
Toronto, Hamilton, Montreal and other parts of Canada, what did we have to say? Nothing! They just 
left and we pleaded with them; we said, this is unacceptable, we want to develop here in western 
Canada. No, no. That’s where the jobs are. Do they get special favors down there so they’d prevent the 
outflow? No, no. Leave them as the hewers of wood and the drawers of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a chance, an opportunity right now for western Canadians to develop 
economically, to develop a broad economic base that will enable us as western Canadians to finally offer 
our young people jobs and opportunities and the federal government says, you may not do it. We are 
going to see that petro-chemical centre remains in Sarnia even though it’s in the most illogical place in 
the country. We’re going to see that it stays in Sarnia and we are going to protect them to the detriment 
of any development of a petro-chemical industry in the province of Alberta. I don’t need to just say that 
myself in terms of a belief, Mr. Speaker, that it’s coming from the Unionest Party of Saskatchewan. 
Crosbie also accuses Ottawa of bullying western Canada. 
 
There’s an item in today’s Regina Leader-Post. Every day it is something else. Every day there is 
something in the paper about some minister in Ottawa leaving a document around that says, don’t do 
anything real for western Canadian farmers in the drought but make darn sure that you appear to do 
something. That’s the document. That’s the attitude. Those are the thought processes of those people in 
central Canada and there is no possible way that those thought processes can be brought to bear and 
brought together with the thought processes of the people of western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned about the unpopularity of the Unionest Party; that’s the reason the members 
opposite have introduced this bill and the reason of some of the members to my right, although I’m not 
so sure at the moment where they stand. They haven’t bothered to say to anyone where they stand. Some 
of them, I understand, have informed some members of the press they haven’t taken a position on it yet. 
That is a very interesting thing. After three and one-half or four weeks of this bill being before the 
legislature the Conservative Party has not bothered taking a position on a bill of this magnitude. But, 
however, that’s for them to decide and I’m sure they’ll play their tactical cards to the best of their 
ability, which may prove to be somewhat lacking in the long run. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that western Canadians are not prepared to put up with, economically, a 
continued drain on western Canadian resources when what we’re looking for is the development of jobs 
and opportunities here. Sure it’s happening now, and I don’t think western Canadians are prepared to 
accept the kinds of moves that Mr. Trudeau, Mr. Lalonde and others in that central Canadian 
government have said they are going to impose in the constitutional discussions. 
 
Mr. Blakeney, the Premier of Saskatchewan, today said to this Legislative Assembly that he sees 
nothing – no negotiations anywhere are going on in terms of the oil-pricing agreement which is up in 
less than a month. He sees no place . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I think the member for Nipawin would have to agree that I’ve 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3879 

been fairly generous with him on keeping him to the topic. I’ve allowed him a fairly wide latitude. The 
topic before us is Bill No. 105, An Act to amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
and I can understand the member relating that to certain aspects of the Unionest Party. But I cannot 
understand how the member can expect to be found in order when he’s talking about the constitution of 
Canada or the petro-chemical centre of Canada being in Sarnia or about the philosophy of the Unionest 
Party. He can speak about the philosophy of the Unionest Party only as it may be affected by this bill. 
But quite simply this bill has to do with the mechanics of research money and other things with regard to 
a third party in this Chamber. And I would ask the member to try and keep his debate related directly to 
that. 
 
A brief reference to the number of the bill or the name of the bill or what members on his right may or 
may not have done with regard to making up their minds. It doesn’t necessarily make his debate in order 
if he’s talking about the constitution of Canada. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, surely, if we believe this bill is an attack on the Unionest Party, 
which is the third party in this legislature, then we must try to explain the position of the Unionest Party. 
Now, you say, how can we possibly relate that to the constitution of Canada? Surely we must make in 
advance our comments in terms of the present situation in order to then say, this is why we believe what 
we do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have stated in my remarks so far on this debate that this bill runs contrary to every 
principle of natural justice and every principle . . . And I’ve gone through and told Mr. Speaker what the 
intent of our debate is going to be and what our amendment is going to be before I take my chair. And, 
Mr. Speaker, surely if this is an attack, as we believe it is, on the Unionest Party, then surely we must be 
allowed the latitude to explain what the position of the Unionest Party is. 
 
We’ve said this is an attack on us, not because we’re any other party; we’ve said, and we’ve been able to 
prove beyond any reasonable doubt, that if the member for Swift Current and the member for Nipawin 
had become Liberals in this Chamber, even after the bill passes – we would be eligible for those grants 
which are written in the bill. We would be immediately eligible, even if they pass the bill. So therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, it must be an attack on a party because of the views of that party. Well if it’s an attack on 
the party because of the views of the party, surely we’re entitled to explain what the views of the party 
are. And that’s what I’m attempting to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The mention of the constitution of Canada and the comments of the Premier today were just to indicate, 
Mr. Speaker, (and I hope Mr. Speaker will allow me to do that) to him why we found it necessary to 
create the Unionest Party; why we believe it was necessary to take this stand at this time; why we 
believe it’s necessary that we should present this option to the people of western Canada. Surely Mr. 
Speaker will allow a person that latitude. 
 
That’s what this bill is – an attack on our views. Well, we’re entitled surely to present our views, and 
we’re right on topic. In order to present our views, we must say why we’re not prepared to stand with 
the Conservatives or to stand with the NDP or, in fact, to stand with the Liberals. So I hope Mr. Speaker 
will allow me that amount of latitude. That’s precisely why: we want to explain why we’re not standing 
with those people who today believe that a constitutional change will occur. 
 
After all, Mr. Speaker, what other reason has ever been given for the formation of the Unionest Party? 
We didn’t give as our reason that we no longer wanted to be members 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3880 

to our right because of their views on the governing of the province of Saskatchewan. As a matter of 
fact, we’ve said many times that we would certainly like to see them become the government of the 
province of Saskatchewan, given the current situation in Canada. We’ve said that many times. 
 
We’ve said we couldn’t possibly support the views of the NDP because they believe, as I said at one 
other point in my debate, Mr. Speaker, that of the four choices facing western Canadians they should 
take over the club, as the Attorney General suggested in an interjection the other day. So we couldn’t 
join with them. 
 
We couldn’t join with the Liberals. How in the world could we support Pierre Elliott Trudeau in the 
present circumstances? In fact, it was our stated objective at the time we sat as independents that it was 
the re-election of Trudeau and his gang down in Ottawa that finally made us realize it wasn’t the 
politicians at all. It is the people in central Canada who are making these decisions, who are re-electing 
people of the ilk of John Monroe and Francis Fox and others even though they have, in some cases, 
committed criminal offences and have used their positions to influence others (as in the judges’ affair) 
and other things like that. That scandal-ridden government in Ottawa was re-elected in February. It 
made us believe that the people had decided that is the way it is going to stay in Canada – the club is 
going to stay in charge; it doesn’t matter about these scandals; it doesn’t make any difference about how 
badly they governed the country; it doesn’t matter that the economy was and is on the verge of collapse. 
None of those things matter. The only thing that mattered was they keep the power in central Canada, 
and that is, Mr. Speaker, why we formed the Unionest Party. 
 
That’s why I made the comments on the constitution which I have, Mr. Speaker. From time to time I 
hope you will let me refer to those. I think they’re important to this discussion, and important to figure 
out why the member for Swift Current and I have made the presentation we have, and why we are going 
to continue to do so, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this bill passes. 
 
I mentioned the other day, Mr. Speaker, and I will again mention, the fact I’m very pleased the 
Government of Saskatchewan has made this decision to proceed on this bill. In no possible way could it 
be emphasized more strongly the need for a change in direction for the people of western Canada than 
for a government in western Canada to introduce a bill of this kind. 
 
To suggest that you live in a free country, to suggest that you live in a free society, to suggest that you 
live in a society with parliamentary traditions, and free parliamentary traditions at that, and then to try to 
pass a retroactive bill to cancel out the rights of a legitimately created, legitimately organized party 
within that legislature, must I’m sure, make most members in this Assembly cringe at the thought of 
what could happen to them, when and if they ever have guts and courage enough, to stand on their own 
two feet and present something they believe in. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting to find out if any of the members on the government 
side of the legislature would ever have the courage of a Victor Berger in the United States (the first 
socialist elected in the United States). I wonder if any of them from their cushy new cars, their cushy 
new offices, their cushy new positions with their cushy salaries, would ever have enough courage to 
stand up to be counted, and to talk about something they, in fact, believe in, knowing at the moment it 
might not be particularly a popular thing to do. 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3881 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, with the attitude they are presently exhibiting, with the attitude that some of 
the members to my right are presently exhibiting, I honestly can’t believe they would do that. I honestly 
believe what they would do is persist in taking the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland’s position, and that 
is, the tradition of the NDP – when we object to anything, we abstain. That’s how we object, by 
abstaining. 
 
In most parliaments, in most governments, in most free societies, if you object to something you stand 
up to be counted, and you persist in standing up to be counted. I must say from time to time the member 
for Saskatoon-Sutherland at least shows some courage of conviction and is prepared to stand up to be 
counted even though it may not be a particularly popular thing to do. For that, I have to give him full 
credit, even though I don’t for the life of me, agree with any stand he has taken. Oh yes, I do. There was 
one he took I agreed with. The vast majority of the things he says, I don’t agree with, but I certainly 
admire him for at least having the courage to stand up and say them from time to time. 
 
I thought it was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the members like to say (on the government side) 
they had a lot of trouble in their caucus over this bill. There was some dissention in there. I sure haven’t 
seen any of them step forward to say, yes, I don’t think this is a very good thing to do. What they’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker, is taking the tradition again, of the NDP and that is to abstain, or to sit back and 
allow these things to happen. But when is it going to happen that someone has enough courage to stand 
up and say what he believes? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is necessary in western Canada right now. I think we are at a crossroads . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Give us a chance. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — The member responsible for education and testing in Saskatchewan speaks from 
his chair, to give us a chance. I want Mr. Speaker to understand that in this Assembly I called on every 
member (every one of them) to stand on this bill and speak on it. I look forward with enthusiasm to that 
day when they will do so. But Mr. Speaker will know, in due course . . . That is about when it is going to 
happen is in due course, a reasonable time from now depending on your outlook on what is reasonable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this country is breaking up. There isn’t any way to reconcile the views of those 
people in Quebec who believe they can enshrine those language rights and prevent the development of 
resources in western Canada. Again, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said today he had spoken to the Minister 
of Mineral Resources and he saw absolutely no hope at all in the negotiations which had been conducted 
so far. I believe I am stating his words quite accurately. The member for Kindersley asked him if he saw 
any hope in the negotiations. The answer to the member was no. Now, I don’t know how you could 
interpret that ‘no’ as any more. He said he had spoken to the Minister of Mineral Resources and he 
didn’t see any hope. It doesn’t mean that perhaps, in the deepest recesses of his mind, he doesn’t have 
hope. He merely said that so far (and I think that was correct) he doesn’t see any hope in these 
negotiations, that they are going to be concluded by July 1 which is when the present oil-pricing 
agreement runs out. But I don’t think these views can be reconciled. I think it is absolutely impossible. 
You know, we talk quite a bit in this country, Mr. Speaker, about compromise. We say, let’s 
compromise our views. I say to you, the people of western Canada have been compromising their views 
for 100 years. It is time somebody else compromised theirs. It is time the people of this country 
recognized it is not compromise from us which is 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3882 

going to work right now. What is going to work out right now is people trying to understand how you 
can best govern a country like Canada. 
 
Now, I said there was no hope, Mr. Speaker. I do see a hope. I did see a hope, I should say. So I worked 
very, very hard at many constitutional conferences to attempt to bring that hope to fruition and to 
realization. What I said was this, Mr. Speaker: in a country as diverse as Canada, you allow 
governments at the local level (that is, provincial governments and municipal governments) to deal 
exclusively with those areas of concern which are personal in nature; for example, health care, welfare, 
education, those for which people have to deal directly with their government. Those items which are 
absolutely essential to the maintenance of a country should be in the hands of the federal government. I 
tried, Mr. Speaker, and I tried, but no one would listen to that. No one would say that family allowance 
is welfare, let the provinces have it, period. No one would say that. No one would say that the federal 
Department of Health is interfering with the rights of the departments of health, and with the medicare 
programs, in every province in Canada, although that must be a regional concern and the federal 
government should fold up in that area. No one is saying that. Not one party is saying that, Mr. Speaker, 
no one. 
 
No one is saying that education is a right of local areas to conduct as they see fit. The federal 
government should get out of that field completely, and allow provinces to become involved in 
educating their children as they see fit at the regional level. No one is saying that, Mr. Speaker, no one. 
So the point is, if no one is saying it, then it is not going to happen and it is not going to work. The 
provincial governments, from time to time, try to interfere by opening up pseudo embassies in Europe. 
That is a federal concern. There is no question about that. That is the way it should be; the federal 
government should deal with foreign governments. The federal government should deal with 
interprovincial trade. The federal government should deal with the armed forces and defence. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I rise again to caution the member for Nipawin that I see absolutely 
nothing in this bill dealing with the matter that the member is saying to this House at this time. 
Therefore, I find the member’s remarks out of order, and I ask the member to hasten to bring his 
remarks into order, in other words, to talk about the principle of this bill that is before us. And if the 
member does not do that, I will rise again. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m attempting to tell you what the policy of the Unionest 
Party is, and that’s what’s being attacked by this bill. So if that is unacceptable then I hope Mr. Speaker 
will tell me it’s unacceptable. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I don’t expect the member for Nipawin to get up after every time I’ve gotten up 
and made a ruling and argue my ruling, as he did last time. I expect him to deal with the principle of this 
bill. This bill has nothing to do with the Unionest Party. It has to do with a third party in this Assembly, 
period. And the member must deal with that principle. If he continues to stray off the point of the debate, 
or the principle of the debate, I will call him to order, and I don’t expect him to argue my ruling every 
time after I sit down. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not arguing with your ruling nor would I pretend to argue with 
your ruling. The third party in this legislature is what this bill deal with. The third party in this 
legislature is the Unionest Party of Saskatchewan, or the Unionest Party. That is the third party as of 
now, as of today, and that’s the principle of this bill. 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3883 

This is an attack on the third party in this legislature. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’m going to warn the member for the last time that he does not have the privilege, 
nor does any member in this House, to argue with the Speaker after he’s made a ruling. My ruling is that 
the principle of this bill is the third party in this House. The member does not rise then and twist my 
words to say that I am wrong and he is right, and that the principle of this bill is about the Unionest 
Party, because it is not in fact about the Unionest Party. It could be about any party of any name. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I’m not going to argue with your ruling, Mr. Speaker. We’ll just return to the bill. 
The bill says Mr. Speaker, that only those parties which were registered at the time of the last election 
would be eligible to fit under this bill. I’m sure that Mr. Speaker will read that into the bill, and I’m sure 
he will find it says only those parties that were registered at the time of the last election. Now this 
doesn’t only deal with the third party; it deals with only those parties that were registered at the last 
election. The Conservative Party was registered at the last election; the NDP was registered at the last 
election; the Liberals were registered at the last election. There is only one other party that is registered 
now, Mr. Speaker. This bill refers to registered parties. I’m not questioning your ruling. This bill deals 
with parties registered before the chief electoral officer. The chief electoral officer has now selected four 
parties – four. They are the Conservatives, the NDP, the Liberals, and the Unionests; therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, with deference and respect to your ruling because this bill refers to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I hesitate to interrupt the member again but clearly the member is saying, 
with deference to my ruling, with respect to my ruling, and he’s arguing the point that I was making 
before. I don’t know how I can put it more clearly than I put it before that the member must deal with 
the principle of the bill and not argue my rulings. While I have the member sitting down I wonder if he 
would permit an introduction? One of the members wishes to make an introduction, the member for 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. J.A. HAMMERSMITH (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
Nipawin and I would like to introduce on behalf of myself and the member for Prince Albert, some 88 
students from Holy Cross Junior High School in Prince Albert. I understand they are all Grade 8 
students. They have journeyed today all the way from Prince Albert. They are accompanied by their 
teacher Marcel Levesque, as well as other chaperones and bus drivers. They will be staying tonight in 
Regina, visiting the natural history museum, the RCMP Museum tomorrow and returning to Prince 
Albert tomorrow. 
 
We have had the opportunity to meet with the students for pictures, refreshments and questions. We 
wish to extend to them a hearty welcome to the legislature. I am sure all members will join with me in 
welcoming the students and we express the hope that their stay in the legislature is informative, that their 
visit to Regina is educational, interesting and memorable. We wish them a safe journey home tomorrow. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Adjourned Debates – Bill No. 105 (continued) 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I am not questioning a ruling, but I want to ask you for 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3884 

one now. Clause 3(d) of printed bill, Bill No. 105, states: 
 

‘Leader of the Third Party’ means the member who is the recognized leader of two or 
more members constituting the second largest group sitting in the Assembly in opposition 
to the government where that group is a political party registered under The Election Act 
on the day of the last general election 

 
The amendment, which this bill is designed to correct, as Mr. Speaker will know, is to add the words, 
‘where that group is a political party registered under The Election Act on the day of the last general 
election.’ The principle of that surely is to bring political parties into account. Is it not possible, in terms 
of making the presentation, that this bill, in suggesting that political parties be introduced, must of 
necessity refer to political parties in existence now, but not in existence at the time of the last general 
election? That is the purpose of the clause. 
 
Now if that is the case, would you accept the fact that by defining political party in the new act, it is 
therefore the entitlement of any member to talk about the political parties and the beliefs of the various 
political parties in Saskatchewan? Is that not part of this bill? 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, am I correct in the assumption that they have brought the words, political party, 
into this bill? It is a new addition to the bill. Because of that, it surely must be part of the principle of the 
bill that the people who drafted this legislation wanted to bring in the words, political party. Now there 
are only four registered political parties. The bill specifically says, registered under The Election Act on 
the day of the last general election. That surely must be the intent of the people who drafted the bill, that 
the principle of the political parties and the beliefs of political parties must enter into this debate. Am I 
wrong in that assumption, Mr. Speaker? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I am going to resist the invitation of the member for Nipawin to get into the 
debate, since there is no opportunity for me to do that. Essentially, I have to rule on the basis of what I 
see before me. I see in section 3(d), ‘Leader of the Third Party.’ Part of the principle of this bill deals 
with the funds to the leader of the third party. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether there are three parties in this province or whether there are 50 parties in this 
province. It would still read the same – the leader of the third party. This is dealing with the principle of 
funds to the leader of the third party in this Chamber. It doesn’t say a word about Unionest Party. I have 
allowed the member for Nipawin the latitude to suggest that, yes, that’s what it is talking about in his 
particular instance, the Unionest Party. 
 
But when the member for Nipawin then extends that one step further to talk about the constitution of 
Canada, that is too far from the principle of the bill for me to allow the debate to continue. All I am 
doing is cautioning the member for Nipawin to get back closer to the subject before us and I am 
specifically saying that the subject before us is grants in part, grants to the leader of the third party. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Good, Mr. Speaker, and I will certainly accept your ruling. Mr. Speaker will know 
that the bill is about more than grants and I’m glad Mr. Speaker does not want to get into a debate on the 
bill. Nor, I am sure, does Mr. Speaker want to rule on something that a member sincerely believes is part 
of a debate on a legitimate bill. Therefore I will now at this point return to the exciting saga of Victor 
Berger who, Mr. Speaker will be well aware, was a legislator and was attacked. Mr. Speaker has 
certainly 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3885 

not ruled it out of order to cite examples of legislators who have been attacked by other legislatures and 
governments in history. 
 
Mr. Speaker will recall that I promised on my word of honor to mark this book with a pencil, so that he 
wouldn’t suggest that I was repeating myself. And so I will. But I wonder if Mr. Speaker would allow 
me enough latitude just to briefly summarize what’s happened to Mr. Berger up to this point in time. I 
wouldn’t want Mr. Speaker to say that I was repeating myself. But I do want to alert everyone that Mr. 
Berger was a socialist in the United States, the first ever elected in the United States. When Mr. Berger 
was attacked he had what he believed were sincerely-held views on America’s entry into the first great 
war. He was not only attacked, he was charged with treason because of five articles that he wrote in his 
own paper. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Telephones makes motions with his hands as though he thinks it’s a 
pretty good idea that the member for Swift Current and the member for Nipawin be charged with 
treason. I tell the Minister of Telephones today and I tell everyone else today, I would welcome a charge 
of treason. I would welcome the Government of Canada’s being as stupid as the Government of 
Saskatchewan in attempting to make this kind of charge stick, or in attempting to thwart the aims and 
ambitions of people who have sincerely-held thoughts in this country. I would welcome any 
government’s attempting to make that kind of stupid ploy, including the Government of Canada. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a court in the land (I’ll just alert the members opposite to this one 
thing) that would allow a charge like that to be laid, let alone stick. There isn’t a charge like this in the 
land that any court is going to allow to stand. 
 
The NDP has introduced all kinds of legislation that have been tested in the courts. I want to tell the 
Premier of Saskatchewan and I want to tell other members of this Assembly that if they pass this bill, 
it’s going to be another one tested in the courts – a jim dandy on retroactive legislation and whether it 
applies in terms of the bill of rights when it’s specifically used to attack the right of free association of 
individuals in our society. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to be a good law case. I’ve been involved in 
some law cases in the past . . . Yes, and I haven’t lost one yet. I haven’t lost one yet and I tell the 
members opposite that this is one that is just going to cheer me on. I think this is the kind of law case I 
would just dearly love to face in this country . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, the member says, let’s get the bill through quickly. You take each step one at a time, Mr. Speaker. 
You know that. You don’t bother jumping into things with both feet. History is a very long and involved 
process. 
 
The process of history is very, very long and the member for Regina Wascana will know that better than 
most people. I keep giving him so much credit in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, for being such a fine 
historian. I haven’t read any of his works though. Any time I’ve talked to him outside the Chamber, he’s 
always been very pleasant, with some knowledge but I wouldn’t say all the knowledge in the world. So 
maybe I shouldn’t hold him up to be quite such an expert as I suggested because I don’t have enough 
facts to go on in his case. In this case, Mr. Speaker, I’ve lots of facts to go on. 
 
Anyway, you will recall Victor Berger, I’m sure, and his fight against what you might call 
totalitarianism in the United States. As a result of his fight, he protected the rights of others. 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3886 

Mr. Speaker, it might interest the members opposite to know . . . they think I’m making a big joke of this 
and they think his is just sort of a sham victory. I happen to think I’m not particularly fussy about 
standing here, doing this day after day; I’m not particularly fussy about taking the kind of chaff that 
members opposite and others are giving. I know, however, that there is building, in the community and 
in other parts of Saskatchewan, a continuing and added feeling every day that although they don’t agree 
with what I stand for they do agree with my right to say what I think. And they agree with my right to 
associate with anybody who happens to believe the same thing, and they believe in my right to free 
speech in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, surprisingly enough they believe the NDP is dead wrong in 
bringing up a bill like this to retroactively attack members of this legislature. As a matter of fact this 
number is growing rapidly, not just in Regina but throughout the province of Saskatchewan; and the 
members opposite will find that out in due course. 
 
For what it’s worth, I also happen to believe in what I am doing, Mr. Speaker; as you know, I get 
nothing personal out of this. The community fund of Nipawin gets a lot out of this. It’s going to be 
interesting to see, when and if they pass Bill No. 105, whether the members opposite in the NDP are 
going to attempt to collect back the moneys which were donated to the United Appeal Fund in the town 
of Nipawin. It’s going to be interesting to see if they are going to try to attack the charity the money has 
gone to, to see if they can get that money back by passing retroactive legislation. Mr. Speaker will know 
that money has already been donated. From a personal point of view, I don’t get anything out of this bill. 
I happen to believe that by doing this perhaps I’ll make some contribution, however small, to the right of 
free men everywhere and to the right of people to associate as they see fit. 
 
When I hear what has happened to other people in the course of attempting to protect and preserve those 
freedoms, when I hear what has happened to other people in Britain and other places over the centuries 
as they attempted to protect those freedoms, this is a very, very small contribution to make. So the 
members opposite can believe that this is somehow an insincere effort or designed to gain great public 
attention. All they have to do is withdraw the bill and the public attention will no longer be there. All 
they have to do is go on to other business in the House and they’ll see that the other business in the 
House gets done relatively quickly. That’s all they have to do. It’s a very, very simple thing, a very 
simple move, a very simple manoeuvre by members on the government side. If they do that, fair enough. 
If they don’t do that, then they’re going to face whatever they face over the coming days, weeks, months 
and whatever. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I have not been known as a person in the past to give up on so-called lost causes. 
I don’t intend to give up on this one. I’ve not been known as a person to be less than stubborn; and I am 
that. Mr. Speaker, I assure the members opposite and I assure you that I do not intend to give up easily 
on this bill, because I sincerely believe I am protecting rights for others in future. For me, at this point, it 
makes no difference; but for others in future, I sincerely believe it does. 
 
Now, we’ll get back to Victor Berger. 
 

Otherwise, the great leaders of the confederacy might have been eligible before the 
fourteenth amendment or Brigham Young could have been elected and his forty wives 
have occupied the gallery to see him sworn in. Is a man to be brought from the felon’s 
cell to the floor of the Senate? Could women be elected to Congress before they obtained 
the vote? In order to keep out an insane man, must the House resort to such subterfuges 
as 



 
June 2, 1980 

 

 

 
3887 

expelling him after he is seated or finding him physically incapable of taking the oath? 
Suppose a representative, just before he is sworn in, should create some outrageous 
disturbance in the House. If he cannot be disqualified, it will be necessary to go through 
the rigmarole of first swearing him in and then expelling him. The duty of the Senate and 
the House to preserve the nation and carry on business is said not to be sufficiently 
safeguarded if the constitution requirements are exclusive of all others. The arguments 
against both of the extreme views mentioned are so strong that the actual practice takes 
an intermediate ground. As to elected persons satisfying all the requirements in the 
constitution, we are not forced to choose between giving the House absolute power to 
unseat whomever it dislikes and giving the voters absolute power to seat whomever they 
elect. 
 
A third alternative has been adopted fairly close to the second view. The constitutional 
qualifications ordinarily sufficed, but Congress has rather cautiously imposed some 
additional tests by statute, and the House of Representatives or the Senate has promptly 
added a very few more qualifications by established usage, a sort of legislative common 
law to cover certain obvious cases of unfitness. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s a precise example in the United States of America which is right on the 
principle of this bill. We have in Saskatchewan established criteria by legislation for what constitutes a 
political party in so far as this Legislative Assembly is concerned. That’s what we have established by 
law, as other legislatures have done. We did that, Mr. Speaker, not 50 or 100 years ago. We didn’t do it 
25 years ago. We didn’t even have other members, elected under other governments, do it. We did it 
ourselves; this very same group did it less than one year ago. We established certain criteria for elected 
representatives by law to be a political party and recognized as such in this legislative Chamber. 
 
Now, the NDP government wants to change that. But they don’t want to change it for the future, they 
want to change it retroactively. They want to change it because two members following exactly those 
same rules, following exactly what we set out less than a year ago as the legal criteria, decided to do 
precisely what the legislation then envisaged. If two members or more of this Assembly became 
associated with a political party, one of them would be recognized as the leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that has nothing to do with whether he was elected or otherwise, as is evidenced by the 
member for Souris-Cannington, now recognized as the Leader of the Opposition in this Chamber. 
Another man was elected as leader of that party, but we recognize the member for Souris-Cannington, 
selected by his caucus, as the Leader of the Opposition. Why do we do that? Because, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s the tradition and the precedent. 
 
We established less than a year ago that two members of this elected body, or more, if they desired to 
belong to a political party . . . We didn’t say that it wasn’t a new party. Legislation didn’t say it couldn’t 
be a new party or an old party. That’s the way it should have been written. It doesn’t matter whether it’s 
new or old. If two members decide to become members of a particular political party in this Assembly 
and present their views in concert, then in this Assembly they are entitled to do so. In order to do so, 
they are entitled to certain funds to pay for secretaries, research and other help. That’s the law. That’s 
the way it is today. That’s the way we ourselves intended it less than one year ago. 



 
June 2, 1980 
 

 

 
3888 

All of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, the government decides that’s not good enough; that’s not reasonable 
enough; that’s not realistic enough. Therefore that is an attack. The same group of people, who passed 
the same bill less than a year ago, has not decided to change the rules. Mr. Speaker, I say to you with all 
deference, and I mean that sincerely, it is an attack on the Unionest Party of Saskatchewan because of its 
views. That’s what it’s all about. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


