






















































Hansard: May 28, 1980


 
3647 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 28, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct the attention of the members 
of the Assembly to the Speaker’s gallery where there are 39 Grade 4 students from the Eston School. 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Beth Baren and Greg Balas and their chaperones, Elaine 
Jardine and Carol Curtis. As well, Mr. Speaker, I would simply like to advise the Assembly that the 
town of Eston is in the forefront in bank programs in this province. Their band recently won the junior 
stage band, concert band and fancy drill competition at the Moose Jaw Band Festival. These Grade 4 
students will be going into that band program. I would just like to wish them a fruitful visit to Regina. I 
hope they enjoy the question period and they have a good trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Bill No. 105 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A question to the House Leader in his role of guiding through 
government business: I note Bill No. 105 has, since at least last Wednesday, been placed down near the 
bottom of the list of government business. It has been placed after the Department of the Environment 
estimates, Department of Education. Can the Attorney General kindly explain why it is always being 
placed at the bottom of the list? 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, it has not always been placed at the 
bottom of the list. As a result of our discussions with the official opposition, I am always led to believe 
every day that we will be able to get to Bill No. 105 in order to debate it. But unfortunately while the 
hon. member is occupied elsewhere or otherwise, in his absence the House somehow gets bogged down 
in education estimates which take beyond the expected period of time to complete. The result is Bill No. 
105 doesn’t come up for debate. All I can do is try to reasonably guide the affairs of the House and 
expect some degree of co-operation from the members opposite. If I get it, it works. If I don’t get it, it 
doesn’t work. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of supplementary, I don’t expect the House Leader to suggest that the 
opposition hurry through estimates of such departments as the Department of the Environment (given 
the record). I think that is the request being made. The Attorney General, of course, is aware that as of 
this Friday the Unionest Party will get its first payment. As a result of always having the matter down at 
the bottom of the list, it looks like it is the government’s fault that in fact the Unionest Party receives its 
first payment on Friday. What action is the government going to take? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, if it is anybody’s fault, it is the fault of the opposition . . . 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3648 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . who, every time the bill is on the list to start at approximately 3 o’clock or 
thereafter, chooses to either deliberately lengthen out estimates or otherwise take part in a debate thereby 
not allowing Bill No. 105 to come through onto the debating format. I say to the hon. member he would 
be well-advised to leave the negotiations of the House business to his colleague, the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, rather than trying to do it here and rather than trying to make what, I believe, are 
simple, pure, small-time politics with respect to Bill No. 105. He knows full well how we operate this 
House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. New question. 
 

Payment to Unionest Party 
 
MR. LANE: — A new question to the Attorney General. The Leader of the Unionest Party has 
indicated that money is not the issue. Has the Attorney General any contingency plans to perhaps place 
the money in trust pending a resolution of Bill No. 105? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member is suggesting is that the legislature in effect 
break its own law. The law is now (rightly or wrongly) that a third party, as described, shall receive a 
form of payment. But the hon. member for Qu’Appelle, a member of the legal profession, is suggesting 
that somehow we withhold that money if it can be withheld, and, in effect, break the law. The only way 
that we can handle the situation is by introducing Bill 105 to be dealt with by passage of the law as we 
are doing — as we are attempting to do by the management of the House business. And all I can say is 
that the suggestion made by the hon. member is one that perhaps could be looked at, but it’s a very 
extreme recommendation to say the least. I’m not going to dismiss it out of hand. Maybe there is some 
legal avenue which is available here for us to consider, but on the face of it I do think that it is really 
trying to retroactively ignore the laws of this Assembly and of this province. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary. Assuming that there is no breaking of the law as you have just 
indicated, and assuming that Bill No. 105 passes, what plans does the government have to reclaim the 
funds? 
 

Statement by the Minister of Energy 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, last night on The 
National news Mr. Lalonde, Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources in the federal government, 
indicated that Canada had just fought the referendum in the province of Quebec against a party 
committed to political separation with economic association, and he drew the analogy that what we face 
now in Canada is a party or a province, in particular the province of Alberta, committed to economic 
separation with political association. My question, Mr. Premier, to you is: would you not agree that the 
momentum gained by the no vote in the province of Quebec toward addressing renewed federalism with 
consensus politics is, in fact, going to be very much jeopardized by what I see as a very serious 
confrontation attitude being taken by Mr. Lalonde and the Government of Canada? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the hon. member that the 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3649 

statement by Mr. Lalonde was in the circumstances, and if I understand the statement correctly, 
ill-advised. It did not seem to me to be a statement designed to bring about the appropriate basis for 
accommodation and compromise which will be needed to arrive at settlements, not only in the 
constitutional area, but also in the area of resource management and pricing. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Lalonde further indicated I believe, earlier in the 
energy debate, that he saw a good chance of arriving at an agreement or settlement with all provinces 
except the province of Alberta. The province of Alberta was the only one that was holding up any 
energy pricing agreement. He further went on to say (I think press statements would indicate) that the 
strategy of the federal government is to somehow woo the NDP so they can isolate the province of 
Alberta in the energy debate. My question to you is: have there been any negotiations between your 
government and Mr. Lalonde that would give Mr. Lalonde an indication that he can in fact accomplish 
that purpose? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The answer shortly put is no, certainly not that I or our ministers are aware of. 
 

Export Tax on Gas 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. The Alberta report that recently 
came out, Mr. Minister, which I assume you have probably read, indicated some of the proposals being 
advanced by Mr. Lalonde. One of those proposals would be the imposition of an export tax on gas, and 
that would affect primarily the province of Alberta and the province of British Columbia; and there 
would be a rebate formula to the province of British Columbia but not to the province of Alberta. In 
your negotiations with Mr. Lalonde did this matter come up and did you discuss that matter? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — No, the proposal of an export tax was not 
discussed in any detail, although it was generally alluded to by me because it’s obvious that if the 
federal government is wanting to acquire large sums of money there are only a limited number of areas 
where they may be able to do that. Certainly one of the first they would want to consider would be the 
export tax. We inquired as to whether or not there was any current thinking about proposing such an 
export tax, and if so, how provinces such as British Columbia and Saskatchewan (which is now subject 
to an export tax for heavy oil) may be treated. The answer, which was very general, from the minister 
was that certainly it was an option which was open to them. He was not prepared to discuss it in any 
detail with me. I assumed that if he were prepared to discuss it with Alberta, he wanted to have the 
opportunity to discuss it with the Minister of Energy in the province of Alberta before discussing in 
detail with me or other energy ministers in Canada what the federal proposal might be. I have not yet 
met or talked with Mr. Lalonde since he met with Mr. Leach, the Minister of Energy in Alberta. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A further suggestion, Mr. Minister, in the . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. If the member has a question? 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The other suggestion, Mr. Minister, is that the proposal of Mr. Lalonde would be to 
take any further increases in the price of oil and use those increases to reduce the federal debt. Can the 
minister advise this Assembly if that proposal was discussed as well when you met with Mr. Lalonde 
perhaps two weeks ago? 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3650 

 

MR. MESSER: — No, not at all, Mr. Speaker. In fact we have conveyed to the federal government that 
whatever revenues they wish to achieve, we would like to see priorities put to the expending of those 
moneys toward conservation and development of energy in Canada. We think that is a more appropriate 
place to direct some of the increased revenues they are hoping to obtain from the producing provinces. 
 

Assistance to Cattlemen 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. I have spent the last 
couple of days in the constituency talking to numerous cattlemen. I find there is a real concern among 
the cattlemen that their herds this year, in the next few months, are going to be depleting very rapidly 
with the number of cows going through the auction marts. I wonder if you have any contingency plan 
over and above the emergency program to discourage the cattlemen from depleting their herds at this 
time? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — In reply to the hon. member, no, we have no 
additional plans. I think in one month’s time there has to be a further review of the situation to see what 
further steps must be taken. It is felt that there will be, in fact, some trimming of the herds. It is felt that 
with some change in the weather patterns (and we have seen some of it across the province) we can 
sustain the core herd or the basic herd through the summer, and given some breaks, supply feed for 
keeping the core herd through the coming fall and winter. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I hadn’t realized just how bad it was until about three or four people 
came to me over the weekend wanting to get hold of my slough hay. They have never bothered me for 
this slough hay before. I am concerned that we should have a beef monitoring watch on these cattle. Do 
you not think that through the ag. rep. meeting with cattlemen in each district, we have to convince them 
to try to hang on to their herds. With the programs to be offered, do you not think we should be doing a 
more aggressive job of convincing these people to keep their cattle? We are going to end up in the 
position, which you stated some time ago, that we are going to be strictly grain farmers. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in all sincerity to the hon. member, I don’t think we can do any 
convincing to the cattle people to sustain their herds unless we can provide for them some feed supply, 
both fodder and grain. The essential or the basic part of our announced program last week was to get in 
place available stocks, supply that information to the age. reps. and therefore on to the cattlemen and see 
what we can do to bring feed into the province. That is the process that’s going on. 
 
It seems to me not proper or sensible to say to cattlemen, you keep your herds, and not to be able to say 
where there is at least potential for feed for those cattle. 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Minister, is it not possible through your department to set up a 
monitoring program per R.M., so that we could know at the end of each week how many cattle had been 
sold in that R.M. to know if we are getting into a real crisis situation, which I believe could happen? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, I think there will be a monitoring of cattle sales, I think that goes on 
within the department all the time. But I don’t think the question that was directed by the member for 
Estevan was a question to deal with the problem now. I think 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3651 

the question is to size up the available feed supplies and then relate the feed supplies to what is 
happening to the industry in terms of sales. 
 
If we can say to farmers, here is where there’s some barley; here’s where we can get some slough hay 
(and I’m pleased that the hon. member is indicating that farmers are seeking out possible sources; there 
will be a fair bit of slough hay in the province); here is where we’re getting some alfalfa pellets and so 
on, then we can say to farmers, don’t get so panicky. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, several years ago, to stop the outflow of female 
stock, there was a program brought in by your government of $60 (I believe) for female stock held over. 
Is there consideration of some program along that line to suggest you keep the female stock and if you 
must sell, sell the male stock, so we don’t lose our basic herd? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I have indicated and I indicate again that our objective in 
this serious situation is to keep the basic herd. The basic herd is obviously going to be the female stock. I 
think that our efforts must be to find feed supplies to keep that basic herd and that’s what the objective 
of the program is really intended to do. 
 
I may say I was very pleased last night with the comments from the federal government with respect to 
its approach to work with us in solving this very serious problem. 
 

Increase in Use of Drugs and Alcohol by Students 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — The Minister of Education, Mr. Minister, the recent 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association) sponsored workshop on alcohol and drug education 
indicated that the use of alcohol and drugs is continuing to increase in our province. A survey shows that 
approximately 41 per cent of the students, who were surveyed in Grade 12, are moderate or heavy 
drinkers by the time they reach that grade. 
 
My question is what action does your department plan to take, what immediate action to help alleviate or 
eventually solve this serious social problem? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Chairman, first of all, our department was 
involved in the sponsoring of that conference and participated in the committee that led up to the 
conference. Indeed it provided a very substantial amount of the financing for the conference in question, 
in order to help get a better hold on this problem, in co-operation with the SSTA and others. 
 
As a result of the conference (and I think it’s not the sole source of information on this question), we are 
going to be undertaking certain kinds of measures. For one thing we are currently reviewing the 
Division III health part of the curriculum to look at the possibility of bringing into that curriculum 
programs that would deal with the challenges that young adolescents and young teenagers face in our 
society and looking at providing through that curriculum and through that program a better educational 
program for young people, which deals with these and other kinds of situations that young people face. I 
might also indicate to the hon. member that we have been participating in taking some leadership in the 
Safe Graduation program. In addition to that, we will be continuing to support activities through the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association) and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
that will assist teachers to deal with the very real problems they face in this respect. 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3652 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, Dr. Don Faris, the head of the provincial 
rehabilitation program indicates that some of the programs in the schools are not being used; they are 
not using these programs. Does your department have any thoughts of bringing out a compulsory unit to 
be taught to the students on drug and alcohol education that would help to solve this problem and that 
would ensure that this is taught in every school in Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — That is certainly a possibility we are considering. I think as the hon. member 
knows, parts of the curriculum that deal with these and other related matters dealing with adolescent 
lifestyles are organized as such that the school boards have a choice as to whether or not they wish to 
introduce those programs. That does indeed create some difficulties if we accept it as a provincial policy 
matter. We should be addressing these kinds of questions. So in this review of this program, we are 
going to be looking at the possibility of making these kinds of programs required programs. Certainly, 
no decision has been made of that sort at the present time but that will be considered. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Final supplementary, Mr. Minister, as you well know. The Education Act makes 
provision for parent advisory councils and at this time when the Safe Graduation program is highlighted 
throughout Saskatchewan, I feel that this would make a good study (the study of drug and alcohol abuse) 
for the parent advisory councils. Would you, Mr. Minister, at this time, because of this serious social 
problem, use your good offices to encourage the study of the drug and alcohol abuse situation in 
Saskatchewan through parent advisory councils in this province? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Certainly as we develop to which I referred, it would be our intent to involve as 
many parental organizations as possible including those councils. 
 

Market Research on Expanding Agricultural Production 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Question to the Minister of Agriculture. The irrigation 
projects in the province have made it possible for farmers to diversify and to grow a wide variety of 
pulse crops and vegetable crops. My question to you is: what market research has your department done 
to assist the development of this potential for expanded agricultural production? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, a good deal of market research has been done by Agdevco (and 
we had some discussion of their efforts in Crown corporations) and the marketing and research branch 
of the Department of Agriculture. In terms of providing the hon. member with an answer today, I simply 
can’t do that since I don’t have that kind of information on my mind. I can perhaps provide it to the hon. 
member or perhaps he can raise the question during agricultural estimates when officials of the 
department will be present and I can provide an answer to the hon. member. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary, to the minister. I would appreciate if you would send across that 
information of the market research that you’ve done. Have you done any research to see if it’s feasible 
to process some of these crops and thus provide industry in the province rather than exporting all of it in 
the raw state? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I can say yes to the hon. member regarding the research involving the same 
two particular organizations of the government. I simply can’t give the hon. member say indication of 
the results of the research but it can additionally be a  



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3653 

question as part of estimates, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Testing of Water in Towns, Hamlets and Villages 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Question to the Minister of the Environment. In light of 
discussions in environment estimates pertaining to the testing of water in all towns, hamlets, and 
villages, will the minister give us his assurance to this Assembly that he will have his department notify 
each town, hamlet and village about the different ways of testing water, and also the importance of 
testing water. 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — I won’t give that assurance, Mr. 
Speaker, but I will certainly take it under advisement. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — A supplementary to the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban), Mr. Speaker, due 
to the drought in Saskatchewan this spring, wells and water sources could be very low, thus lowering the 
quality of water. I ask the minister if he agrees there is an urgency in encouraging more frequent water 
testing in this province this summer? 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Speaker, no, I do not consider there is 
an urgency. 
 

PCB Spill at Federal Pioneer 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — A new question to the Minister of the Environment. In light of the fact the 
Department of the Environment and Federal Pioneer covered the PCBs with pavement in the fall of 1976 
and also, in light of the fact these PCBs could have been removed for a few thousand dollars, would you, 
Mr. Minister, inform this Assembly why you have threatened Federal Pioneer with court action if they 
refuse to pay for the removal of the PCBs your department sealed nearly four years ago? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I advised the hon. member the other day in estimates and in other 
questions raised before the Assembly, that the matter of Federal Pioneer and the Department of the 
Environment is now an issue before the courts. I would prefer not to discuss the details of the actions 
relevant to Federal Pioneer and the background or history related thereto. I think it is important for us to 
maintain the advice which we have received from our counsel in that respect. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister why is it not the responsibility of 
your department to pay all costs, especially when your department sealed, had and lied about the whole 
PCB cover-up at Federal Pioneer? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it is incumbent upon the member to retract the use of that word in this 
Chamber. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I will retract it and say misrepresented. 
 

Land Acquisition by Sask Housing Corporation 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the minister responsible for Sask Housing. I directed a question last week 
as to the announced program of acquisition of infill houses in the City of Regina. Would the minister 
now explain whether or not that is the program referred to in the annual report of the Central Mortgage 
and Housing Corporation which is the Canada-Saskatchewan Urban Rental Housing Pilot Program for 
Families of 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3654 

 

Native Origin or is it a totally different program? Would you kindly explain as well the number of units 
acquired and their locations? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, no, it is not the same program mentioned in the CMHC report. Mr. 
Speaker, in the case of the native pilot project we entered into an agreement with the Government of 
Canada a little more than a year ago to acquire (largely) rather than construct about 1,000 housing units 
in the major centres. Approximately one-third of them will be in the city of Regina. That is a separate 
program from the infill program which was announced last week jointly by me and the Mayor of 
Regina. The infill program is in two areas of the city of Regina, the cathedral area and the north-central 
area. In total we have acquired to date about 160 lots with over 4,000 front feet. 
 
In the case of the cathedral area, Mr. Speaker, I think some question was raised about people who might 
be residing there. In looking at the hon. member’s question the other day, of the 60 lots or 60 properties 
we had acquired, only 6 were occupied. It is housing which is largely beyond repair. New housing will 
be put in place in those units. It will be available to low income and middle income people, single parent 
families. It’s not the same program as the native housing program. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Affairs (Urban)) moved second reading of Bill No. 119 — An 
Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am please to move second reading of Bill No. 119. An Act to amend The Urban 
Municipality Act. In recent years, Saskatchewan, like a number of other provinces, has experienced a 
gradual decline in the viability of the downtown areas in several of our major urban centres. A similar 
deterioration process of the main streets of some of our smaller urban centres has also been experienced. 
In the case of cities, it has been the result in par, of major suburban shopping mall. The resulting effects 
are a shift of business trade from the established downtown area, a marked erosion of the downtown tax 
base, and generally a visible decay of the inner core which traditionally has been the community’s focal 
point for social, cultural and business activities. 
 
In the case of the smaller urbans, aging main street businesses and public buildings have contributed to a 
flight of local business to either neighbouring communities or larger regional centres and equally 
important, communities experience a loss of pride increasingly concerned with these problems. If our 
urban communities are to remain viable, and to retain their traditional appeal as good places to live, we 
cannot yield. We cannot let deterioration and decay replace what was once a bustling focus of our urban 
centres. This government has responded, and will continue to respond to these problems. This response 
has taken several forms. 
 
For example, for our smaller centres, in 1978 we introduced the Saskatchewan Mainstreet Development 
Program. This program is jointly administered by Saskatchewan urban affairs and industry and 
commerce. It is designed to help small communities improve their main street business districts and to 
retain their share of the economic activity of this province. To date, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to report to 
this House, that close to 100 centres have participated in this activity which includes grants for 
improvements to public areas and grants for store front renovations. These have 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3655 

been very popular programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan cities the government has used its provincial office accommodation needs as a lever to 
introduce significant new commercial developments downtown and so contribute to revitalization. 
Weyburn Square, which opened this spring, includes 45,000 square feet of provincial office space and 
110,000 square feet of privately developed retail facilities located in the multi-use complex in the heart 
of downtown Weyburn. Because the government was willing to combine its office needs with 
commercial retail space at the request of the municipal council, a very real threat to downtown Weyburn 
was transformed into an opportunity for revitalization. 
 
In other centres such as Saskatoon and Prince Albert, provincial office structures have been sited in key 
downtown locations in co-operation with the municipalities, to reinforce their efforts to strengthen their 
downtown areas. In Regina, the recent construction of the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
building and the Sask Tel building, which is currently under construction, form an integral part of the 
Cornwall Centre which will include Eaton’s and Sears, plus ancillary retail space around a fully covered 
two-story pedestrian mall. As in Weyburn, the government has used its office space needs to create an 
opportunity for redevelopment and downtown revitalization. Vital new development will replace 
obsolete or deteriorating buildings resulting in benefits to the community for years to come. New jobs, 
new tax dollars for the municipality, new shopping facilities, and a boost for all of downtown Regina 
will result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these initiatives demonstrate this government’s firm commitment to a policy of downtown 
revitalization. We are strongly convinced of the need to retain and revitalize the downtowns of our urban 
communities. This can only be done in partnership with the local municipalities whose enthusiastic 
response to the Mainstreet program has already demonstrated a similar commitment and concern. Mr. 
Speaker, these amendments to The Urban Municipality Act being considered by this House will extend 
the opportunity which exists for municipalities to pursue downtown revitalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in September my department faced requests from some Saskatchewan cities for 
approval of rezoning to accommodate new or expanding peripheral malls. The province had reason to 
believe thateach of the proposed peripheral malls would have a detrimental impact on the respective 
downtowns. Because of this, we were reluctant to give approval without ensuring all alternatives had 
been considered by the communities. 
 
Without some form of government assistance it became readily apparent that there was no real 
alternative to peripheral mall development. Deterioration of downtown would be inevitable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is not prepared to sit idly by, nor were a number of local businessmen and 
private citizens who expressed their similar concerns to me. In response to these concerns, I contracted 
each of the communities. An offer of assistance to these communities was made to help relocate the 
proposed shopping malls to downtown locations. After some discussion, the cities of Swift Current and 
Prince Albert responded favourably. 
 
The offers of assistance which have been made embody certain principles. Each offer responds to a 
development situation in which a proposal for a peripheral mall would 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3656 

 

have threatened the viability of the downtown. For each, the offer of assistance is premised upon 
municipal commitment to downtown revitalization, and a willingness on the part of the municipality to 
share in the costs and benefits which this entails. 
 
Local government would be responsible for selection of a downtown site for redevelopment, for 
assembling the site, for negotiating agreement with a developer, subject to the provincial approval. The 
municipality would retain ownership of the site, leasing it to the private developer who in turn would 
finance and build the project. 
 
The cost of acquiring a downtown site would be shared by the municipality and the province. It would 
be financed through the purchase of municipal debentures by the province. Revenues from annual 
ground lease payment for the site, from incremental property and business taxes created by the project 
and from a portion of project income, would be used to service these debentures. Where necessary, this 
would be supplemented by provincial grants and a municipal share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments to The Urban Municipality Act are being introduced as part of this 
government’s commitment to downtown revitalization. They will enable municipalities to carry out 
downtown revitalization projects now being considered for Swift Current and Prince Albert, where such 
legislative authority does not already exist. If future instances arise in which the government determines 
that provincial assistance may be necessary for other municipalities to undertake downtown 
revitalization projects, these provisions will serve in those cases as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this context, I wish to briefly outline these amendments to this House in order to explain 
what we will achieve. 
 
First, the amendments will authorize a municipality to enter into agreements respecting a downtown 
revitalization project. 
 
Second, the amendments will clarify and reaffirm municipalities’ authority to acquire, hold, improve, 
and dispose of property to be used for a revitalization project. 
 
Third, these amendments will subject long-term borrowing done for a revitalization project to the usual 
local government board approval procedure and other normal requirements presently included in the 
Urban Municipality Act, with certain exceptions. 
 
These exceptions relate to the statutory debenture debt limit for communities and to additional 
provisions for notice — a public meeting and an opportunity to submit a petition in lieu of an automatic 
vote of the burgesses. It is intended that these will expedite the process of negotiating downtown 
projects. 
 
In other amendments municipalities will be given the authority to make grants in conjunction with the 
downtown revitalization projects and will permit business improvement districts to contribute to the cost 
of the project. 
 
Finally, in addition to these amendments, provision is made to remove the 1 per cent per month limit on 
the surcharges that municipalities can impose on property taxpayers who are in default of payment 
where the tax payment is greater than $2,000. For property owners with taxes payable under $2,000, 
there will be no change. With present interest rate levels it is to the financial benefit of large property 
owners to delay 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3657 

payment of taxes until after December 31 in any year. This results in a municipality’s having to finance 
its operations by borrowing at prevailing high interest rates. This is a problem peculiar to cities and the 
six cities have requested me to bring in these amendments because they would be faced with some 
difficulties if they were not able to impose higher penalties. 
 
This concludes my remarks with respect to these amendments. To reiterate, these legislative changes 
will make it possible for local government to pursue downtown revitalization with the co-operation and 
support of the provincial government. In this manner, these amendments will further reinforce local 
decision making and autonomy. They demonstrate this government’s firm commitment to a policy of 
downtown revitalization. They provide a unique and positive opportunity for Saskatchewan downtown 
revitalization. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I adjourn debate on the second 
reading of this bill, so that I have an opportunity to study in detail the comments of the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs (Urban), just given this morning, I would simply like to express a couple of concerns. 
 
I think the whole question of downtown revitalization clearly had to be addressed in the province of 
Saskatchewan, in all towns, in all cities. But I do think that the whole problem requires something more 
than to have government bring in a program to revitalize the main street areas and to build government 
buildings in the downtown areas. What we require in the province of Saskatchewan is growth in our 
small towns and in our cities. And that is not happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The towns and the villages of this province are being depopulated, more so than in any province in this 
country, and that’s the long-term question we must address. We must address the question of retaining 
the population or of having growth of population in our major centres, our cities and major towns. That 
is the total question we as legislators must address in the coming years. 
 
I noted the other day in the city of Calgary, just by way of example, there were 79 high cranes at work. 
Now clearly we are not going to have that type of development in the province of Saskatchewan, but 
that is incredible building there; 2,500 people a month are moving into the city of Calgary. 
 
We in the province of Saskatchewan have to start looking at increasing our population. We are a growth 
province; we have to address that problem. The way we are going to address that problem and the only 
way we are going to address that problem is to increase our population, not just in the city of Saskatoon 
and the city of Regina but in the other major urban centres in this province. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would be leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 125 — An Act 
respecting Actions for Defamation. 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3658 

 

He said: Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of The Defamation Act; well, it 
is my duty to move second reading of The Defamation Act. 
 
For some time now newspaper publishers and broadcasters have been requesting legislation to overturn 
the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Cherneskey versus Armadale Publishing. In this case 
the Supreme Court of Canada considered the defence a fair comment. 
 
The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix published a letter to the editor criticizing a position taken by one Mr. M. 
Cherneskey, a local alderman. Mr. Cherneskey sued the paper and was awarded damages. The main and 
most disturbing point in the majority of judgments is that in order to rely on the defence of fair 
comment, the newspaper must show that it agreed with the comments expressed in the letter it 
published. The problem is that in order to avoid liability a newspaper would be forced to publish only 
those letters with which it agrees. 
 
It is also possible that the principles outlined in the majority judgments may apply to other media — 
television, radio, cable television, and open-line shows and community programs. 
 
Last summer at its annual meeting in Saskatoon, the uniform Law Conference of Canada adopted a 
legislative provision to, in effect, overrule Cherneskey versus Armadale Publishing (or at least the 
principles of Cherneskey versus Armadale Publishing). The case itself remains untouched as does the 
award. 
 
The provision that the Uniform Law Conference of Canada proposed is contained in proposed section 12 
of the bill which is before the House today. I must advise the legislature that a similar, if not identical, 
section is before the Assemblies of Manitoba, Alberta and Nova Scotia. Ontario, with its Attorney 
General, Roy MacMurtry, has also publicly announced that it too proposes to enact legislation to 
overcome the impact of this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have taken this opportunity to update our legislation in this area. Libel and slander 
have been replaced in this bill with an action for defamation. This will mean that the act does not have to 
provide for several of the old distinctions between libel and slander. The act makes reference to 
broadcasting as well. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I was asked at a press conference in Saskatoon, last Monday, whether or 
not broadcasting was included, and erroneously I indicated that broadcasting was not to be included. It is 
my duty to advise the House that we are also including broadcasting. The requirement for newspapers to 
register with the Provincial Secretary has been dropped. I should also point out, Mr. Speaker, that this 
act follows closely The Uniform Defamation Act. I believe it is important wherever possible to provide 
for uniform legislation throughout Canada, Alberta, B.C., Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, 
P.E.I., Yukon, Northwest Territories have already adopted a uniform defamation act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would not like to make some comments on the specific sections of the bill. I will not 
comment on all the sections because many of them (namely sections 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 19 and 20) 
are similar to sections in the old libel and slander act. Let me make a comment about a few of them. 
 
Section 2. This is of course the definition section. Broadcasting has been defined to 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3659 

include our friends in the cable television industry. 
 
I think it is important that the principles of the act be extended to cable television. I have been requested 
to insure that section 12 applies to our friends and supporters in the cable television industry. 
 
Defamation has been defined to mean liable and slander. 
 
Section 3: under this section we provide here for the action for defamation. I am sure the hon. member 
for Rosetown-Elrose is most interested in this. As I mentioned earlier, by providing for an action for 
defamation and by stating that where defamation is proved damages are presumed, we can eliminate 
certain provisions necessary to cover off the old distinctions between libel and slander. 
 
Section 11: this section prevents an action for defamation where the defamatory matter was contained in 
an advertisement from being consolidated with another action for defamation. The reason for this is that 
we feel there should be a separate action, when someone has deliberately gone out to retain space and 
pay for an advertisement which it is alleged contains defamatory material. 
 
Section 12: this is the section which I have referred to and adopts last year’s uniform law conference 
recommendation made at their meeting in Saskatoon, which we were very honoured and pleased to host. 
It merely restores, and I want to emphasize the word restores, the right of a defence of fair comment to 
our friends in the newspaper industry, in particular, but it applies generally. It restores the right of the 
defence of fair comment to someone publishing alleged defamatory material that is an opinion expressed 
by another person, even though: 
 
(a) The publisher did not know that the person expressing the opinion did not hold it; 
 
(b) Where a reasonable person could hold that opinion, the publisher is not under a duty to inquire into 

whether or not the person expressing the opinion actually holds that view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public policy behind that should be evident to most members. The public policy 
argument by the newspapers which we subscribe to is that a letter box should be a free and open 
exchange of conflicting opinions, of which the publisher and editor of the paper may not subscribe to. 
Now, under Cherneskey, in order to be able to raise the defence of fair comment, when they’ve 
published a letter, the publishers of the newspapers will have to believe the contents or to have accepted 
the contents of the letter. Knowing some of our friends in the newspaper industry, this would indeed cut 
out a wide variety of newspaper letters to the editor which appear, and dare to challenge the 
conventional opinions that the editors unfortunately, and regrettably in our province, so strongly and 
dearly hold to their hearts. 
 
Sections 17 to 20: these sections apply only to actions for defamation brought against newspapers or 
broadcasters or their employees. As I say, we are extending this bill to our friends in the cable industry. 
Section 17 is the limitation period, six months from the date the publication of the alleged defamatory 
matter came to the notice of the defendant. This is the same as the present provisions of The Libel and 
Slander Act. 
 
Section 18 sets out the notice which must be given before an action for defamation is 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3660 

 

commenced. 
 
Section 21 sets out the conditions, where section 19 (mitigation of damages) and section 20 (award of 
special damages only) do not apply. 
 
One of the requirements for these sections to apply is that a broadcaster must, if requested, give a person 
a copy — at a reasonable cost to the broadcaster — of defamatory material. Mr. Speaker, some of the 
members of this House will have had the experience of trying to get a copy of something which has been 
broadcast over the airwaves by our friends in the electronic media. 
 
Talk about freedom of information legislation, Mr. Speaker, applying to the members of the 
government; I think some days we should apply a freedom of information bill to our friends in the 
electronics industry. It is the most difficult thing in the world, very often, to get a copy of the transcript. 
They raise arguments that the CRTC licenses them and they don’t have any obligation necessarily — 
you bring down your secretary, etc. Well we figure the best way to handle that is to put in the words, at 
reasonable costs. I realize my friends opposite may not have experienced that kind of frustration with 
broadcasters, but some of us have had occasion, especially in the light of some of the irresponsible 
comments made by members opposite outside the Chamber, to request copies. We have found the need 
to apply a freedom of information bill to this very closed society, the owners of the electronic media. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate our reasons for proposing the legislation; to overrule the 
legal impacts of the Cherneskey case without touching the case itself; to restore the defence of fair 
comment to our friends in the newspaper publishing and broadcasting industry; to update our legislation, 
in other words, to make it more modern; to adopt uniform legislation with respect to defamation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure this bill will receive speedy passage by the opposition, since we are all very 
anxious to get on to debating other matters, such as Bill No. 105, as agreed to by members in this House 
in informal agreements which have heretofore never been revealed quickly. I am sure my friends will be 
anxious to dispose of this matter very quickly. We can then get on with updating this bill and give to the 
media the freedom that is so precious and so respected by all those in the House, the freedom of speech 
which has been so rightfully and strongly maintained by a free and open press in our society. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, these amendments are in that tradition and we can accordingly expect co-operation, at least on 
this one item, from the opposition. I move second reading of this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Deputy Speaker unfortunately, the critic was called away on 
an emergency about 15 minutes ago, therefore I would ask leave to adjourn debate so he can make his 
comments. Then we could proceed with the bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 124 — An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act (No. 2). 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, with respect to The Queen’s Bench Act (No. 2) and The Small Claims 
Enforcement Act, these are consequential amendments which relate to the merger bill which has been 
before this House now for the last two months, unattended 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3661 

by the members opposite who continually stand the legislation and unfortunately delay the proceedings 
of the House. We have to move these amendments in any event because they are consequential. Sooner 
or later I am hopeful that my friends opposite will see fit not to stand the legislation and have it fully 
debated, pass the merger bill, in which case this particular bill will also become relevant. Accordingly, 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 124. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Chairman, once again, for the reasons I indicated earlier, I beg 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 126 — An Act to 
amend The Unified Family Court Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I will introduce this bill again, but I am not optimistic that we will see any more 
progress on this bill than we have on Bill No. 105, given the position of the Conservative opposition of 
foot dragging this throughout the piece; but I’ll move it in any event. This is, Mr. Speaker, a unified 
family court act amendment to Bill No. 126. This is one of the amendments originally contained in The 
Queen’s Bench Consequential Amendment Act. We have decided to put this in a separate bill before this 
legislature, because we would like to proclaim it in force before the consequential amendments come 
into force. 
 
The amendment is a simple one, and I think the reasons will be obvious. It provides that appeals from 
the unified family court will be to the court of appeal, and not to a single judge of the court. We have 
consulted with the chief justice of the province of Saskatchewan and he is in full agreement with this 
proposed amendment. He informs me that the judges of the court of appeal do not like to sit as single 
judges on appeals on matters from unified family court, in any event. As well, there is a conflict with 
The Divorce Act which provides for an appeal to the court of appeal. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of The Unified Family Court Amendment Act (1980), Bill No. 126. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I missed the defamation bill, I understand 
the Attorney General is concerned about getting speedy passage of bills introduced late in the session. 
The Attorney General seems to have indicated he wants hasty passage of legislation he has brought in 
the last week, traditionally near the end of the session. On this particular bill that an adjournment of a 
recently introduced bill (like a couple this morning) is normal practice, but does not delay proceedings 
in the House. 
 
As a matter of fact, we would be quite prepared to adjourn it until after the Attorney General brings 
forward Bill No. 105. In the interests of getting to Bill No. 105 today . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. The Attorney General’s remarks at the beginning of his comments were out 
of order, as are the comments from the member for Qu’Appelle. We are not discussing House business, 
or in what order it should be proceeded with. We are discussing The Unified Family Court Act and the 
principle of the bill. If the member for Qu’Appelle can get to that, I would appreciate it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, I suppose the question arises, why wasn’t the Attorney General 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3662 

 

called out of order when he . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member for Qu’Appelle is now criticizing the Chair. If the member for 
Qu’Appelle had been watching, he would have noticed I was taking over from the Deputy Speaker when 
I came into the Chamber and the Attorney General was making his remarks. I think in all fairness, the 
member for Qu’Appelle should have recognized that and not raised a criticism of the Chair because he 
was out of order. 
 
MR. LANE: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 128 — An Act to 
amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act (No. 2). 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I shall make a very small comment. This is a consequential amendment to the 
unified merger proposals which have been stood repeatedly by the member for Qu’Appelle in the 
Conservative opposition for over two months, delaying and foot dragging. Some day we’ll get through 
that bill and hopefully we’ll need the consequential bill as a consequence. So, I move second reading of 
this bill. 
 
MR. LANE: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 128 — An Act to 
amend The Garage Keepers Act (No. 2). 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move both Bill No. 128 and Bill No. 129 
which are essentially the same. These are consequential amendments which are based on The Personal 
Property Security Act which has now been stood for about five months by the Conservative opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, and some day . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’m going to ask the Attorney General to deal with the principle of the bill and not 
the order of the House business or the disorderliness of the House business. He has to stick to the 
principle of the bill. Otherwise he puts me in the unfortunate position of allowing the member for 
Qu’Appelle to do the same thing. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The principle of this bill is a consequential amendment 
to The Personal Property Security Act. I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that The Personal Security Act is still 
in adjourned debates and one day The Personal Property Security Act will get through second reading 
and we will need these consequential amendments. I hope that the principle of this bill, which is 
consequential to personal property will not be delayed for five or six months as The Personal Property 
Security Act has been to date. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 128, The 
Garage Keepers Act (No. 2). 
 
MR. LANE: — Just to respond — I have had on my desk for the last week material being prepared to 
debate first on property security and get it through second reading. The Attorney General had not 
brought it forward on numerous occasions since then. I’ve had material here being prepared to debate it. 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, we have 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3663 

made it clear to the Attorney General on the personal property and consequential amendments which 
these are that we would allow speedy passage because he did extend to us the courtesy of being able to 
meet with his staff and discuss changes on a very complex bill. We have indicated most clearly that we 
would be prepared to give hasty passage because the courtesy was extended to us to discuss a complex 
bill with his officials. That applied to the consequential amendments of which these are two and as a 
consequence they fall, as far as we are concerned, within that personal property and we are quite 
prepared to expedite them through the House. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 129 — An Act to 
amend The Warehousemen’s Lien Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I will make no second reading speech of this because it is a consequential as I 
indicated and I move second reading of Bill No. 129. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 
 
Motion to stand bill negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 11 
 

Birkbeck Rousseau Muirhead 
Larter Swan Katzman 
Lane Pickering Andrew 
Taylor Garner  
 

NAYS — 29 
 

Pepper Banda Prebble 
Romanow Kaeding Long 
Snyder Hammersmith Nelson 
Baker Kowalchuk Thompson 
McArthur Feschuk Engel 
Gross Byers Poniatowski 
Shillington Vickar White 
MacMurchy Cody Solomon 
Mostoway Matsalla Collver 
 Lusney Ham 
 

Section 1 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Minister, I think I have quite a few remarks to make. What is 
the lost revenue expected to be if Sask Tel passes Bill No. 13 and most of the 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3664 

 

acoustic couplers in the province are allowed to stay? 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — We didn’t hear the question. We were shuffling 
around our papers. Would you mind asking the question again? 
 
MR. GARNER: — I’ll repeat it, Mr. Minister. What is the lost revenue expected to be if Bill 13 is 
passed, and none of the acoustic couplers that are in service now are allowed to stay? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we now allow acoustically coupled equipment. If they’re allowed 
to stay, it’s pretty obvious we won’t be losing any revenue. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, here is another letter that I’ve received regarding Bill 13. 
 

. . . your letter of May 7, 1980, outlining your concern over the proposed Bill 13. As a member of 
free enterprise, we too are very concerned, especially in the areas of points 3 and 4 of your letter. 
 
Point 3: The whole future of electronic information systems in Saskatchewan under the control 
of Sask Tel. This is a key point. This would remove all choice in the area of (a) hardware: (b) 
network hook-ups for equipment from word processors to future home terminals. Removing the 
right to make a decision forces the end user into a compromising position. We will be unable to 
have any meaningful input into the decisions that will carry the electronic age into the 80s and 
the 90s. 
 

Just for the member’s information, this letter is from Wascana Office Equipment right here in Regina. 
 

Point 4: Sask Tel would have sole authority to manufacture, distribute, or lease 
telecommunications in Saskatchewan. This is also a key point. As a business we would be 
competing against government and our own money. Our prime concern that affects us directly is 
that we market work processing equipment and since government is a very large prospect and 
user of word processing, our number one competitor becomes a government Crown corporation 
also with the power under Bill 13 to confiscate equipment attached to the telephone lines. 
 
The steadily expanding use of electronic equipment by individuals and business firms brings to 
light the pitfalls of Bill 13. Thusly your assistance as leader of the Progressive Conservative 
Party to help curtail the passing of this legislation would be definitely appreciated. 
 

Mr. Minister, I think if there’s one message here it is this: why should business in Saskatchewan — 
established business — have to compete with its own tax dollar? Sask Tel is set up as a Crown 
corporation; it’s a public utility to provide a service to the people of Saskatchewan at the lowest possible 
cost. Now with the powers of Bill 13, that same business that pays taxes in Saskatchewan — that very 
same business — has got to compete with big brother government in order to stay alive. I don’t think 
that’s right. You want the power — leasing all, manufacturing all. Then you want to go one step further 
and have the complete power, the ultimate power, to say who can sell what, who can use what. Not in a 
public utilities board as we have asked for, no, you want the power 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3665 

within your cabinet to make the decision on who can sell what and who can connect those lines. 
 
I’m very sure, Mr. Minister that politics won’t be kept out of this. When we have private enterprise, 
whether it’s computing firms or word processing firms or it doesn’t matter what, prepared to supply the 
technology and the equipment for the people of Saskatchewan, why does your government have to go 
into the business? 
 
Are you telling me and the people of Saskatchewan that you’re going to provide it that much cheaper? Is 
that what you’re telling me? What about these firms that are already in Saskatchewan? What do they do 
if you don’t agree with a piece of their equipment to be connected to the lines? What are they supposed 
to do, leave Saskatchewan and go to Alberta to join the young farmers who are going there? It’s not 
right, Mr. Minister, and you know it. 
 
A MEMBER: — It’s not happening. 
 
MR. GARNER: — It’s not happening yet. But that brings us to scrambling telecable signals in 
Saskatoon. Double headend equipment, Mr. Minister, why the double headend equipment? I hope 
you’re making a note of these because I would like a response from you on all these. Oh, he’s shaking 
his head. 
 
I get letters from Regina. I have another one from Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister, your government is 
terrifying every cable operator in the province — a fear tactic — because you want to own and control 
all telecommunications in the province of Saskatchewan. You want the people to see what you want 
them to see. Choice is gone. Freedom of rights is gone with Bill 13. Your government agreed in 
principle on second reading to amend this Bill 13 as it is now. 
 
Why does your government insist on owning the earth stations? The information brought forward to me 
is that in the next two years technology is going to improve that much more with earth stations, 
receiving disks. You know what I’m talking about. Even a farmer could maybe buy one for as little as 
$500. But if Bill 13 passes you’ll be depriving not only the farmer but the small businessmen, the small 
towns in Saskatchewan. I know your comeback is going to be fibre optics. 
 
Can we in Saskatchewan really afford fibre optics with a population of approximately 950,000? Can we 
really afford the fibre optics or would we not be better off going the route of the earth stations? How 
many other provinces in western Canada that have a larger population than we do are into the fibre 
optics? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the Minister of Tourism and renewable Resources hollering 
here. Maybe he will get in and have some questions for the minister. Because undoubtedly, Mr. 
Chairman, these letters have not just been coming to the Progressive Conservative opposition. They 
have to have been coming to government members opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear them 
say they haven’t received one. 
 
Well, I am going to read a letter here presently, Mr. Chairman, which was sent to the four cabinet 
ministers in Saskatoon. When you get so many letters, Mr. Chairman, you have a hard time keeping 
them all separated. I hear the Minister of Agriculture reading them all off. That just brings to note 
something I remember the minister saying in this House before, that the Progressive Conservatives are 
only interested in taking care of their big business friends. 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3666 

 

Well, I have the Minister of Agriculture (and I think he was in the House when I read a couple of the 
letters which came from some of his constituents who might even have voted for him — ham radio 
operators), on one hand saying, they’re from the constituents, ham radio operators. But the Minister of 
Telephones, on the other side says, it is only big business, Mr. Chairman, they can’t have it both ways. 
They can’t get together. Why, Mr. Minister, is Sask Tel so dedicated to this Bill No. 13 to prevent . . . 
Whether it is through the scrambling of telecable signals, depriving the small towns of maybe owning 
their own earth stations, having double headend equipment when it is not necessary but just used as a 
means by which they can control communications to the people of Saskatoon, Regina or Moose Jaw, it 
is total control, state control of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, it is wrong, very wrong. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you to reply to some of those questions right now. First of all, how many 
other provinces in western Canada have a fibre optics system? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I 
hear the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources answering the questions now. If he will be quiet, 
I will let him answer some questions in tourism and get that deficit cleaned up. Make some sense. We 
can delay this as long as they want. Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the Minister of 
Labour has something to add now too. You want it in Moose Jaw. Do you have fibre optics in Moose 
Jaw? Ah, grandstanding, grandstanding nothing. You want to get into this, fine. My question with the 
priority, Mr. Minister is on the fibre optics. How many miles of fibre optics do you plan on putting on in 
the province of Saskatchewan? What is your total cost for this year? 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t expect anything different from the hon. member today. My 
expectations have certainly been well lived up to. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Answer the question. 
 
MR. CODY: — That’s for sure. I will answer the question as soon as I can get down to answering some 
of the things which obviously have been answered innumerable times in this House and in many other 
ways as well. 
 
First of all, with regard to the first question, fibre optics. I don’t believe there is a province in Canada 
which doesn’t have some fibre optics. I don’t think there is anyone who has the plan on putting a fibre 
optics project together like we have in Saskatchewan. But it is just like everything else in Saskatchewan, 
we have to pioneer it and the people follow along in other provinces. It’s no different in this project than 
it has been in medicare or automobile insurance or you name it. We have pioneered it and the other 
provinces have followed along on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan. That’s always what 
happens. 
 
We don’t mind doing that, because we believe that we should be forerunners in many things. In high 
technology and high technological things such as fibre optics, we believe we can also be front running 
and do a good job, not only for the people for whom the member for Wilkie would like us to do the job 
(and that’s his big private enterprise friends, as I said before), but also for the people who live in rural 
Saskatchewan in places like Moosomin, Estevan, and Wilkie. We want to see that those people also 
have an opportunity some day to see cable television and at the same time have the opportunity to have 
such things as fire alarms and other kinds of things. 
 
It’s pretty obvious, as the member for Regina Centre said, the member for Wilkie does not want the 
people in Saskatchewan to have cable television. If that’s his wish, we can 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3667 

probably accommodate him in Wilkie. If he doesn’t want to have it, let the Wilkie people express 
themselves in that way and we’ll accommodate him and we won’t put cable television into Wilkie. 
 
That is not a threat, Mr. Member for Estevan. I am asking you now to come forward with the views that 
the Wilkie people have and if the people in Wilkie say to me, as the minister in charge of Sask Tel, that 
they don’t want cable television, I can accommodate them. That’s all I’m saying. 
 
Specifically I don’t believe there are many (if any) provinces in Canada which don’t have some type of 
fibre optics in place or will be putting it in place in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to manufacturing of all equipment, it’s pretty obvious that we have no 
intention of manufacturing all of the equipment that will, at some point in time, be attached to our lines. 
It doesn’t make sense to even suggest that we would want to manufacture all that equipment. We have 
manufacturing firms right in the city of Regina now, which are doing that very job. We believe that 
they’re doing a good job. One firm is Northern Telecom. They are doing the job of assembling 
telephones; they are doing the job of manufacturing cable. We don’t in any way want to interfere with 
that company, because we think they are doing a good job, giving lots of jobs to ordinary citizens in this 
province. We have no intentions of manufacturing all of the equipment. 
 
With regard to double headend equipment, I’m just going to very briefly talk about that for a second or 
two, and then I’m going to tell the member that I’m not going to talk any more today about cable 
television in Saskatoon and Saskatoon cable television, because of the fact that it is now before the 
courts and I don’t think it would be right for me to stand in this legislature and say things that may . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m not talking about cable television in Regina, I’m talking about Saskatoon 
Telecable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I said I am not going to talk about cable television in 
Saskatoon, and cable television in Saskatoon is obviously handled by Saskatoon Telecable. I don’t feel 
it’s right for me to indicate or give any suggestions or answer any questions with regard to Saskatoon 
Telecable when it in fact is today before the courts. It may well in fact have a serious effect on the 
decision which a judge may want to make one way or another, and I’m not going to get into that. 
 
With regard to headend equipment, we don’t have double headend equipment in Saskatchewan, 
anymore than they have double headend equipment in Alberta or in Manitoba. If the member want to 
explain to me specifically what he means by double headend equipment, I may be able to answer his 
question specifically. But as far as I am concerned, we have no double headend equipment. It’s pretty 
obvious the reason the member says something about double headend equipment is because he is 
misinformed. He obviously hasn’t received the facts that the should have and doesn’t know the 
technologies, and as a result feels there might be double headend equipment when in fact this is not the 
case. 
 
With regard to earth stations, the member asks a question with regard to earth stations for farmers. Well, 
if a farmer can get a licence from the Department of Communications in Ottawa, we would have no way 
of stopping him (if we did want to stop him) and of course we are not going to stop him. That’s not our 
intention. Our intention is to own earth stations in areas where there are a large number of subscribers, 
we need the revenue we derive by carrying the signal from a satellite from a satellite to an earth station 
and delivering it to our customer — Saskatoon Telecable, Cable Regina, Prairie Co-ax, or 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3668 

 

what have you. 
 
We have to have this bulk amount of revenue so that we can give cable television to a place like Swift 
Current or Wilkie or Yorkton or Estevan at a reasonable rate. And if we don’t have this ability by 
owning the earth stations, we will not have the money to be able to rate-average throughout the 
province, and as a result we will not be able to give cable television to the very small communities in 
this province. And the member for Regina South says, that is nonsense. The member for Regina South 
obviously knows very little about cable television. He knows very little about a lot of things, I have 
noted over the last couple of years. 
 
I think if we do not have the ability to own the earth stations, we will never see the city when we have a 
good network of fibre optics throughout this province to give small communities an opportunity to 
watch cable television. We, on this side of the House, believe in all of the communities in 
Saskatchewan. We believe that everybody in Saskatchewan should have an opportunity to watch cable 
television at a reasonable rate, not like the Tories opposite. They believe that by allowing earth stations 
to be owned by the cable television operators they will be able to deliver the signal throughout the 
province. That simply is not the case. They obviously don’t know the technologies, it wouldn’t happen. 
 
I just wish the hon. member for Wilkie would at some point in time do a touch more homework, so that 
the questions we have to answer have properly been asked (so we can answer them in some definitive 
way). 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Minister, just a couple of points from your remarks there. First of all (and 
I will check Hansard when it comes out) I sure don’t like it and I know the people of Wilkie 
constituency will not appreciate it. I don’t know how to phrase it really until I see the Hansard, but it 
seemed to me it was a threat. If you don’t vote for the right political party, forget fibre optics and forget 
cable television. Now that sounds to me, Mr. Minister, like a government that’s running out of control 
and wants more control. Mr. Minister I say to you that’s wrong . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I hear one of the Saskatoon MLAs saying they just want to control Tories. Well, these letters I have 
received sure aren’t all from Tories, when they were Sask Tel employees they couldn’t have all been 
Tories. I think a lot of them are though. But I heard the comment over there before, Mr. Chairman, from 
one of the members (I don’t remember which one) that, oh, we didn’t receive any letters. Well, here’s 
one for you — to the four Saskatoon cabinet ministers from Western Business Machines, copy to Jim 
Garner: 
 

We would like to express to you our concerns regarding the implications of the proposed Bill 
No. 13 to amend the Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. We have been in the office 
machine industry in Saskatchewan for many years and are aware that we are on the threshold of 
a new era of communications. Communicating word processors, computers and copiers are now 
a reality. Electronic mail is not only a possibility but a certainty. It is of concern to us to have 
Sask Tel given the added powers implicit in these amendments. This is particularly true in view 
of the fact that SaskComp is now in the computer retail business market. Hewlett-Packard and 
Sask Tel are, we understand, about to become involved in the direct marketing of a word 
processor. 
 
Having a government monopoly operating in direct competition to us is bad 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3669 

enough. But when they also have the power to stop (and I repeat, to stop) anyone else from 
competing with them, the situation is untenable. All that has to happen after this bill is approved 
is for Sask Tel to say, we haven’t approved that yet and you are denied service! We hope you 
will use your influence to have the section which would allow Sask Tel to market equipment 
changed. If this is not done a system of appeal through an impartial body should be put in place. 
As the legislation now stand sit is like being in favour of freedom of press and having one group 
owning all the printing presses. Yours truly, K. Stead, CIM, Manager of Western Business 
Machines. 
 

Mr. Chairman, there’s one letter to the Saskatoon cabinet ministers. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Big deal! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Ah, now all of a sudden they have three. Later on it will be ten. But they hide them. 
Mr. Chairman, this is just a prime example that when a government wants something badly enough, and 
wants enough control, it doesn’t matter how much or when the people make representation to them, they 
file it, they shelve it or maybe they throw it out the window, but they don’t listen. They don’t listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is just a very good thing, Mr. Chairman, that the members on this side of the House are here and are 
willing to listen to the people of Saskatchewan and act on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan (not just 
the big business operations, but also the ham radio operators and all of them). Mr. Chairman, there is no 
way I am going to be satisfied with Bill 13, nor are any of the members of the Progressive Conservative 
opposition, until we pass some of the amendments we will be bringing forth to take away some of the 
state powers the NDP government wants. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister stated before that he wouldn’t talk any more about Telecable in Saskatoon 
because it’s before the courts. You know, it seems that as the days drag on in this session there are more 
government ministers and departments before the courts in Saskatchewan. This should point out 
something to the people of Saskatchewan. The government is in court; why is this government always in 
court? Why, Mr. Chairman, is this government always in court? We’ll be known as the court 
government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. Not a government listening to the people, but a 
government that is always in the court, always stepping too far. Mr. Chairman, people are starting to 
fight back. Gone are the days (and I say those days are gone, Mr. Chairman) when people are going to 
sit back and be quiet. 
 
But I would like to bring to your attention, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, some of the tactics used by 
this government and Sask Tel to try and control and manipulate the people in Saskatchewan. Here’s a 
letter from A.L.M. Nelson, President of Sask Tel. 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3670 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Take it as read. We’ve already heard that. 
 
MR. GARNER: — No. I hear the minister saying take it as read. This is a very important thing, Mr. 
Chairman, a very important letter. They’re not only trying to manipulate the employees who are now 
with Sask Tel, but they’re reaching back. 5, 10, 15 years, to the employees who worked with Sask Tel 
then. 
 

Dear Fellow employees, present and former. In recent days considerable public debate has taken 
place with respect to two issues of great importance to the corporation. One issue deals with Bill 
13, or the interconnect bill as some people referred to it. The other was our decision to pick up 
(Mr. Chairman, this is very important here, I should have underlined it.) House of Commons 
debates carried on the Anik satellite by the use of earth stations and the subsequent dispute with 
the Saskatoon Telecable. Both issues challenged our role as the province’s designated common 
carrier. 
 

Our decision to pick up — they already could pick up the signal through these connections with the 
CBC on the Telesat satellite. But they weren’t happy with that. They had to go through and pick up the 
signal by the Canadian Satellite Network because the Canadian Satellite Network (which Saskatoon 
Telecable is a shareholder in) was projecting that signal too. Canadian Satellite Network and Saskatoon 
Telecable had a joint effort. They had all the licences. Sask Tel wasn’t happy with that because it was 
kind of on the side. I mean, they had done their own thing. They didn’t get the permission from Sask Tel 
as Bill No. 13 would call for. They had to get all the signals. 
 
Now I could agree, Mr. Chairman, that if Sask Tel couldn’t get the signal, maybe make a deal with 
Canadian Satellite Network to get that signal as well. They were already getting the signal; but so was 
someone else. Someone else in the province was getting the signal. They didn’t like that because that 
wouldn’t fit well with their little socialist image which is being projected out there — total control of all 
the communications. And they could see that they were losing some of that control because private 
government licences and the government regulations, and was providing a service to its customers, and 
its customers are the people of Saskatchewan. But they still had one need that double headend 
equipment, Mr. Chairman? I can only guess why we have that double headend equipment. My guess is 
so that Sask Tel still has the final lever, and can act as if Bill 13 had already been passed to be able to 
cut that signal off to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I hear the minister talk about increased revenues. Increased revenues when you’re putting double 
headend equipment in? We have one headend. It should be sufficient. Now we have double headend 
equipment. But back to this letter, Mr. Chairman; it’s what I call kind of a scare tactic, or a fear tactic by 
the government. 
 

Bill 13 is before the legislature now. As a matter of fact second reading was scheduled to begin 
this week (that was April 22). The earth station issue could possibly end up in the courts. 
 

Mr. Chairman, it has ended up in the courts. This is just how far this government is going to go on the 
earth station. 
 

The two special reports to the employees contained in this information 



 
May 28, 1980 

 

 

 
3671 

package are intended to familiarize you with both issues. I think that employees, especially 
informed employees, are Sask Tel’s best ambassadors. 
 

And in the letter in larger print is: 
 

Special reports to employees. I hope you take time to read this information. I hope that in doing 
so the two issues will be much clearer to your minds. Should you still have questions please talk 
to our public affairs people, or call me. Yours sincerely, Arnold Nelson. 
 

Well, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you why it was necessary to put that letter out? I could see 
maybe to present employees, Mr. Minister, but to former employees, I mean, former employees who 
may have moved to Alberta or to Manitoba? 
 
Mr. Minister, this seems to me like the tactic of controlling all the people and the employees of Sask Tel. 
I wonder if you state to your employees when you hire them, Mr. Minister of Sask Tel, that even if they 
don’t work for you five years from now you’ll still be sending material packages on why you’re doing 
this. Mr. Minister, I say to you I received this letter from one of your former Sask Tel employees and he 
was very unhappy to receive it. He said, I don’t work for Sask Tel any more, Mr. Minister, that 
gentleman even went one step further. We’ll sure be getting into what he told me later on, what he was 
asked to do when he worked for Sask Tel . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You name him, I hear the 
Attorney General say. The last time we talked on second reading on this he took a long weekend on a 
witch hunt. Name him now. You see, Mr. Chairman, that’s just what I’m saying . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, the letter was sent by the president, Mr. A.L.M. Nelson. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  Mr. Chairman, I move the committee report progress on Bill No. 13 and beg leave 
to sit again. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Order! I wonder if we could clarify the motion of the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley. Was the intent of the motion to report progress on Bill No. 13 and to go on to other 
items or was it to report progress from the committee and go back into the House? 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  What I said was that I moved that the committee report progress on Bill No. 13 and 
beg leave to sit again. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The motion is that the committee rise, report progress on Bill No. 13 and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
MR. ROMANOW:  Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  That’s a non-debatable motion. Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt this 
motion? 
 
Order! The question before the committee is the motion by the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley 
that the committee rise, report progress on Bill No. 13 and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



 
May 28, 1980 
 

 
3672 

 

YEAS — 10 
 

Birkbeck Swan Katzman 
Lane Garner Andrew 
Taylor Muirhead McLeod 
Rousseau   
 

NAYS — 23 
 

Pepper Banda Prebble 
Smishek Kowalchuk Long 
Romanow MacAuley Nelson 
Snyder Feschuk Thompson 
Gross Byers Engel 
Shillington Vickar Poniatowski 
MacMurchy Cody White 
Mostoway Lusney  
 
The committee recessed until 2 p.m. 


