






















































Hansard: May 26, 1980


 
3529 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 26, 1980 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — DEPARTMENT OF TELEPHONES — VOTE 38 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. It wasn't on the schedule but there's a small item in Department of 
Telephones; then we could clear Mr. Cody away. Would that be O.K.? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Supplemental estimates, page 5, Vote 38, item 1: Executive Administration — 
$15,000. 
 
Supplementary agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF CONTINUING EDUCATION — VOTE 5 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We're dealing with the Department of Continuing Education, page 26, in your 
estimates. I call on the hon. member to introduce his officials. 
 
HON. D. F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce to the members 
Dr. Alex Guy, deputy minister of continuing education, beside me to my left; just directly in front of me, Mr. 
Bob Barschel, who is the assistant deputy minister for occupational training; beside Mr. Barschel on his left 
is Dr. Don Philippon, who is a research officer in the planning division of the department; behind me, Mr. 
Frank May, who is director of administration in the department; and next to him, Mr. Morris Campbell, who 
is director of student services in the Department of Continuing Education. 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. D. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — My first question to the Minister of Education is: why, 
when the House agenda is drawn up for education, do we come in with continuing education as the first 
estimate? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I had requested to have continuing education dealt with at this time. 
I'm sorry if it has upset the hon. members. It was more convenient because one of my staff members, who is 
critical to the review of the estimates of the Department of Education, was not able to be here just at this 
moment. I made that request and I understood the House was accommodating me in that request. I'm sorry if 
it has upset your . . . 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I don't hold you entirely responsible for what goes on as the order of the House, 
but seems that . . . 
 

Point of Order 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I am aware, the lady who is . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I am advised, (and I should reply to the hon. member's question) that the lady 
is here under the auspices of Mr. Speaker, preparing a slide-tape 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3530 

presentation. I understand she had agreement from both sides. There was another person here earlier in the 
session who was also taking some pictures at that time. This is part of the same project and she is here under 
the auspices of the Speaker. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I've been sitting through a number of estimates in the House and I have 
not seen photographs taken in any of the other estimates. This afternoon, the minister knows very well, when 
both he, I and the member for Rosetown stood to speak there were pictures taken every time. I see pictures 
being used from this Chamber in the Leader-Post. These things have a serious connotation for the voters in 
this province. So I would like the Attorney General or whoever runs that side of the House to explain why 
every time that I, the Minister of Education, or the member for Rosetown rises we are photographed in action 
when that hasn't taken place in any other estimate in this House. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I take it that the hon. member is rising on a point of order, raising a point of 
order. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, we'll take it as a point of order. I just wanted an answer to this, Mr. Chairman, but 
if that's the correct procedure to go through as a point of order, I will call it as a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Fine. Just hold it. Just to explain the situation, I find it difficult to speak for Mr. 
Speaker, but the Speaker had, I understand, consulted with the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of 
the Government concerning this project of taking pictures, and with their agreement he allowed the pictures 
to be taken which is his duty. However, I can point out to the House that if there's some objection to the 
taking of pictures, it's up to the House to decide that. If they don't wish the photographing to take place, a 
motion to have her excluded would be in order. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I think you will remember that about three weeks ago I raised the 
question with the same minister about a brochure which was full of pictures and I just wonder why in 
continuing education and education discussions we are being totally photographed. I don't think it's fair to be 
always thinking of what posture you have to have or if your tie is straight when you are trying to discuss 
considerably important matters here. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think the best way to handle this is if there is some objection, (and I guess 
there is) is that we should ask the person to be excused if that's . . . I don't think we should get into a big 
debate over . . . 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Chairman, if I may just speak to the hon. 
member's point of order. I don't think it's a matter of exclusion of the particular photographer who is in now 
during estimates. It's a question of whether or not photographers in the Assembly are going to be used for 
just one particular set of estimates. That's the issue. If they're going to be used uniformly across the board for 
all estimates, that is quite agreed upon by this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Chairman, further to the discussion, I think as an individual member I have a right to know upon whose 
request from the Department of Education a photographer was requested. I would like to know by whom the 
particular photographer is employed. Is she employed by the photographic arts division, or another 
department of government, or an individual group in the city or in the province, or is she just an individual, 
private photographer? 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3531 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I think I'm going to rule by asking the photographer to excuse herself and we 
will straighten this situation out. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Before you make that ruling . . . You weren't quite complete in your 
discussions. Mr. Speaker not only spoke to the Leader of the Opposition, and I'm sure, to the government 
side, but also to me about inviting a photographer to come in for this special purpose. I say we had 
agreement. We gave agreement in writing, I believe, to Mr. Speaker, that the photographer would be allowed 
in here to take pictures for the presentation of those slides. We did not give permission for those pictures to 
be used for any purpose other than that for which Mr. Speaker requested. I say you should not, under any 
circumstances, exclude a photographer who has already been agreed upon by the leaders in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I'll call on the Attorney General. 
 
HON. R. J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Well, Mr. Chairman, I simply want to support the 
member for Nipawin. I am frankly shocked at this attempt by the Conservative caucus (apparently taking a 
contrary position on other matters than television in this House) to try to arbitrarily kick out a photographer 
of the photographic division of the information services. By agreement, said photographs were not to be used 
outside this Chamber, but to be used as training in the presentation of the slides. That has been 
acknowledged by everyone and it is shocking that the Conservatives are now taking this position. I, for one, 
would not agree to that kind of an arbitrary dismissal. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I've made my ruling and I think I'm going to have to stick with my ruling. I 
understand that (if you want to put it this way) an agreement was apparently made with the Speaker to which 
I am not a party. I don't want to put myself in a position of deciding this issue without any motion or 
anything before me. If some group doesn't agree with the agreement or the agreement somehow has fallen 
through, then I think it is my duty, without any other substantive motion or anything to back up a decision I 
would make, to ask the person to leave. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I think if you would check the record my concern was and I asked the 
minister, why this lady was taking pictures during our discussions this afternoon and this evening and not 
any other estimates? I think this was the concern that was raised . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That was the 
question asked. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sit down. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I'll sit down when I feel like it. Just don't be silly. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — You've made a ruling. I'm sorry, but I must move the photographer be allowed to stay, 
in keeping with the agreement made with Mr. Speaker, and for the information of the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, I have been informed that the picture at which we all were upset was taken when the curling 
group came in this Chamber and was taken illegally against the rules of this House. Mr. Speaker alluded to it 
at the time and said it wouldn't happen again. As a matter of fact he said so from the 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3532 

Chair, but I move, therefore: 
 

That the photographer not be excluded from this Chamber. 
 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Move it against the Chair. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I am like hell. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! It has been moved by the hon. member for Nipawin and seconded by 
the hon. member for Swift Current that the photographer presently in the Chamber be permitted to continue 
as agreed with Mr. Speaker. Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, the motion moved by the member for Nipawin was absolutely 
unnecessary, as was your decision (and that is not casting any aspersions on you as the Chair) to have the 
photographer removed, because no member from this side of the House asked for the photographer to be 
removed. The record, Mr. Chairman, will clearly show that. This side of the House, Mr. Chairman, was 
clearly asking the reasons why the photographer was in the House taking photographs of this particular set of 
estimates. That was the issue. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we simply asked for some clarification of that in the House tonight. Rather than give any 
indication of clarification, you made a decision as Chairman to have the photographer removed, (not one 
which we asked for) and subsequently the member for Nipawin, with the Attorney General herding him on, 
moved a motion which will keep the photographer in the House when she was never asked to leave in the 
first place. I never heard of anything so ridiculous in all my life; absolutely idiotic. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have no objections whatsoever to the motion moved by the member for Nipawin, if in 
fact, Mr. Chairman, you're going to allow that motion to be in order, because Mr. Chairman, I view that 
motion as a censure against the Chairperson of this committee. That will be a precedent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to point out to the House that the first series of questions on 
this matter were raised by the member for Qu'Appelle to the Minister of Continuing Education, to which Mr. 
Chairman of this committee responded, outlining what he believed to be the agreement involving Mr. 
Speaker and all the parties. This prompted thereafter (the record will show clearly) the allegation by the 
member for Qu'Appelle that taking photographs in these circumstances was dangerous and undesirable. This 
was followed by the comments from the member for Moosomin about the photograph taking and thereafter 
by your suggestion that the agreement was now being broken or doubt was being cast on it so you had no 
other option but to ask the photographer to withdraw which prompted the motion from the member for 
Nipawin in that regard. The record shows that absolutely clearly, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. G. S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — I wonder what the member for Qu'Appelle is going to say when 
he sees allegations made about him tonight, and he's not even here. 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3533 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! That's a question of debate, not a point of order. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I have made my point about the motion. I think I'm fortunate . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! He was speaking when a point of order was raised. I had to deal with the 
point of order immediately. He doesn't give up his right to speak. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — There's one correction. It is not the member for Qu'Appelle, who is not in his chair; 
it is the member for Indian Head-Wolseley who took this position straight across the line. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — On the motion put by the member for Nipawin, Mr. Chairman — I 
would like a ruling from you before you put it. Is it not basically a challenge to the Chair, by the way it is 
worded, if you have already made a ruling? Correct me if I'm wrong. I'm just asking for clarification before 
the vote. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I obviously found the motion in order by putting the question to the Assembly. Is the 
House ready for the Chair? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, obviously I don't think so. I can't get into a debate on the motion. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt this motion? 
 
Motion agreed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I guess the photographer is free to take pictures. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Department of Continuing Education — Item 1 (continued) 
 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I think we can probably get on with the discussion of the Department of 
Continuing Education. If there is not too much talk from the cheap seats, maybe we can get into a 
meaningful discussion regarding education in Saskatchewan. This is something I believe you as the minister 
are deeply concerned with. I can't say the same for some of your noisy colleagues, but I believe you have 
some deep concerns in this area, as do I. I think we can get into a meaningful discussion on the estimates and 
how you are planning to spend the money of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in providing to the people and 
the students of this province — the adult citizens through the community colleges and students through the 
universities and the technical schools — needed and very important avenues for continued education. 
 
I would hope, in my introductory remarks, that we would realize there is a very great expenditure of dollars 
for the Department of Continuing Education. I would think, Mr. Minister, I speak for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan when I say that no one questions the need for continuing education and higher education; 
however, I do think there is a need for some degree of scrutiny, Mr. Minister. I know and I want to say at the 
outset of my remarks that I believe in academic freedom as much as you or anyone else in this Chamber. 
However, Mr. Minister, I think there is a fine line between what one could call freedom, and licence to do as 
you please. I think that, in these times of escalating costs in education, people want to know if they are 
getting their dollar value. I know from my 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3534 

experience in education that this is a very hard thing to ascertain. 
 
But on the other hand I don't think that we can disregard the demand by the general public to have some 
degree of feedback or some degree of a positive feeling that their dollars are being spent in the best interests 
of the society and the development of new ideas, of new programs and the equipping of expertise that will 
lead our society in the next decade. I don't think people question that at all. They want to have this type of 
training. But I do think, because of the high cost, they want to be assured they are getting a return on their 
money. And in equating it to the education system where we do have quite a degree of, I wouldn't like to use 
the word control, but we do have a mechanism by which Joe Public can find this sort of thing out, Mr. 
Minister . . . 
 
They can find out if their tax dollar is being spent in the way that they hope best serves the children within 
their schools. There is a parent advisory council as a provision in the new act. Also there are committees on 
curriculum on which there is lay representation. They have a voice into that. There's the avenue of the school 
board which is enshrined in our heritage here in Canada, of the public school board and separate school 
board, where you do have these (shall I say) monitors would be the word I would use, on the education 
system. Now, I know that we have the boards of governors in the universities. The mechanisms in the 
technical schools are I think a little closer being under the deputy minister or the ministry of the Department 
of Continuing Education. 
 
I do sense though, in talking to the general public that there probably is a need. Maybe we don't have to 
create a new avenue. Maybe the board of governors or the senate of the university or something seems, by its 
name and because most of the people that come on there have an expertise (they've come through the 
university and so on) maybe the average person seems removed from them as input, as questions, as to how 
the operation is taking place. I sense that as I talk to people, Mr. Minister, there seems to be a growing bit of 
frustration in this regard. 
 
We all want to see our students come out, if they are capable, with university training, with technical 
training. I think you aspire as I do to maximizing the potential of the individual. I think that's the goal that 
you hold and I think that's the goal that society holds. But I do think that when, and I'll admit some may be 
rumour, there are mechanisms for gauging the ratio for pupil to teacher, the program in the school system — 
I'm not saying that we should operate it on a pupil-teacher ratio, don't take me wrong in that regard, but 
anyone can find this out pretty well within any school jurisdiction in the province of Saskatchewan very 
quickly. 
 
When I see those mechanisms in place and when, as I say, some may be rumour, some may be fact, but a 
very low pupil-teacher ratio in some situations in institutions of higher education and very little public 
knowledge of the actual research, independent research that is going on. I wonder if there can be some way 
that the general public could feel or could know the ongoings of the institutions of higher learning so they 
have that general feeling they are getting the educational value for the dollar spent and we'll start with a 
discussion of that. I'd be interested in your reply. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the hon. member's comments with regard to the 
legitimate public concern and public feeling that all of us who have responsibilities in the education system 
should take whatever steps are open to us and available to us in our good judgment and within our powers to 
see that we make the best use of the education dollar spent. 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3535 

 

I think it's particularly important in our province where we have developed through many years a very, very 
comprehensive, complete system of education. Our philosophy of education works from the principle that 
our citizens should have the opportunity of a high-quality education right from the kindergarten years 
through to the completion of their life (their adult years). We should have continuing education opportunities 
available and as a result, we have developed a wide range of educational institutions and opportunities. 
Certainly, each of those institutions has and must have, because of the history and tradition, their own 
systems of accountability which meet the needs of the public and the needs of us as legislators. 
 
I might say I share very much the other part of the hon. member's interest in this question. Education is the 
business of our public, not just as taxpayers, but also because it is such an important public activity. And 
therefore everyone does have the right to understand, to know about and to have the opportunity to express 
concerns about our education system. 
 
I do want to caution the hon. member, however, with respect to certain comments he made. I think if one 
looks at, for instance, the university community, some of the comments the hon. member makes are directly 
applicable to the university community. 
 
I say to the hon. member that we have some very, very good reasons, historical as well as contemporary, for 
needing to be on guard as public officials to ensure that the university and the university community has the 
opportunity to govern its own affairs without fear of interference from the political side or the government 
side or from other such agencies in our society which might wish to interfere because they object to what is 
being done in the university in terms of research or writing or teaching in terms of the content. 
 
We have established the tradition that our universities should have a free opportunity as part of free enquiry 
and open education to peruse those intellectual areas and areas of research which they deem to be important 
in their own judgement. 
 
As a result, we've built up a system within our universities, a self-governing system, that does have 
participation, not just from within the university but also from without. The board of governors is the 
supreme administrative governing body of the university. 
 
I point out that there are a large number of members of the board of governors who are on the board because 
they represent the public interest in the university. And they are there not only to represent the public 
interest, but to be accountable. I think people who have an interest in the accountability of the university do 
have an obligation to take their concern to the board of governors. I also agree, likewise, that the board of 
governors has an obligation to make sure people are informed and knowledgeable about the activities of a 
university so the public can have the feedback the hon. member talks about. 
 
In addition, we have other bodies of the university, such as the senate, which also draw upon public 
representation from interest groups and others in order to provide as much openness as possible. I might also 
point out that our universities have a very, very fine and long-standing tradition of public service and 
community service. 
 
They do extend themselves in the community. This goes back to the very early days of the University of 
Saskatchewan when that university, perhaps more than any other university in the whole of the country, 
reached out into our rural areas and was 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3536 

accessible to our rural citizens as well as our urban citizens. Through that they built up, not only knowledge 
and understanding about what the universities were doing, but also carried back information from the 
citizenry about the university to the university administration. 
 
I might add, with respect to the technical institutes, that we maintain advisory councils for each and every 
program and course within them. Those committees are drawn from outside the institute communities, so as 
to bring information from and feed back information to the community and particularly that part of the 
community which is interested in those programs. I might also add that this very process here, I think is 
important so that we have the ability as legislators to review how our dollars are being spent. 
 
Having said all that, it is never particularly easy, as the hon. member points out, to evaluate efficiency and 
effectiveness of educational dollars on such things as intellectual pursuits and research. To a certain extent 
you must take some gambles and risks and hope that this side of our education system will provide a pay-off 
to society. I think the history of our universities in this province, the history of our technical institutes, and 
now the recent history of our community colleges very clearly show that we do have a very substantial 
pay-off to our society. 
 
Might I mention just one other thing with community colleges? The philosophy of the community colleges, I 
think more than anything else, supports the point the hon. member makes about making our educational 
institutes part of the community. The community colleges are different from all other community colleges in 
Canada. They are based in the communities. The membership is drawn from the communities. Each of the 
community colleges contains many (what are called) needs identification committees, based throughout the 
province. They work with the people in the communities to identify what they need and want in terms of 
educational opportunities and work within the community college to provide them. I think that direct 
participation perhaps more than anything else, is the proper way to guarantee that people do get value for 
their money out of the education system, because they participate as decision makers in determining what 
they get out of their educational system. I think that is something our community colleges are uniquely 
capable of doing, and it is something we are very proud of. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I would be in agreement with you, Mr. Minister. I want you to be very clear on this. I 
think you realize I am in no way suggesting the government should be looking at the internal aspect of the 
university, interfering maybe with the ongoing program; that has an inherent danger. However, Mr. Minister, 
there should be some degree of public scrutiny, or an avenue which the public can go through. Maybe it is 
the very fact that the majority of the public are not university graduates. I get to know who is on the board of 
governors and in the senate as you do, because we are alumni of the university. Other people seem to feel, 
and express to me, what can I do? I am concerned about things which are going on in there. I don't know the 
avenues to go through. I don't know where to turn. Maybe there should be a little more publicity of who the 
contacts are if you have concern. I am sure you must get letters about this; I know you do, from people who 
probably never attended a university in their lives. Their child is going to university. They come home with 
stories of things they don't approve of, or they question. They don't seem to know where to turn or who to 
voice complaints to. Or on the other hand, not everything is a complaint; we don't want to paint a negative 
picture. There can be some (and there are some) very good things going on. Some people out there have 
some good suggestions. But there seems to be a breakdown which there 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3537 

 

isn't in the public education system. 
 
So I just put this forth as a suggestion, that perhaps things might run a little more smoothly if there were 
more emphasis from your Department of Continuing Education on letting the general public know, or having 
some way of knowing (if they have complaints or if they have bouquets for the university) which way to go, 
rather than coming or writing to me or something of this nature and wanting to politicize it; I don't think that 
is what we want to do here. I think we want to develop the best type of university and continuing education 
program that we can for this province. That's my desire. And I just feel that there is a need in this regard. 
 
With technical schools, I don't get that kind of input so much. There is some concern about cutting programs 
and what this would do with staff and things of this nature. I do get that sense of futility or if I have a 
complaint against the university — to whom do I turn or where do I turn? I don't know if you want to 
comment any more on that. If you do I will entertain what you have to say. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I do personally take an interest in trying to see that we have 
more information available about our educational institutions. We are currently examining some ways of 
providing more information. We are looking at the present time on student assistance in university entrance 
and that type of thing. We certainly can have a look at the question, as you point out, of just a better public 
understanding of the nature, structure, organization and functioning of the university. That is something we 
can look at. And in undertaking such a program, it will likely involve some publications. We'll take great 
care about the kinds of pictures we include in those publications. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — It's very nice of you to scrutinize the pictures, Mr. Minister. Getting into research, in 
talking to people in the university community there seems to be a concern as to whether the amount of 
research funds provided are adequate. I must admit that most of my discussions are with people in the 
college of education. Could you indicate to me what increases there have been, if any, and what funding 
under these subvotes would be for research, or is this entirely an internal matter with the various departments 
and disciplines in our universities? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, it has been the practice that in the funding . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I would ask the hon. member for Rosthern to withdraw the remarks toward 
the Chairman, namely that I have two sets of rules. I would ask you to withdraw it. I would ask you to stand 
up and put it on the record. I'll ask you to rise and withdraw the remarks. I would ask you to rise and 
withdraw the remarks about the Chair. Thank you. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I withdraw. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Thank you. 
 
MR. LANE: — Now, on that point of order, Mr. Chairman, I assume we'll see those remarks in the record 
tomorrow. 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3538 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — There is no point of order. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member for . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, order! I would ask all hon. members to try to maintain some order and 
decorum in the House. I call on the Hon. Minister of Education. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley had asked a 
question with respect to the funding of research at the universities by the Government of Saskatchewan, or 
the Department of Continuing Education more specifically. I want to indicate to the hon. member that we 
provide almost without exception our funding to the universities on an unconditional basis. We provide 
funding and then leave it to the university to determine the appropriate use of those financial resources in 
terms of teaching, research, community service or whatever. We do believe that largely brings about the 
most effective distribution of the use of the internal university resources. 
 
I might add that part of the reason that tradition has developed is because there has been a complementary 
organization of research funding on the other hand by the federal government, which organized its spending 
to universities on the basis of mission oriented or directed research. So its funding tends to be tied to 
particular research projects. We reviewed that as being an appropriate way to approaching the division of 
responsibilities between governments as well. 
 
There are instances where we have a very specific and particular interest, as a government, in some matter 
that we wish to have researched and in that case we will undertake contract research. But the amount of 
research undertaken on that basis is relatively small. By and large our funding, as it is directed toward 
research, is part of the global funds that go to the university. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Then if your funding to the university in general is a little on the skimpy side, or they're 
having a tough time meeting their expenditures, would it be correct to assume that maybe the research would 
be cut back because of just a general lack of funding? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think it's certainly true to say the more money the universities have, likely the 
greater will be the amount of research and teaching time, as well as the amount of extension time, that's put 
in. This is simply by virtue of the fact that by and large the university staff is expected to divide its time 
between research, teaching and, to a certain degree, extension or community service. 
 
So, clearly, the more staff the university is able to engage, then it is likely that there will be more research 
done because those additional staff members will at least be devoting part of their time to research. 
 
However, I think one shouldn't confuse the situation here. I don't think there's been any indication or any 
history in this province of any pressure to cut back the level of university activity. Clearly the universities 
would on occasion like to have more money, as their aspirations and their hopes sometimes exceed the 
resources they have. That's a situation all of us face when we're trying to manage any kind of public agency 
with scarce financial and other resources; they're always scarce in that sense. 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3539 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Fine, then in regard to program could you tell me, with the aid of your officials, has the 
program at the University of Regina been decreased in the last year, and if so, in what disciplines? Also, 
what about the University of Saskatchewan, has it been decreased in program offerings? I mean in the 
various disciplines. Have they had to drop any of these? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not aware of any disciplines or programs which the universities 
have eliminated at either Saskatoon or Regina. There may very well have been. It is not my responsibility nor 
my place to have any involvement in this. There, I'm sure, have been cases where, because of the shifting 
priorities of the university, or because some aspects of the university are growing in terms of student 
enrolments and some are declining, they have shifted certain teaching resources. They may have taken some 
positions and reallocated them to certain other areas; the result of that would be that certain areas would no 
longer have as many teaching positions as they once did. 
 
I'm sure some of that goes on. It's gone on in every public institution, government department or whatever, 
that I've ever been involved in. I'm sure it goes on in the university. However, I have not been notified of any 
decision to eliminate any programs or disciplines of that sort within the university over the past year. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — When would these changes, if there were shiftings or cuttings or so on, be made? Are 
these made well in advance of the academic year so that the students enrolled would be aware of these types 
of changes? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — The university fiscal year is from July 1 to June 30 of each year. Therefore, the 
university would have to be in a position of having their budgetary plan and their operational plan into place 
by July 1 of each year. 
 
The main university program starts, as you know, sometime in early September so there would be at least 
that kind of lead time in terms of changing of teaching resources. I don't think, (and I could be wrong on this) 
that any of the changes which have taken place are the kind that would impact the way the hon. member 
indicates. That is to say I don't think a student would find that a program he or she wished to pursue (a 
particular program of study) has likely disappeared because of these reallocations of resources. It may be that 
there are not as many teaching resources in a particular faculty. I don't know. There may be a reduction of 
one, or something, in a faculty. But that would not likely result in any disappearance of any part of the 
program that a student would be planning to participate in. 
 
MR. H. J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Minister, I just wanted to talk for a moment about the 
universities commission. 
 
The board of governors often feel that the universities commission stands between them and the legislative 
body in the province. The board of governors at both universities often feel quite a sense of frustration when 
they try to deal with their budgets. They can't talk directly to the government who provide the funding. They 
must go through the universities commission. 
 
That process, thought it may be good, does not really fit with the method which the former minister of 
education used when he described the need for the negotiations between the government, the trustees and the 
teachers. He said that he was paying the piper and must call the tune. If the government is still paying the 
piper in this case and they set themselves apart from the universities by putting the universities commission 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3540 

in between, then that doesn't fit. I'm having a little trouble understanding the thinking of the government and 
I'd like an explanation of why you see the need of the universities commission. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have to go back just a little in history to understand 
the role and development of the universities commission. As you know up until 1974 there was only one 
university in this province. It had two campuses, the Regina campus and the Saskatoon campus. But there 
was only one university, the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
With the introduction of the plans and the legislation in 1974 to create two universities — two 
self-governing university communities in the province — it was recognized that there would be certain 
problems and difficulties and certain additional needs as a result of the requirement to have an appropriate 
relationship between government and those two universities. As a result of that, because of the very 
legitimate fear, (not fear, but concern) about maintaining as much as possible a distance between government 
and universities in terms of management of the universities, it was recognized that with two universities you 
get into questions of division of the overall financial pie for the university sector and into planning questions 
about the appropriate distribution of programs between one university and another, or the appropriate 
distribution of capital facilities. Recognizing that those kinds of decisions would have to be made and you no 
longer had a single board of governors making those kinds of decisions, it was felt that it would be most 
appropriate to establish, (as has been done in other provinces which have more than one university) a 
universities commission that would deal with those kinds of planning and financial allocation matters. 
 
Again, perhaps it's an overabundance of caution, but we on this side of the House believe that even though it 
has its difficulties and frustrations that a free and independent functioning academic community in this 
province is extremely important to the well-being of the province. We believe history has shown that a free 
and independently functioning academic community does contribute and we believe that left confident to 
function in that way in the future it will contribute in a very important way. Therefore, we have taken these 
kinds of measures including the creation of the universities commission. I appreciate that it creates 
frustrations. There is not the same kind of direct communication between the boards of governors, now that 
we have two, and the government as there was previously when we had only one board of governors. But I 
think that's an unfortunate side effect, if you like. I think all of us need to work for finding more effective 
ways of communicating within that framework but I'm not convinced by any means that the framework itself 
is not appropriate, given the very legitimate concerns and interests in this whole question. 
 
MR. SWAN: — The University board of governors feel that separation, where they can't speak to 
government. When we in turn ask questions of the government about the operation of the university, you 
again say, well the university commission has control and we really can't say anything. So you don't just cut 
off the universities but you also cut off the opposition in the legislature by your process. I'm wondering 
whether you indeed have the right process or if there isn't some way it could be improved? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I'm not sure that I fully understand the relationship of the points the hon. member is 
making. I don't think I have ever claimed in this House that I could not answer any questions because of the 
existence of the universities commission. I don't believe I've ever had any question directed to me but there 
could be occasion, where some matter, within the knowledge of the universities commission and not within 
the 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3541 

 

knowledge of the minister, makes it impossible for the minister to inform the House of what that matter is. 
But I'm not aware of having ever found that I could not answer any question because the universities 
commission had the information. 
 
MR. SWAN: — You may not have felt that you couldn't answer; you just wouldn't. Is that the case? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Perhaps I should try to speculate a little bit about what the hon. member is actually 
referring to. If he is referring to questions which have been directed to me in this House about the operation 
of the University of Regina, I want to emphasize to the hon. member and to all members of this House that 
my inability to answer for the behaviour of the university has nothing to do with the universities 
commission. My reasons for not being able to answer have to do with the fact that the university historically 
and by statute, is a self-governing institution — an institution of learning, and institution of research. 
 
Aside from the whole existence of the universities commission which has really nothing to do with that 
particular issue directly, we, on this side of the House, and I, as a minister, maintain the position that it 
would be wrong for me to interfere with academic decision making and academic freedom of the university. 
I think that any attempt on my part to hold the university accountable for decisions it makes, would amount 
to interference which I think would cause a great deal of alarm (legitimate alarm) and concern within the 
universities. So I do not, in that sense, attempt, nor do I think it would be my right, to hold the universities 
accountable for their decisions and therefore I cannot answer for those decisions within this House. 
 
I might add that the whole tradition of universities within the free world has developed such that those 
universities are self-governing institutions with their own accountability systems and their own means of 
being accountable for their decisions outside of being accountable to the government or to the state. I think 
that is clearly a very fundamental principle. That is why I have not found it possible to answer for certain 
decisions of the university; it has nothing to do with the universities commission. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, getting back to changing of courses within the year, I have a letter here I'd 
like to just read for your information. The letter was written to me and says: 
 

I'm writing to you in regard to the change in policy of majoring in accounting in the college 
of commerce at the University of Saskatchewan. Here are the facts as I know them. 
 
In early February the accounting department held a general meeting for all commerce 
students who were interested in majoring in accounting. At this meeting they told us they had 
figured out there would be too many of us majoring in accounting in the following year to 
facilitate us all. Therefore, they would have to set up a system of eliminating some of us from 
going into accounting. As it turned out, they had had this problem the year before and had 
dealt with it on a first-come, first-serve basis. 

 
However, this year they thought that way of doing things was not fair. Therefore, this year we 
had to apply to get into accounting just as though we were applying to get into university. 
They looked at the average grade of all of the classes we had taken up until December, 1979 
and they chose the 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3542 

applicants with the higher averages until the major was filled. Up until this meeting, all a 
student needed was a 59 per cent average to get into the major he chose. Also at this meeting 
they told us they knew about this problem last fall but they told us nothing about it until this 
February, at the February meeting. 

 
As it happened, of the 250 students who applied to get into accounting, 190 students were 
accepted and 60 students were turned down. The average mark which turned out to be the 
cutoff point was 70 per cent. 

 
I was among the 60 students who didn't get into the accounting major. We were either faced 
with quitting university, transferring to another university whereby there was no guarantee of 
our getting into the accounting major there, or like myself, forced to turn our reference to 
another commerce major and follow through with it or try again to get into accounting after 
the following year. Again, we are still not guaranteed to get in unless we have a certain 
average. 

 
Also on the basis of this system that they have set up, some third year students who have 
already taken classes toward their accounting major did not get into the accounting major for 
their fourth year. So now where does that leave them? 

 
There's some more in the letter, Mr. Minister, but I think you have the general gist and that's why I asked 
earlier, when are these decisions made? Because I think that's rather an injustice. I can understand that you 
have to have a quota of students whom you can admit. You just can't let everyone in there. But I think it is an 
injustice and a gross injustice for students to think they are going to be able to major in this and get to second 
or third year (I think he mentioned some of them going into fourth year) to find out they cannot get the 
necessary courses. And I think your assurance to me was that these things were usually made by June so they 
would know in September. This letter points out that this happened in midstream in February. 
 
Were you aware of this situation, Mr. Minister? If we're safeguarding the education of these students, that's 
the kind of thing we should be avoiding in the universities, the technical schools or wherever it may take 
place. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, generally I've been aware of the situation with respect to accounting 
at the University of Saskatchewan. It is a program, as the hon. member has pointed out, that has quotas with 
respect to enrolment. As I understand it, those quotas are in existence for two or three reasons. 
 
One reason, I think, is because of the interest of the university and the college in maintaining certain levels 
of academic standards which they have chosen to do and which is not anything for me to argue with them 
about. 
 
The second thing is that the college of commerce itself has been a very rapidly growing faculty. Apparently it 
is a faculty in which student interest is great. Also I take it that the 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3543 

 

demand for graduates is great, so it's been a faculty which has grown quite considerably. The universities, I 
think, are feeling the pressure in that faculty and feeling rather badly about the fact students do have to be 
turned away from the accounting major. The universities have not at this time, as far as I know, advanced 
any proposition to the universities commission and through it to the government about any steps that we 
might take to assist them with their problem. 
 
I am told by university officials that one problem they do face and that they have no ready answer for, is that 
highly competent highly trained and professional accountants are in such great demand that they have trouble 
attracting an adequate number of faculty members to instruct in the accounting major. And as a result of that, 
if they want to keep their teaching program within certain limitations in terms of the demand upon the 
instructors, they have a great deal of difficulty in seeing exactly how they can overcome this problem. I 
understand it is something they're working on, but it's not something they see an immediate or early solution 
to. 
 
I might also say I'm not sure that I fully understand the member's criticism of the university for informing 
student in February about this difficulty. I would think any decision provided to the students in February 
would be a decision that would not come into play until the following fall. I would say that is a case of a very 
substantial amount of advance notice (probably as much advance notice as is practical under the 
circumstances) for the university to be giving those students. So I would not share the hon. member's 
criticism of the universities for having made that decision in February. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I think the concern there, as expressed by the students, Mr. Minister, is what's the 
foresight in planning within the department? Why let these 250 in if you're only going to have 190 that you're 
going to allow to continue? Where is the guidance? 
 
You're telling me the future for accounting and commerce is very bright. I would think that if this is so, 
certainly why do we not accommodate the 250? Maybe there is a problem in getting professors, but surely if 
there's that demand out there for commerce graduates, we're doing a great disservice to the students of 
Saskatchewan if we are not allowing them to continue their training. 
 
The 59 per cent average to get into the course, if that's not adequate, well then raise it to 70 per cent if that's 
what it has to be. But let's not be doing this in the middle of the stream on these kids; that's what I'm saying. 
If they knew they were going to have the 190, Mr. Minister, then they should have been told in September 
and not part way through. I think I indicated that some of these people were third and fourth year students. 
 
Getting back to what you were saying, if it is that good out there for accounting and commerce, then I think 
if I were in that university and having some decision-making say (if that's where the possibility is to forward 
this province and to give young people the opportunity to make a decent and respectable living and 
contribute to the ongoing society and economy), surely to God I wouldn't be saying cut 60 of them out. I 
would be making provision for those 60 to join in this great future in accounting. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think, Mr. Chairman, we need to be a little careful about being armchair managers. 
I think the difficulty the university is experiencing, in predicting the demand and mobilizing the teaching 
resources to meet the demand, is a real one. 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3544 

I might point out that while it's regrettable, my understanding of that situation the hon. member is referring 
to is that the university cannot determine exactly how many people are going to pursue a particular major, 
such as accounting, until somewhere well into the second year of that class's enrolment in the college of 
commerce. Then they get an accurate indication of the level of interest in the different majors. Therefore they 
can't exactly predict as well as the hon. member might be implying. I think what they probably have found is 
they are getting in a position where, out of a particular class, they have many more students interested in 
pursuing a particular major than they can accommodate. They must make some of these decisions about 
requirements for acceptance in that major and the possibility that some of the commerce students will have 
to pursue one of the other majors. It's regrettable, but it's a real fact of life. 
 
I might also point out that it is my understanding that the option for those students to pursue an accounting 
career is not entirely closed off, in that there are relatively effective mechanisms for a student upon 
graduation from commerce (say in administration or one of the other majors) to pursue a career in the 
accounting profession through a further study program. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, it is obvious that the courses they wanted to take, Mr. Minister, they weren't 
allowed to pursue. I may be an armchair manager (that could be right) but I'm of the opinion that if a young 
person meets the entrance requirements and has the desire to do that, I would say: fine and dandy, you just go 
ahead and give it a try. I think that is what we should be doing with our young, encouraging them, instead of 
having good young kids like this writing to people like you and me expressing frustration, because they were 
allowed in and then pulled out. That's like putting a fellow in a 100 yard dash, and if he isn't really doing 
very well at 50 yards, saying: hey buddy, get out of the race. Neither you nor I know what burst of speed he 
may have for the end, and that's the possibility here too. I'm not saying let everybody into the program, but if 
they meet the entrance criteria, and if the possibility for earnings and a career is good (and I accept your 
word that it is good), and if we are really interested in providing continuing education for the students in this 
province, then let's make it so they can fulfil their aspirations and potential we spoke of earlier; let's not cut 
them out because of some arbitrary standard which is brought in halfway through the course. I would put that 
forth for consideration, and I think it is the route we should be looking at. I think we've responded to that; 
we've both had some discussion there; I bring it forth as a sincere concern. 
 
The next thing I am a bit concerned about is the degree of graduate training in our universities. That hinges 
on what I was talking about earlier in research, and I quote from an article Mr. Minister, I am sure you are 
probably familiar with, which quotes Dean Kenneth McCallum. It says: 
 

Low financial support is one reason the University of Saskatchewan is not attracting many 
graduate students, Dean Kenneth McCallum of the college of graduate studies and research 
said Saturday in Saskatoon. . . Proportionately Saskatchewan has the lowest percentage of 
graduate students in comparison to other universities . . . In 1977-78 full-time U of S 
graduate enrolment as a percentage of full-time undergraduate enrolment was 5.4 per cent, 
compared to the national average of 12.3 per cent. 

 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, that is rather a significant difference in graduate training. I think you realize, as well 
as I do, the potential that is there from graduate students entering into our labour forces as well as instructors 
in classes and so on. He points out that maybe 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3545 

 

some of the reason for the decrease in graduate students is the funding available to them in graduate teaching 
fellowships. He goes on to say: 
 

Nationally three-quarters of the students remain within their own province for graduate study, 
but only 56 per cent of Saskatchewan students do. 
 

I think with that we're losing a brain drain perhaps. We're not attracting many from other provinces and 
states. We're losing some of our top students, and as Dean McCallum points out, maybe this is due to 
funding. Mr. Minister, I would be interested in your comments on the retention of graduate students in our 
universities. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say first of all that I think I share the concern and interest 
Dr. McCallum has expressed about finding ways of increasing the interest and participation of our 
graduating students in graduate programs at our universities. I think it is quite evident that one of the things 
we are going to need, and need very much over the coming years in Saskatchewan, is highly trained 
professionals. And I think one of the means of developing highly trained professionals is by interesting them 
in pursuing graduate study programs in our universities. 
 
I might add, however, it is somewhat difficult to determine exactly what it is that would bring about an 
increase in the interest of students pursuing graduate studies in our universities. There are a number of 
reasons why tentatively some of us have identified here in Saskatchewan there is a somewhat lower than is 
the case in Ontario, participation in graduate programs amongst our graduating students from our 
universities. I think one of the things that is clear in the case of Ontario is they have a very substantial 
number of universities. We find students in all universities often wish to transfer to another university to 
pursue a graduate program. Because we have only the two universities in Saskatchewan, and in many 
programs in which there is only one university offering a program, it does seem to be somewhat of a pattern 
with students graduating from our universities to look to another university outside the province as part of 
that trend to looking to a second university to do graduate work in. That's not a bad principle I think to take 
your graduate work at another university. 
 
Another difficulty that we've identified is the fact that job opportunities are so significant for bachelor degree 
graduates, baccalaureate graduates, in Saskatchewan at the present time that many, many students go straight 
into the work force out of their first degree, many, many more than was once the case. Part of that is simply 
because they are taking advantage of very, very generous and substantial job opportunities that exist today in 
our province, associated with the growth and development in our province. I would relate to the hon. 
member that I was speaking to a faculty member in the faculty of geology recently, who was talking to me 
about this very problem that the hon. member mentioned. I was pursuing with him what he thought would be 
a possible solution to this problem. He pointed out to me that he wasn't very sure what the solution was at 
the present time because it didn't seem to matter what was placed before a graduate of the first degree in 
geology. The opportunities for work were so attractive that it was difficult to convince them to pursue 
postgraduate work of any sort. 
 
I do think, however, we do have to look at it. We are the present time reviewing financial assistance, 
scholarships and other types of fellowships, that are available for graduate work with the possibility that we 
can provide some additional financial incentives by improving those. Now I don't know whether that will 
bring the response we might hope it would, but that is one alternative we are currently looking at. It will be 
further examined in the coming months for possible implementation in another year. 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3546 

I might say we have raised some of the fellowships and graduate scholarships at the present time, and we'll 
get some indication of what effect that's having. I think it is something we need to review a little further. It 
may also be something the universities themselves, could be looking at in terms of the kinds of teaching 
assistantships and so on, that they provide out of their own resources. It may very well be they need to look 
at enriching those as well, as an additional incentive to keep graduating students within the university 
community to do graduate work. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I heard you right, Mr. Minister, in that you are reviewing this with a look at maybe 
increasing the funding for graduate research and so on. If this is the route you are looking at I think that's 
quite important. Your suggestion that maybe they go into the work force, I would think the same opportunity 
would be possible in other provinces of Canada as in Saskatchewan, to go into the work force right out of the 
baccalaureate. That doesn't explain to me really why we are lower in the percentage. I realize the difference 
made by two universities and I accept that, but still I do think that we have, as I said earlier, a brain drain. I 
think if we can put money into this it is very good, because I point out here, and I quote again from Dr. 
McCallum and he says: 
 

Unless Canadian universities sharply increase their output of highly-trained research 
personnel, such scholars will soon have to be imported from other countries, a University of 
Saskatchewan administrator said. 

 
And he points out a Science Council of Canada study shows the cost of doing research is escalating at a rate 
much higher than the consumer price index and that we, in Canada, only put 9 per cent of the GNP into this 
type of research, which is one of the lowest in the western world. So if you would take this as a suggestion 
that we don't want to be losing this expertise and if you don't accept that we in Saskatchewan are in the 
optimum position here, I think maybe it would improve our situation if you did react upon the suggestions 
and increase the funding for research in the coming year. 
 
While we're on this topic, we could discuss student loans in general, Mr. Minister. I have here a clipping 
which indicates that students find loans do not cover expenses. It says: 
 

Although Canada student loans are supposed to enable all people to go to university, a large 
number of students at the University of Saskatchewan who had to take out loans find them 
inadequate according to a Star-Phoenix survey. 

 
Mr. Minister, one of the things that has been brought to my attention as an inequity in this student loan 
program . . . I realize it is a Canadian student loan program, so before you tell me it's in the federal sphere, 
we'll get this pinned down. 
 
Being the Minister of Continuing Education, I think it would be incumbent upon you to raise this concern 
with the federal authorities. The concern is that the parents' assets have to be taken into consideration. I think 
there's a $100,000 deductible or something of that nature. This would certainly affect the children of grain 
farmers in the area. You know you don't have to have too big a farm to have assets in excess of $100,000. 
You are well aware of that. 
 
These people, and many of them are people who have been paying a good percentage of taxes throughout 
this province, are finding it very difficult to get student loans 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3547 

 

because of the very fact that the father is somewhat successful. Now I'm not saying that the parent doesn't 
have some responsibility in helping to finance their student in higher education. 
 
I think parents, as a whole, accept this responsibility. But on the other hand, I don't think we should have a 
system where if a student would declare to move away from his home and set up independent housekeeping 
or something, he should become eligible for a lot of government help in the way of a loan, where the other 
kid, who maybe goes home in the summer and works on the farm or something of this nature, is penalized 
because his father has assets. Have you made any representation to the federal government about this 
concern? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, indeed, I have been making a number of representations to the 
federal authorities and to the other provinces with respect to what I think are a number of changes required in 
the student assistance program that we offer as a joint bursary-loans program between the provinces and the 
federal government. 
 
I might point out to the hon. member that there has been a certain amount of resistance to reviewing this, not 
just from the federal government, but also from some of the other provincial governments. Many of the 
provincial governments apparently do not agree with the hon. member's assessment of the need to expand the 
eligibility for student assistance under the bursary and loans program. However, we're working that through. 
 
At a recent meeting of the Council of Ministers of Canada with the federal minister, I was successful in 
convincing the group that we should undertake a major review of the whole student assistance program. As a 
result of that, as the hon. member is probably aware, there is now a task force functioning across the country 
to examine the whole question of student assistance and the various criteria and so on which should be 
changed. We have recognized that the assets requirement, the $100,000 maximum on assets that one could 
have before those assets started to be counted in determining the assistance was a particularly pressing 
problem in this province. As a result, we proceeded to make some changes in that particular part of the 
program for this year which will, I think, alleviate the problem. We are going to increase the basic exemption 
on net assets from what was previously a figure of $100,000 to $150,000 for the basic loan on bursary 
calculation and will also be increasing that exemption further to a $250,000 level in the case of loans 
themselves. So that is a very, very major change in that asset requirement in the calculation of the eligibility 
which, I think, will very substantially loosen up, if you like, or free up the eligibility of people who do not 
have sufficient income to cover the cost of education, but who have these assets which, as you say, are not 
particularly liquid so therefore, not easily transferable into resources to support the student. So, yes, we have 
recognized that particular problem and have gained agreement on this change. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, just to follow a little bit on the same topic. You talk about $250,000 solving 
it. You know, it sounds like a lot of money to many people. But if you take a farmer in Saskatchewan today 
with one section of farm land (and that is a small farm) and you start to price the cost of that land with the 
necessary capital investment of equipment which that man would have to have to operate, he will far exceed 
your $250,000. Yet his net income to try and support a student on may be indeed very small. So I think you 
are perhaps moving in the right direction, but I think you will have to move a lot farther when it comes to 
agricultural land if you are going to look at a capital figure as your base. You know, agriculture is a capital 
intensive program. I believe if you take a 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3548 

section of land in the constituency which I represent, you will find it is probably worth much in excess of 
$300,000 just for one section. That is not including any equipment. So I would ask you to take a serious look 
at that figure and to adjust it for the agricultural industry so it is meaningful to those people. It is really not 
meaningful at the present time. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the very fact that we are proceeding with this change on the 
asset calculation is an indication that I have some sympathy with the point the hon. member is making. I 
think again (not to belabour the point), certainly we must recognize these instances where inflation in land 
values in particular, but the inflation in the value of equipment and so on has met that, as you say. You may 
not have a particularly high earning farm operation, therefore not a particularly high income and still have a 
fairly substantial value of assets. We are making this change which will come into effect for the coming year. 
We will assess that and see what happens. It may be (as the hon. member, I think, is advocating) that we 
even need to increase these exemptions further than they are now. But that is something which we will be 
working on and working through. This is a very substantial increase, I might add, in the exemptions and will 
no doubt help to alleviate that particular problem. I certain take the hon. member's comments because I feel I 
have some understanding and sympathy for young people from the farms as well. I think it is incumbent 
upon us in this province in particular, where we have such a substantial part of our population living on 
farms to be very cognizant of that problem. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think I would encourage you now while you are in the process of 
making a change, that you change it for the agricultural industry far beyond the $250,000 because I don't 
think you are going far enough to be meaningful. The cost of agricultural land in the last two years has 
escalated far more than the change you are making. So, it is going to cut off the same people. 
 
I raised a case with your department this year from Rosetown (and I'm sure your deputy is aware of it) where 
the family farms one section of land. With the necessary equipment their assets are classed as being worth 
something over $400,000. The net income of that particular family was under $4,000, it was almost 
impossible for them to support a son or a daughter going to university. Yet, on paper it looks like they are a 
wealthy family. The reply I received from your department was, if they have $400,000 they can borrow the 
money. Well, perhaps they can, but they may have borrowed to almost their limit with the land borrowing. 
So it's a very real concern. I would hope that you would take a look at the agricultural sector and consider at 
least the inflation trends that have taken place. 
 
I don't know whether you realize it but for those people to go out to buy a tractor to operate that farm, they 
probably have to spend $45,000 as a minimum. That's not a big machine; that's just one machine, one of the 
many. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I might say to the hon. member that I come from a farm myself, maintain very close 
contact with that farm and am quite aware of the expenses farmers are now incurring. And so, I think that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I'm afraid not, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I should point out a couple of things. First of all, I should clarify that these asset calculations are net assets. 
Therefore, if one had a $400,000 farm and had $300,000 worth of outstanding mortgages or debts against 
that land, their net assets would be 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3549 

 

$100,000. So these are net figures and we net out the debts. That's one thing I wanted to clarify. The second 
thing is that, while we must recognize (and I agree and that's one of the reasons why we're making these 
changes) there are special problems with the farm community. I don't think we really can make a special 
provision for farm people separate from non-farm people. I think that would be a difficulty. 
 
I think we must recognize the assets of all people on an equal basis and make our calculations on that basis. 
And so an implement dealer with $300,000 worth of assets should be treated on the same basis as a farmer 
with $300,000 assets. Now, that is not to say we cannot have adjustments, so if that farmer earns less income 
off those assets than does an implement dealer on average, that wouldn't increase the eligibility of the farm 
youth for assistance. And that is essentially what we are trying to do with these changes. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Yes, I agree you should try to treat everybody as equally as possible and that's why I am 
concerned about the capital asset route that you are using. I think if you were to go back to the income tax 
form and the net income, it's perhaps fair to all then. It's fair to the person who earns a wage; it's fair to the 
businessman; and it's also fair to the farm person. If you look at the net income, I believe you're looking at a 
very real figure for each and everyone. You can establish a figure, whether its $10,000 or $20,000 or 
whatever you think, but at least we'd treat all people equally. 
 
So, I would hope you could proceed in that direction rather than this capital asset area, because often that 
does not translate into earned dollars. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I might say to the hon. member that what we must try to achieve in any program 
based on income is an accurate reflection of income. That is what we've tried to do. However, before we had 
this particular requirement in terms of the contribution based on the asset value of the farm family. We were 
provided with (if you like) two options by the federal government. The other was to include depreciation as 
an expense, and we ran into all kinds of difficulties from farm people who objected to the difficulties in 
writing depreciation in as an expense. So we switched over to this option, which is an option provided under 
the program. It may be that after a year or two of experience with this we will have to have a harder look at it 
and further review it. 
 
I should say also that the agreement with the federal government does restrict (I think rightfully) the 
methodology for calculating income. We cannot use the straight income tax calculation of net income for the 
obvious reason that there are parts of the tax system which provide special allowances, special credits, and 
other things of that sort, which tend to decrease the taxable income but are not in the true sense a full 
reflection of the income. And so, for that reason, there has been a requirement that income be calculated on a 
relatively standard basis, that is separated to a degree from some of the other objectives of the tax system in 
terms of special incentives which are provided within that. And so, therefore, it's not possible because of the 
nature of the program, because of the nature of the agreement, to have strictly the use of the income tax form 
as the basis of calculating income. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, trade schools, Kelsey, Moose Jaw and so forth, are 
playing a more important role in the community in training young people to earn their livelihood. It seems to 
me I keep hearing that you are cutting programs in Kelsey and so forth. Mr. Minister, what would be the 
reason for cutting programs at Kelsey and Moose Jaw? 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3550 

MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I should say first of all that I suppose to a certain degree in 
keeping with the urgings of the hon. members opposite (although we do this aside from the urgings of the 
hon. members opposite), we attempt, on a regular basis, to evaluate our programs against the need for those 
programs, in terms of the need for graduates from those programs as well as the interest by students or the 
demand on the part of students to participate in those programs. Now, we periodically do eliminate programs 
or reduce programs because perhaps we have identified less demand for graduates from those programs and, 
therefore, a need for fewer spaces in those programs. Periodically, we identify a change in the demand on the 
part of students attending those programs and make changes. 
 
There are other cases where we actually plan to have a program in operation for a certain period of time, and 
we had a (I think the member for Kindersley's favourite term) sunset clause where we had planned that a 
program would fill a certain need for a period of time and then we would switch our priorities somewhere 
else. So what we go through is a process each year, with also a longer-term planning horizon, of trying to 
evaluate the appropriate priorities and within that, the appropriate use of our resources. 
 
I might point out to the hon. member that we have had a very, very substantial growth in our vocational 
training institutes over the past few years; we foresee substantial growth into the future. I think the big 
challenge for us is going to be meeting the demand with the financial resources we have. We certainly do not 
have any intention or any plan for general or substantial reductions in programming within the technical 
institutes. Indeed within the general field of vocational technical training. I think it would be fair to say that 
our general plans are for a very substantial and continuing growth. Exactly how that's going to be covered, 
and the amount of financial resources we have, will depend upon the general financial position of the 
province and the priorities we can determine within that. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, a program that people are demanding (or should I put it this way), a 
program where there is a waiting list, and jobs waiting for people who graduate, I think would be a program 
which would be of major concern for enlarging that area obviously. A program where there are fewer people 
wanting in is obviously a program you would sunset or close down. I think the way to judge that would be 
the number of people applying, the number who are graduating, how quickly they find jobs, and if they are 
taking jobs in the field they are trained for. 
 
There was an article in the Star-Phoenix several weeks ago which made a reference to people taking trades at 
school where manpower was assisting them, and then suggesting they never worked in that occupation even 
though there was work. That kind of comment sort of hurts because that's not what the system is built for. 
My concern is, do you have any idea, or statistics which would indicate) the number of people for an 
example, taking a particular trade) how many find jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, how many go 
elsewhere, and how many leave that field they tried for? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Yes, indeed we do, Mr. Chairman. I think we have a very, very sophisticated 
program of assessing applications, assessing job opportunities and assessing placements within those 
particular occupational fields. 
 
I would say, Mr. Chairman, that the Saskatchewan Department of Continuing Education leads the field in 
this kind of work in Canada. I might point out to the hon. member that I do have a summary table here (if I 
understand the hon. member's 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3551 

 

question) which indicates, for instance, the results of surveys for 1978-79 year which shows by program, the 
number of students we have surveyed, the number of responses we received back, because you're doing 
follow-up surveys and you don't get — it gives an indication of the number of students employed at the time 
of the survey, (which was three months after the end of the program) the number of students employed in 
training-related employment at the time of the survey, and the number employed in training-related 
employment in Saskatchewan. This deals with the questions. I would be quite happy to give the hon. 
member a copy of this document at this time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, further to that, do you have anything that checks the number of people 
who want into this program, so you know if you're leaving enough space or if you have to increase that 
program? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, if I understand the question, it was the number of applications for 
programs, and the number of enrolments so you could then compare to employment follow-up? Is that 
correct? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — That's basically it, Mr. Minister. For an example, let's assume a young lad wants to 
become a mechanic. He can go to Kelsey or Moose Jaw to apply, and there is not sufficient space for him so 
he goes to Winnipeg to Red River College or to Mount Royal College in Calgary. So I'm asking, do we have 
enough space in our provincial places so we can educate the people who want to enrol, rather than sending 
them out of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the number of programs is very large so it would be quite 
complicated for me verbally to answer the member's questions. If I could just send over to the hon. member, 
another document which contains descriptions of program — this one for Kelsey but I have them for all three 
institutes. I will send all three to you. The number of applications by program and the enrolment by program 
for the 1979-80 year. 
 
Now I caution the hon. member that some of the applicants (some substantial number, I don't know the exact 
number) are turned down because they don't meet the entrance requirements. That's a normal part of 
qualifying people to enter. In addition there are some who are turned down simply because it is true we 
cannot accommodate all of the applicants. I don't have the breakdown of that but I do have here for you the 
breakdown between applications and enrolments. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the other obvious part of the question is (maybe you have statistics for 
this one too), how many people pay their own way through and how many are assisted by Canada 
Manpower? I understand Canada Manpower people get first chance at getting into the schools. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not able to put my finger on the exact statistics in this regard, but 
may I just try to answer the hon. member's question by indicating first of all, that we have a certain number 
of spaces, particularly in the one-year industrial programs, which are purchased by Canada Manpower. They 
make an arrangement to purchase those spaces and then we have an agreement with them through which 
people who go through a certain selection process can be enrolled in those purchased spaces. I believe in 
some of the one year or shorter industrial programs, Canada Manpower in some programs may purchase up 
to 40 per cent of the spaces. 
 
That is an extension of the general program that developed some 10 years ago or more, 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3552 

I guess. It was a federal provincial program through which the institutes were partially constructed and were 
to meet certain industrial training needs. In return for that Canada Manpower agreed to purchase certain 
spaces as well as financing part of the capital cost and we agreed to make provision for those spaces. 
 
The remainder of the spaces are then an open competition for fee-paying students, all of whom pay only the 
tuition fee (which is not a very substantial part of the total cost of operating the program, I might add). But 
they do pay the tuition fee. They are then eligible for the student loans and bursaries program for additional 
financial assistance to enter the programs. 
 
I might point out also that for all of the two-year certificate programs there are no Canada Manpower 
purchased spaces in those and they are all fee-paying spaces in which students compete for places. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, let's deal with auto mechanics. Let's pick a trade. I think it takes several 
years. They go out and work part of it in the industry; they take school for so long and then work in the 
industry. Using that one as an example, could you pull the figures on it? Is it called MVMR? We're trying to 
pick it off the list here. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think, if we're reading you correctly, that's correct (if you are dealing with the 
apprenticeship programs, which I believe you may be dealing with. O.K., in that particular program, the 
apprenticeship programs are not full year programs. The time spent is 6 to 8 weeks on the average per year in 
the institute-based part of the training program. All of those spaces are covered by Canada Manpower for the 
apprenticeship program. Now I point out to you there are many other programs besides the apprenticeship 
program, even within the industrial component of our program. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — What I can't understand is when somebody is refused entry to that particular program 
in Saskatchewan. I know of two cases in particular which I'm going to refer to. One of them went to 
Manitoba and one went to Calgary; they started in the programs in those provinces. Therefore they got into 
the Saskatchewan program but you had no room for them in the Saskatchewan program to start with. Now 
how do you work that? They paid for their way into Red Deer College in Winnipeg. Then they dropped out 
of there after, I believe, a year, and came back and got into our program. Yet you refused them originally 
because they had not been out of school long enough. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think we're mixing apples and oranges. Maybe I should make an attempt to clarify. 
We have, Mr. Chairman, within this motor vehicle repair program, which you're speaking of, the 
apprenticeship program, first of all. That's the eight week per year training within the institute. The students 
are not selected by Manpower or by us for participation in that program. They are selected as apprentices 
through the program that's operated under the apprenticeship program. Then they are taken into our program 
and will receive their institute-based training at our institutes. 
 
Now, in addition to that, in the motor vehicle repair area, as well as in a number of other areas, we have what 
are called one year pre-employment training programs. In those particular programs, students must make 
application as fee-paying students or they can be sponsored by Manpower. If they are sponsored by 
Manpower, they must be out of 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3553 

 

school for a year. So the particular type of student you are referring to, if I get your question correctly, would 
be in the pre-employment program, would be participating in a Manpower-purchased space. Therefore, the 
requirements would be to be out of school for a year. 
 
We do not for the fee-paying, the ordinary fee-paying, student make that requirement. So it could not apply 
to the ordinary fee-paying student. I think that's, in summary, what the situation would be with that particular 
student. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The individual was informed, when he went to the pre-employment (I guess is what 
we're talking about now) that first of all the only spaces that were available were through Manpower and he 
couldn't pay his own way in Kelsey. But the moment he had had a year elsewhere, they let him back in the 
program. He bought his way in in Winnipeg and paid his way for a year there, then he came back and got 
into our program here. But he was refused here in the first place. That's the concern I have. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think we'd have to get the details of the particular student. But the picture I can put 
together from the student you are referring to is that the student made application for the pre-employment 
program as a fee-paying student. He was not accepted because there were not sufficient spaces. That student 
then perhaps went to Manitoba where he found an institute that had a space, took a one year pre-employment 
program, then perhaps returned to Saskatchewan, was accepted into the apprenticeship program, at which 
time the student would be able to take the remainder of the training as an apprentice at our institute as an 
apprentice student. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, he couldn't even get into the apprentice program in Saskatchewan, and 
he had a sponsoring firm that was willing to take him in. The school kept saying we don't have room. There 
are conflicting stories here. That's what I'm trying to understand, why that would happen. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I think that as far as the student not being accepted, even though the student had a 
sponsoring employer into the apprenticeship program, it would have nothing to do with the question of our 
saying there is space or there is not space. That would be a decision which would be made with the 
appropriate board structure within the Department of Labour, and a question that would have to be directed 
to the Minister of Labour because our responsibility we very clearly define as being in the training area. We 
do not step into the determination of requirements or acceptability or anything else for a person into an 
apprenticeship arrangement. Therefore, they must meet the requirements for apprenticeship through the 
apprenticeship structure. Having met those requirements, then we don't deny them any training. They have 
the automatic right to the training and will receive that training. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you a series of very quick 
questions. I hope I won't get into a long discussion, so if you could give me some quick replies. 
 
First of all, how many apprentices can you put through STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute) in the motor 
vehicle repair program? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Two hundred and seven went through in the last fiscal year for which we have 
figures, 1978-79. Excuse me, at Kelsey, you asked, was it? STI? That's correct — 207 at STI and 205 at 
Kelsey. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, why in 1979-80 did you only have 97 and 48 respectively? 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3554 

MR. McARTHUR: — Well again, we're mixing applies and oranges. That would be the one-year 
pre-employment program, for which you have the figures. The parallel figures would be the apprenticeship 
programs. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — They're not listed here then? All right. The figures you gave, are they the maximum? 
The maximum you can put through? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I gave the actual enrolment, and I believe in that program the actual enrolment is 
very close to capacity, so approximately, yes. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Has the program changed at all in the last few years, the apprenticeship program? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — In particular, the motor vehicle . . . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I'm referring to the MVMR apprenticeship program. Has it changed much in the last 
few years as to the kind of program being taught? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — You mean has it changed in terms of numbers, or the nature of the program? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The nature of the program. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — The trade advisory boards, which advise on these programs, review them constantly 
and regularly. We make changes in those programs each year as is deemed appropriate; we make incremental 
or other changes as recommended to us and that we find are deemed advisable. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What I remember of the apprenticeship program is the general apprenticeship. In 
other words, they had to learn everything about an automobile as a mechanic. Has no representation been 
made to you to move into the specialized area, by the motor dealers' association or other groups? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the trade advisory boards deal with this matter as set up under the 
apprenticeship boards. As far as we are aware, there are regular discussions about further specialization 
within these programs. It seems, when you look at the area of vocational training, the trend is toward 
specialization and that raises some concerns for us as well. In many of these areas, there are pressures for 
getting a further degree of specialization. My understanding is that, with respect to this program, the trade 
advisory board has not recommended we break down this program into further levels of specialization at this 
time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You might check it, Mr. Minister. I've been out of the business for some time, but 
there was a time when the dealers would have approved of a specialty training program for mechanics. As 
you know, the automobile is becoming highly technical and the automotive trade is becoming highly 
specialized — automatic transmissions, engines, whatever — and they were looking for that kind of 
specialization at one time. Now this may have changed for the motor dealers' association, but I think you 
might be wise or it might be to your advantage to check on it. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will check further into the actual recommendations which 
have been made, and indeed I will undertake to make available to the hon. member whatever information I 
have. I won't be able to do that 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3555 

 

immediately but I will . . . 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — While we are talking about the technical institutes, I note a statement by your deputy 
minister, Dr. Guy, who said that by '85 we are going to need 4,700 more skilled tradesmen than are presently 
in training. My question is, is this going to require an expansion in the technical institutes in the province to 
meet the need Dr. Guy foresees? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — We are constantly involved in trying to predict what will be the expectation and need 
for trained people in the vocational field. One of the things we are clearly noting, and it is reflected in the 
statement of Dr. Guy you have quoted, is a very, very rapid growth and demand for skilled people in the 
vocational areas. I think that, while we haven't answered all of the questions about how to meet this very 
rapidly escalating demand, in some sense our target would be to try to head in that direction. We've got some 
questions that we still need to answer. 
 
I think it is clear that if we are going to meet that need, we are probably going to have to look to some 
refinement in the way we provide training and probably to some forms of decentralization that will allow 
more people to be trained at their place of residence or in association with their place of work. That is 
something we are engaged in assessing at the present time. I have distributed to interested parties — 
community colleges, technical institutes, employers, union organizations and so on — some discussion 
documents centering on that very question. So I think it would be fair to say that is the recognized need. 
 
The challenge for us is to try to organize some cost-efficient way to try to meet that need within reason. And 
I might say also, recognizing this trend toward specialization, I believe that we can't totally legitimize the 
suggestion that every type of occupation, defined in a very specialized way, justifies a special training 
program. I think we must recognize we are still educating as well as training. There may be some level of 
generality in training in education within the vocational training area as well that adequately prepares an 
employee for entry into the work force. There is some responsibility on the part of the employer to further 
refine that person's skills and abilities in terms of the very highly specialized needs of that employer. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, Mr. Minister, surely if Dr. Guy has been able to gather these figures of 4,700, he 
didn't pluck them out of here or there. I respect his research and I accept the figure of 4,700 as being a 
correct figure. Therefore you must have some idea if you know there are 4,700 of them; are there 4,700 
bricklayers? You know, you must have some idea, Mr. Minister, of what fields these skills will be needed in. 
If you know that, if you know there are 4,700, then you must know what fields. If you know what fields, then 
you must know what demands this is going to place upon your program and your offerings at this point in 
time. My question was, were do you see expansion? Do you see that you are going to have to expand in 
Kelsey? Are you going to have to introduce new programs? What are these 4,700 skilled tradesmen? Are 
there new things? 
 
We are into a whole new era in communications, Mr. Minister. As you well know, the pace of the 
communications technology and hardware is expanding at a galloping rate. Is this a field that you would be 
looking at? I would be interested in knowing what areas you think you may have to expand, and to make it 
precise, what institutes you may be looking at expanding in? We'll follow on with the line of questioning on 
this. 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3556 

MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, one of the things about public servants and research people is that 
they are engaged in an exact science and we poor souls in politics are engaged in an inexact science, so we 
deal in a little different level of specifics I suppose. But I want to say it is the responsibility of our public 
servants to try to define as precisely as they can what our needs might be. One can never be 100 per cent 
certain and you can't base everything on what is the best attempt possible. You must retain some flexibility 
as you move along. 
 
But what our department, under the direction of Dr. Guy, has attempted to do, is get the best picture possible 
of what some of the needs are going to be as expressed by employers at this time. It is based on their 
predictions over the next five years within the currently defined occupational areas with some expansion into 
areas we are recognizing as new legitimate occupational areas. What we are doing is trying to work up a 
program of expansion of these programs which will meet these needs as closely as possible, within the limits 
of predictability that are possible at this time. 
 
We have started on the process now and not just in terms of expanding the existing institutes. I point out to 
the hon. member that we have announced a $5 million expansion plan for the technical institute at Moose 
Jaw. The hon. member for Moose Jaw North is expressing considerable pleasure, but not total pleasure of 
that program; he feels perhaps we should even do more at Moose Jaw; that's fair enough. But we have 
announced a major expansion program at Moose Jaw. 
 
We've announced in this year's budget a less substantial program at Wascana in terms of facilities. I might 
point out to the hon. member that in terms of Kelsey, we have the capacity to expand in terms of physical 
plant, the capacity to expand somewhat, so we're not facing that constraint there. What we will be doing as 
part of this expansion plan is looking at the expansion of training programs we can provide in those institutes 
to meet the needs. 
 
In addition we are looking at utilizing existing facilities (some of the comprehensive high schools that we've 
built around the province have very sophisticated vocational training facilities). We are looking at ways of 
tying together the community colleges with those facilities and with those school boards to provide a greater 
degree of training in those centres. We have not been able to work out all of that in total at the present time. 
We're still in the important early stages of planning and developing the program. 
 
I would point out (the hon. member for Rosthern would be interested in this since he was concerned about 
the programs within the institutes) that this year we have created six new programs within our institutes and 
have a major expansion in Saskatoon of another, the office education program. We have a new day care 
worker program for instance; we have a new telecommunications technician program which was perhaps the 
program being referred to. We have a number of other new programs coming in. 
 
We will continue to add programs over the next five years to pick up some of the occupational areas that we 
are not currently meeting. So it's partially new programs, but to a considerable extent, it's expanding the 
capacities of the existing programs. It's partially using existing institutes. It's partially spreading out around 
the province and finding new cost-efficient ways of providing the instruction at decentralized locations. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I'm very pleased to hear about the use of the comprehensive high schools 
because I think that was a suggestion I brought up last 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3557 

 

year with the minister at that time if you check Hansard. Probably some of your officials were listening and 
took my good advice. 
 
I notice in your budget (and I think this is the right way to be looking) there was a lot of money allocated for 
native education. And I think that in the technical schools some of the courses are the types of courses native 
students could profit from. 
 
I am not criticizing your expanding in Moose Jaw and I'm sure the member for Moose Jaw North is very 
happy and rightly should be. But a large proportion of the native population, the urban natives, live right here 
in the city of Regina. And I was just wondering if you've thought of some methods of developing technical 
courses that would help these people fit into the mainstream of our economic life. 
 
While I'm on the topic, I'm going to offer a suggestion to you, Mr. Minister, and perhaps this could be 
something which you could consider. That is, I believe the community college is certainly a way to bring this 
about. I agree with that concept. One could bring, say, a number of short courses in through the community 
college and a person could take some time off work. I am thinking of native people. 
 
The other thing is facilities are very expensive for us to expand, as you well know. I am thinking of Regina 
here and looking at what is happening in the core area where some schools, I understand, are down to very 
few students (80, 85 students or something of this nature) and may be in danger of closing. I wonder if your 
department has looked at the utilization of these facilities as a method for community college or technical 
instruction for the urban native population here in the city of Regina. Have you given any thought to this sort 
of thing? To me it seems a feasible type of suggestion. I have talked to some native people about this. They 
seem to think it has potential. How are you looking at upgrading the skills of the urban native who, I would 
say, is beyond the high school age or not attending high school? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, this is very much a group which we are involved in developing 
programs for at the present time. I think, (as the hon. member will recall) both the Minister of Finance in his 
budget speech, and I in my contribution to the budget debate, outlined an undertaking to advance our training 
programs directed specifically to the needs of native people. I should point out to the hon. member, first of 
all, before I talk about the new initiatives in this area that, at the current time, we do have quite a substantial 
number of programs offered for native people which operate just very much on the principle which the hon. 
member has indicated. 
 
The NRIM (Non-Registered Indian and Metis) program is a program which operates through the community 
colleges. The community colleges organize training programs (many of which are vocationally related) for 
native people. Those programs tend to be offered in the community. A substantial number of them are 
offered within schools, in terms of using facilities within the schools, within our urban centres. And so we 
are making use of the existing facilities to some degree. 
 
I can report to the hon. member the enrolment in 1978-79 in the NRIM program, which I mentioned, was 
very close to 3,000 students, of which approximately 2,000 were in skill and trades training. Another 182 
were in our universities or the private trade schools and 640 were taking an adult basic education program. 
 
We are now looking at further extending our capacity to meet the needs of native people for 
vocationally-oriented training by going into a new program that is going to 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3558 

very much integrate, if you like, the capacity to utilize our training facilities and our community colleges to 
organize training and the capacity to bring together the employer with the rest of that process, as well as the 
native organizations in terms of identifying students into a full stream of educational and training 
opportunities. That will realize as the end point, the placement of the person into a job situation where a 
considerable amount of the training takes place right on the job. So we will be looking at building up a 
process of identification of potential clients, a process of working with those people to identify what they see 
as their interests, their needs and the types of things they would like to pursue, then putting together an 
integrated program of training, counselling, and of on-the-job work environment activity which will result in 
those persons being in a position to take advantage of a job in the kind of occupation they are looking at, and 
indeed to be placed by an employer into a job. 
 
As part of that we are looking at some new techniques in organizing programs. We're looking at 
modularizing our programs, breaking them up into component parts (what we call competency-based 
systems) which make it possible for the student to combine education or training and work in stages. This 
makes it possible for the student to leave the work force, take some training and return to the work force and 
so on, and also integrates the on-the-job experience with the training package itself — the more formalized 
training. You have a stream of training and work which leads to the student developing the competencies and 
skills required for that occupation. 
 
We're really working on developing a program of this sort. We are now engaged in consultations with native 
organizations, employers, labour unions, and other to make this a co-operative arrangement such that we get 
full participation by all parties. I'm not able to give you the final details of the program as it will likely be 
worked out but that's the basic nature of the program. 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3559 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — I raised in question period one day the limit on the enrolment of students in tourism and 
renewable resources technology at Kelsey Institute. I believe the quota has been cut down to about 27 
students. The reason, I understand, is that jobs (although the government opposite says they are here) for 
students of TRR are not as plentiful in Saskatchewan as they have previously been. 
 
The unfortunate part, as I find out from students in this regard, Mr. Minister, is that staff cuts are going to 
take place. When I first investigated this (it would have been about March, I believe), I was informed by 
some of the members that staff members were going to be cut. I hear, since that time though that because of 
seniority of some of the staff members, the cuts have changed and the students tell me they're pretty alarmed 
about this. They feel that some of the most competent instructors are going to be let go because they're lower 
on the totem pole. These students are looking at transferring out of the province, looking at the feasibility of 
this even though they're part way through their course. 
 
Again, this hinges on something like the accounting topic we talked about a few minutes ago but I do think 
this is a serious thing. I realize sometimes there are quotas, and you have to cut the number of people who 
are in the program because there's no sense training them if they cannot get employment. That's letting them 
down. But it seems bad if we're losing our competent instructors and the program is maybe a bit in jeopardy 
because of this. Are you aware of the cuts which are taking place there, and have you been informed that the 
program may be suffering because of these staff cuts? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the particular program you refer to, I think, is a good example of a 
kind of challenge, as well as the way we accept that challenge, in terms of planning our programs within our 
technical institutes. 
 
This program was established some years ago in order to meet the demand for people working in this whole 
area of forestry management, renewable resources management. At the time we established this program, the 
other provinces in western Canada did not provide such a program; we were the first to provide such a 
program. There was also quite a substantial demand both inside and outside Saskatchewan for graduates. 
 
Since that time, the situation has changed considerably in terms of demand for graduates. We are finding that 
because of the fact that there are now new programs that have been mounted in other provinces, and also 
because we find that particularly the other western provinces and Ontario were employing fewer and fewer 
of these graduates, that the demand for graduates is not nearly as substantial as it was. So we have made a 
decision (in keeping with a rational process in setting priorities) to reduce the number of graduates coming 
out of this program. As a result of reducing the number of graduates, we have now cut the class from about 
60 to 48 students. We feel that will more than adequately meet any foreseeable demand for students. As a 
result of reducing the number of students, the number of permanent teaching positions has been reduced 
from nine to seven. Now that's just an adjustment process which I think is important for any institution to go 
through when you recognize that the demand for the graduates has declined in the way it has in this program. 
 
With respect to your comment about what the impact of the reduction in the two teaching positions has been 
on the quality of the teaching force, I am afraid that I 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3560 

couldn't really make any kind of intelligent comment on that. I suppose that you are always going to be 
second guessed on whether or not some instructor who is unfortunate enough to be in this position was better 
than some other instructor who is not. I think all I can say is that our people do their very best to recognize 
the competency of the instructors but we also recognize the very, very important matter of seniority for staff 
people when you are reducing positions; I think there are prior rights which we must recognize in terms of 
seniority for staff people when making these changes and that's just something which any responsible 
employer should recognize. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, my concern is that I had a number of students who were always vying to get into 
TRR. I don't know if there is something glamorous about that or whether all young boys want to be game 
wardens or park superintendents or what the benefits are to this thing. I can imagine some of them. It seems 
to me it would be a real shame if our Saskatchewan program in this did deteriorate because it is a popular 
program, and as I say I am disappointed to see there is the cutback at this time. I'll accept that perhaps it's 
necessary, but I think we want to keep a very viable program in there because I know in dealing with 
students it's a very popular one. I would like to see Saskatchewan continue to have a good program so that 
our graduates certainly get whatever jobs there are in this province in TRR, and in fact they may be able to 
pick up jobs in other provinces, because I think it satisfies the need of many boys and fulfils their dreams and 
aspirations of a glorious career or something which seems very appealing to them. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I might say to the hon. member that I think I speak for the members of the 
department when I say this is one particular program that, in recognizing the decreased demand for 
graduates, it hurt a bit to have to make that recognition. Because it's a program of which our department has 
been proud, and of which Kelsey Institute has been proud. I think it has been a very good program. However, 
I think we do have to periodically recognize the facts of life and the facts of life are that there simply are not 
nearly the opportunities there once were for graduates and, therefore, I think we mislead graduates if we 
don't recognize that fact by reducing somewhat the size of the graduating classes. That's an adjustment which 
I think hurts a little bit in a program we are so proud of and which does have a bit of glamour to it I agree, 
both for the students and also for our institute. It always hurts a little bit to make that kind of change. I am 
assured by Mr. Gunn, the principal of Kelsey Institute who has joined us here, that he feels very proud of this 
staff and also feels that we will have a high quality staff for the program with seven remaining instructors 
(who are very good instructors) for those 48 students in the coming year. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I certainly hope that this is true, and if it isn't I would urge the principal and the staff to 
make whatever changes are necessary to ensure that we continue to have a very fine TRR program at Kelsey 
to serve this province. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I'd like to raise a question. I have had a number of letters from students telling me they are 
very concerned about your approach to the solution caused by the SGEA strike as it relates to the institute 
people. I would raise it in particular with relation to a number of the nurses who should have graduated at the 
end of June, but because of the strike have been delayed. They are going to now look at being in school 
through the month of July. It's been a fairly high cost to many of these people, not only in the tuition they 
have to pay, but the cost of maintaining a residence wherever they happen to be taking their course and the 
loss of job opportunity for the month of July. Now, in your news release you provided a little bit of relief. I 
think it came out to something like $42. That's a very minimal assistance to these students. I would like to 
hear your 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3561 

 

comments on that. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — First of all, may I say to the hon. member it is always unfortunate when you have a 
strike. It is most unfortunate, I suppose, for innocent third parties affected by the strike, but I think that is 
nevertheless one of the consequences of a free collective bargaining system which we must recognize and 
accept. It is just a regrettable but unavoidable consequence of a strike when a strike does result. So I certainly 
feel as badly as anyone else that we have inconvenienced and caused some hardships for certain students as a 
result of this. 
 
Certainly we have in certain cases been forced to extend the program for those students in order to ensure 
they get a full quality program in accordance with the training requirements set out. The hon. member 
mentions the nurses as being the group particularly hardest hit, and that is correct. The nursing programs did 
have to be extended. I want to point out a couple of things to the hon. member. 
 
First of all, we have been able to organize the extension of the program such that, it is my understanding, all 
nursing students will be able to sit for their exams in early August. One of our big worries was whether or 
not we would have to extend the programs to a point where they would miss those national exams (which we 
don't set) and as a consequence of that miss a whole year or part of a whole year of employment opportunity. 
We have been able to organize our programs such that that is not happening. So to the extent there is any 
loss of work, there could be some short-term loss of part-time summer employment; that would intervene 
between graduation date and exam date, although as to the full extent of that, I don't know. You would have 
to know the exact circumstances of the individual student to be able to answer that question and the degree 
of hardship created. 
 
But recognizing there was some hardship created, and recognizing these were students in provincial 
government institutions, we have, as I announced earlier, introduced a program to alleviate and to assist 
students in their financial needs as a result of this circumstance. 
 
So we have provided first of all a basic $43 bursary that assists all the students. For those in the extended 
programs we have brought in an extension of the student loans and bursaries program. Those who are 
eligible for student loans and bursaries based on need were able to continue to get, on a prorated basis, that 
assistance for the extended period of their studies in order to cover the cost of living and so on. For those 
who weren't originally eligible in that way, we brought in a special provincially based, interest-free loan 
program that provides for loans that can cover those full costs for those who didn't qualify for the 
needs-based loans and bursaries. So these are steps we've taken. 
 
We've processed those applications now and I think that's pretty well complete. The information I get is that 
while many students were suffering some anxiety before we were able to announce this program, generally 
they have found that this program, in conjunction with the way we have organized the extended training in 
order to meet the examine deadline, is providing a satisfactory solution to a difficult situation. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you are right in saying that many of them have seen a little of 
that anxiety removed. But I believe your government has gone very lightly on the money side of it. Think 
what it cost these young people to maintain residence through the time of the strike. You look at what it's 
going to cost them to maintain a 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3562 

residence through the month of July now when they should have been out to work. It's a considerable cost 
and perhaps you can still remember student days a little bit. You're not that old. Many of these people are 
finding, indeed, that it is a real burden to them And the ones who were making it on their own without 
student loans are finding that basically they have had to go to banks to borrow. And they are losing at least a 
full month's wages for the month of July. 
 
You talk about part-time, but the people who I was mentioning could go on full-time employment 
immediately in July. A number of them had employment arranged for. In some cases, they will lose the 
opportunity for employment because it is necessary to fill those jobs and other people will be taking them. 
 
So I wonder, could you not consider a bursary situation to assist these people rather than a loan? It was not 
their fault that the strike occurred. It was the Government of Saskatchewan which was not able to negotiate 
successfully. I believe the Government of Saskatchewan has a responsibility to these students far beyond 
forty-some dollars each. I'd like to know whether you can proceed to change that figure. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I'd like to point out to the hon. member that the recognized cost for the assistance 
program, the $42.50, was a basic payment made to all students whether or not they had extended programs 
or whatever. It was a payment essentially calculated in lieu of the tuition they would have paid for the period 
of the strike. That was essentially it. 
 
But that wasn't the substantial part of the assistance. The substantial part of the assistance came through the 
bursaries and loans programs. I might point out to the hon. member that the rates we recognized for the 
bursaries and loans programs were the full level of the recognized rates that the federal government, at least 
the last time I met a Conservative minister, defended as being the appropriate rates to cover the cost of 
education across Canada and in some cases in much higher cost centres than Regina or Saskatoon. So we 
recognized those full costs. 
 
In the case of a single student it is approximately $325 a month to cover the costs of living. So we did make 
provision on that basis. We stuck with the principle of a combination of bursary and loans because that is the 
outstanding system as it currently exists. I was hoping; I am still hoping, to be able to convince the federal 
government that, indeed, the hon. member is right and we should be looking at a more general extension of 
the bursary program for students and that we would then be applying this principle to these kinds of 
programs as well. 
 
However, I was extremely disappointed when the hon. member opposite threw a monkey wrench into my 
hopes that we would get unanimous consent with that kind of view (by proposing an amendment to a 
resolution introduced by one of the hon. members of this House suggesting we should have a bursary 
program). The hon. members opposite proposed an amendment suggesting that instead of an extended 
bursary program, we should have a loans program. That indicated we can't expect full support from all 
members of this House to a federal bursary program. 
 
That's a little bit of an aside. I just pointed out to you that I agree the bursary principle is an important one 
and if we can get a basic change in the philosophy to student assistance, then we will be able to look at 
extending bursaries generally for these kinds of programs. 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3563 

 

MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, it would be the first time ever than an amendment from this side went 
through if you were opposed to it. You seem to have a few more members than we do so I think that's a very 
weak excuse you're using — a very, very weak excuse. 
 
And you're talking about federal funding. I was talking about strictly a provincial concern because the strike 
here was caused because the province of Saskatchewan could not negotiate with its own employees. It was 
not caused by the federal government. So when it comes time to pay the bill for these people, I don't think 
you necessarily should be running to the federal government for assistance. I think it is a Saskatchewan 
problem and you should deal with it locally as a Saskatchewan problem. You're putting a lot of money into 
other things. I think this is a very worthwhile cause for a lot of young people who have just begun on their 
life's journey to prepare themselves to be qualified and capable employees in our system. I believe you could 
spend your money very wisely assisting these young people. 
 
I would definitely encourage you to still make that move, to supply a bursary for each of them which would 
cover that month of July they are going to have to continue on to further their education because of the 
disruption that occurred last fall. I would like your response strictly on a Saskatchewan basis; you don't have 
to talk to anyone except to the government here in Saskatchewan. I'm sure you can come up with some 
dollars to solve the problem of many of our young people. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the point the hon. member is making. It was announced 
some time ago and the program has already been implemented. I think it would be very difficult now to 
change horses and go another route. One can always mount a criticism of any program I suppose, and the 
hon. member has mounted one from his point of view which is valid for this particular program. I think 
however, that we have put together this program; we indeed did do it from our own resources, we did not get 
any help from the federal government. Indeed the hon. member might remember the federal Conservative 
government even withdrew the Manpower living allowances those students needed to survive on during the 
strike. We didn't do that, instead we came in with financial support in this form to help them. It is the form 
that we have implemented and it is now really too late to make the kind of changes you are suggesting. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, it seems like we're getting a little political here. I think it is time we got 
back to a bit of basic education in our discussion. I would like to assure you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
What are you saying abut the truth, Henry? You know I tell the truth, Henry. 
 
I would like to assure the minister the issue I want to raise now is certainly not, in the words of the Attorney 
General, a witch hunt at the psychology department at the University of Regina, but I think there are a few 
things here the members of this Assembly should know (and I don't think they do know). I refer to a letter 
you and I received from Dean Blachford regarding the famous Chinese comic book that is used in research 
class 830. I quote from the letter. The dean says 'The main aim of the class was to discover basic issues and 
trends in the graduate psychology production.' He goes on to state, 'There are 150 theses and they had to read 
six of them.' 
 
I think you and I both know from days in graduate studies how interesting it is to read somebody's thesis. 
You look at a few of them to see the format of how you should be doing yours and then you go about it. He 
says: 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3564 

The book is instructive from a methodological point of view and this is how it is used for the brief 
session. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I'm going to take a minute or two to read this little book to the members of this Assembly 
because I do think they should know what the contents are. This is graduate research, class 830 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sorry I can't give it in the original. The minister asked for the original and the 
reason he asked for that is because this book is printed in the People's Republic of China. Therefore I'll have 
to take the English version of it. It has quite a little heading here, it is: How the Foal Crossed the Stream. 
Remember this is from a methodological point of view. Some of you people who are ex-school teachers, 
watch for the importance of that. The book is illustrated very well. I took it home and my little boy, who is 
three, was quite taken with it and liked the pictures. Page 1 says this, and I'll just, with the indulgence of the 
House, take a minute or two to read through this research book in class 830. 
 

There are a lot of big horses in a Chinese mountain village. They pull ploughs and carts for 
the people. This white mare has a foal and the foal follows his mother about all day long. 
One day, mare asked foal to take a bag of wheat to the mill for her. Foal comes to a swift 
stream. An old bull is eating grass by the stream. Foal asked him, do you think I can cross the 
stream, Uncle Bull? Bull replies, the water is shallow, just over my knucklebone. I know, 
because I crossed it yesterday. Foal is about to cross when a squirrel scampers up and calls to 
him, stop, the water is deep. A friend of mine was drowned in it yesterday. 

 
Is bull right or is squirrel right? Foal can't decide. He runs back to ask mare. Why are you 
back? She asked. There's a stream in the way, explains foal. Uncle Bull says it's shallow 
enough to cross but squirrel says it isn't. He says the water is deep. Is the stream deep or is it 
shallow? Can you cross it or not? What do you think yourself? Asked mare. Foal shakes his 
head for he hasn't thought about it all. 

 
Mare explains fondly, bull is tall and big, so of course the stream is shallow for him, but for 
little squirrel it's deep and can drown him. Each speaks for himself. What do you think? Foal 
understands now and prances away. 

 
When foal reaches the stream, bull and squirrel are arguing. One is saying the stream is 
shallow and the other is saying it's deep. (Seems a little familiar). Each is convinced that he is 
right. Foal gets the idea and measures himself, first against the tall bull and then against the 
small squirrel. Let me try, he says. Foal crosses the stream easily. For him it is neither 
shallow nor deep. He is shorter than the bull but taller than the squirrel. 

 
Foal delivers the wheat to the mill and goes home. Mare, his mother, says he's done the right 
thing. From then on, when foal does not know what to do he first asks others. Then he 
considers his own situation before having a try. This way he becomes more and more 
capable. 
 

And that in its entirety is the saga of how foal cross the stream, something my mother taught me before I got 
to grade school. I would suggest all of the rest of you over there . . . I don't think, Mr. Minister, I want my tax 
dollars to pay for this kind of heavy work at a graduate 830 class. I say grade two, fine. Put it in there and 
let's have some decision-making at the grade two level, where it is appropriate. But for 830? I wanted the 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3565 

 

members to know this. I know some of you haven't had the opportunity to see that. If you want to respond, 
Mr. Minister, fine. I'm just point it out as the type of situation . . . I don't believe it's a witch hunt. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know that sort of thing, and I don't think many of them 
would endorse that as the type of material they expect grad students, in whatever department, at the 830 
graduate level to be studying. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Well, I want to say I haven't developed nearly the insight into bull stories that the 
hon. members opposite obviously have. But I do want to say that the hon. member makes the point that he 
wishes the people of the province to know what's in this book or story book he's referring to. I say to the hon. 
member that I don't know the context within which that book forms part of the program within a particular 
class at the University of Regina. I have no idea, and I think it's incumbent upon us, if we wish to make any 
comment about the content of an academic program within the university, that we have a full grasp of what 
the academic context is within which that is presented. 
 
However, I am not in a position to defend or to analyse or to do anything else with respect to the academic 
class for which that book may have at some point entered as some sort of material. I don't have any position 
from which I can judge that. 
 
I want to say to the hon. member that I think there is, however, a larger point. I don't think the Attorney 
General or anyone else is making light of the importance of our universities, our university programs and our 
university finances, when he indicates, as I have indicated, that it is a fundamental principle of our 
academically-based university system that the university itself, as a self-governing institution, must take the 
responsibility. It has the capacity and information through which it can make judgments about the academic 
quality and nature of the programs offered within the university. 
 
I am not going to come forward as the Minister of Continuing Education with any kind of criticism or 
anything else based on information I do not have. I do not intend to come forward and give any kind of 
impression of wishing to interfere with the academic content of any program within the university. They do 
have the responsibility; they do have their carefully guarded realm to work with. I hope no member of this 
House will ever urge a minister, regardless of what the complaints are with regard to the content of an 
academic program, that the minister should attempt to take any action. 
 
As the hon. member knows, the University of Regina has indicated its capacity to examine what is 
happening within the psychology department by the announcement that it is setting up a special management 
arrangement for the psychology department in order to look not only into its rightful concerns with regard to 
the psychology department, but to better and more effectively manage that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I think you recall my opening statement about wanting to look at some 
way of making these officials better known so people can have input through the channels that are there. My 
intention in reading this was to inform the members over there. I don't think many of them knew of it; I think 
they have every right to know about this type of thing. They make their own judgments as to whether that's 
the kind of content they want. 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3566 

I've made my statements and I think we have a problem. I'm not urging you to go out there to conduct a 
witch hunt . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Would you just be quiet for a minute, my friend? I said we want 
value for the educational dollar. I think there's a legitimate case there; I think you realize and can see now 
why students were quite upset about this type of situation. 
 
I hope elected members on either side of the House take note of the content . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 
you don't think that's what you want, take the right channels and make these viewpoints known. I think that 
is a right people have. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, that's all I would have to say on this topic. 
 
Items 2 to 5 agreed. 
 

Item 6 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, we have been discussing community colleges and hoping there was some 
expansion in the urban native program. Here I see that the budget is down and the number of employees is 
down since last year. It dropped by two and there is $20,000 less in the budget. How are you expanding 
when you're contracting on both staff and dollars? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I should just point out something about the structure of the estimates 
that might help here. This particular item is for the administrative structure within the department that relates 
to the community colleges. It is not the subvote which contains the money through which the community 
colleges operate. 
 
One of our original plans was, as the community colleges mature, we would withdraw the degree of 
administrative overlay which we provide at the departmental level and provide more independence and 
decentralization to the community colleges. That reduction simply reflects the fact that we have started a 
little bit of the decanting of the field services component of the departmental structure. 
 
If you look to some of the other subvotes, including subvote 17 and including subvotes 22 and 23 you will 
find there where the funds which go for programming within the community colleges are located. 
 
Item 6 agreed 
 

Item 7 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I have a question. I see quite an expansion in personnel there. Is that within the 
department? You have six extra people. What are your plans for that expansion? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, that particular area indeed relates to this program I was mentioning 
earlier in terms of a new initiative to meet the training needs for native people. The growth of this particular 
subvote is primarily related to an addition of staff and other financial resources at the administrative level 
within the department to provide a support system for the development and operation of the new native 
training and job placement program, not for the training costs and that sort of thing themselves, 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3567 

 

but for the administrative and training program development which will take place within the department 
itself. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Fine. It would be interesting to note how many of those people would be natives. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, none of the people have yet been appointed and the positions have 
not yet been classified so I am not able to answer that question. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Is it your intention to include some native people in those positions? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Very much so — that would be my intent. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 

Item 8 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — No permanent positions, but you have almost $900,000 . . . Could you explain what that 
is? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — That's in one way, an interesting anomaly. At Prince Albert we have a vocational 
training institute (in a sense) which, particularly in the pre-employment area, provides training programs. 
However, the program is operated as a satellite of the community college there, and so the employees and all 
that sort of thing are actually carried by the community college. We simply make this payment through to the 
community college to operate that program. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 
Items 9 and 10 agreed. 
 

Item 11 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I know that some of the staff reduction here is in TRR. What other programs have staff 
cutbacks that would account for . . . 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, there were three programs affected by analysis that indicated a 
decreasing demand for graduates. One of our predictions or analyses turned out to be somewhat less than 
reliable and so there is a change from what was presented in the estimates. But originally three programs 
were slated for some reduction in teaching staff because of the reduction in enrolments; a social service 
worker program, the renewable resources program and a personal development worker program. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Chairman, we have reassessed the personal development worker program based on 
representations made to us by schools and developmental centres, and so on, who have indicated that even 
though the personal development worker program may not have been resulting in people being employed in 
the fields which were originally envisaged for that area that there is a very important need for graduates from 
this program. So we have now made a decision to reinstate that program and there will not be the full 
reduction indicated. 
 
Item 11 agreed. 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3568 

Item 12 agreed. 
 

Item 13 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — One moment there. You phased that out, the two people who were there. What should 
they do? Why is there still $30,000? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the science policy secretariat was an agency established three or four 
years ago within the provincial government to do research, planning and advisory work with respect to 
science policy within the government. Based upon a review undertaken over a year ago, it was decided the 
program had not essentially worked as effectively as we had hoped or anticipated. A decision was made to 
phase down the program, and that is the reason why you see the drop down to essentially no employees. 
 
However we also have a body that worked in association with this secretariat which was the Science Council 
of Saskatchewan, an advisory council of the lay people, university people, and so on. That council still 
remains in existence, and one of the functions of the secretariat was to provide some support work for the 
science council itself. The $30,000 will remain there in order to provide some staff support services to the 
science council which it can engage on its own through that budget. We are currently (I might say) reviewing 
that whole area. I now have a study underway of that whole area of science policy and the way we could 
most appropriately handle that science policy. I hope within the next 12 months to have a decision about the 
direction we should go in this area. 
 
Item 13 agreed. 
 
Items 14 to 20 agreed. 
 

Item 21 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — What's the reason for the increase in that, Mr. Minister? There is a considerable increase 
there. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the reason for the very substantial increase in grant (and it is very 
substantial) is that I think, very appropriately in this our Celebrate Saskatchewan year, we have recognized 
that perhaps we need to put an additional effort into the preservation of historical records and documents and 
particularly original documents that are available around the province. We also need to do a better job of 
preserving what we do now have. 
 
As a result of that, we decided to place some considerable priority on the archives program and to up the 
base budget of the archives quite considerably in order to assist in increasing our ability and capacity for the 
preservation of historical documents. I think we have an excellent archives in this province; it has an 
enviable reputation all across the country. I feel their work and the demand for things to be done clearly 
justifies this increase. That's the basic increase; we're going to greatly strengthen the program carried out by 
the archives. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I would agree with you that this is an important expenditure this year and any year, for 
that matter. You have a number of dollars here. Is that in personnel; are 



 
May 26, 1980 

 

 
3569 

 

you expanding the staff by a considerable amount? With this thrust do you envisage the need for an 
extension? Are we going to be able to hold all these documents or does it look down the road that we're 
going to have to build an archives building? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — First of all, I think there's going to be a staff expansion in the archives because the 
workload to do the job well is fairly staff intensive. We feel that in order to meet the demands and meet the 
needs, we should have an expansion of staff. We'll probably be expanding by four or five people the staff 
component alone. 
 
In addition to that, there are many new techniques of recording and preservation that are developing. Some 
of these are somewhat expensive, but have proved up to be very, very effective and efficient ways of 
preserving documents, and so we will be spending a fair amount of money on new processes and new 
equipment. 
 
I might say that none of this money is directed toward anything to do with the physical storage of archives 
materials, but I will tell the hon. member that we also have that particular question under review, because 
clearly with the growth in materials, there probably will, at some point, be a need for additional storage 
capacity within the archives. 
 
Item 21 agreed. 
 
Item 22 agreed. 
 

Item 23 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, is that where some of the money is for native education? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — That is right. Some substantial amount of the money would be required for the 
purposes both of purchasing training out of our institutes and community colleges and so on, and also for 
possible wage subsidies to employers who agree to participate under contract and training-on-the-job 
programs as part of this overall program; both of those kinds of payments would be covered under this 
particular subvote. 
 
Item 23 agreed. 
 

Item 24 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — After all this discussion on student aids and bursaries and so on, how can you justify 
cutting the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Student Aid Fund is an independent account or 
fund (independent I say of the estimates). What we do is supplement or put money into that fund periodically 
as needs develop. 
 
At the present time, or I should say at the end of the 1979 fiscal year, because of the accumulation of funds 
that were unused over a period of time and the build-up of interest in those funds and so on, we have $9 
million cash assets in the student aid fund. So what we are doing is supplementing that $9 million with 
another $5 million to bump the fund up, which will bring the total amount of financial resources in the fund 
to approximately $14 million. Out of that we will be able to fully accommodate any of the demand for 
student assistance even if we do get agreement to make changes to the 



 
May 26, 1980 
 

 

 
3570 

criteria to expand the amount of money that we process. We are actually looking toward, if we possibly can, 
a 10 per cent increase in the actual amount of money disbursed to students through scholarships; loans and 
bursaries. So one must understand this is a replenishment grant that isn't tied in any direct way at all to the 
amount of money paid to students in the form of loans, bursaries and other forms of assistance. 
 
Item 24 agreed. 
 
Vote 5 agreed. 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION — HERITAGE FUND — VOTE 5 
 
Item 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Vote 5 agreed. 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION — SUPPLEMENTARY — HERITAGE FUND — VOTE 5 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Supplementaries Vote 5 agreed. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:09 p.m. 


