






















































Hansard: May 29, 1980


 
3735 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 29, 1980 

 
AFTERNOON SESSION 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and other members of the 
House. It’s a great privilege for me to introduce to you, Mr. Chairman, and through you to the House, 45 
students in the Speaker’s gallery who are visitors from the Yorkton Junior High School in Yorkton, 
along with two of their teachers, Dennis Pomeroy and Miss Pattison. These students too are part of the 
large group who are touring the whole of Regina and visiting the legislature here. I know all of us here 
will be wishing them an interesting stay in the House and an interesting tour around Regina and a safe 
journey home. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. A.S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Chairman, this is a great day for the Yorkdale school 
division area. This gives them an opportunity to come into the city of Regina and the legislature to see 
what their representatives are doing and the kind of legislative work that is proceeding here. I would like 
to join with the member for Yorkton in welcoming the student group to the legislature and I do hope that 
they have a very pleasant and enjoyable visit to our capital city. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. N. LUSNEY (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join my colleagues in welcoming the 
students here this afternoon. I know they will enjoy their visit to the legislature. We will be looking 
forward to meeting with them in a short while to discuss some of the procedures here. We wish you an 
interesting visit to Regina; may this visit to the legislature be very informative. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Chairman, it is indeed a privilege for me today to 
welcome 18 students from the Lucky Lake School. They are accompanied by their teacher, Audrey 
Weir, and parents, Gladys Paveo and Mrs. Milne, and their bus driver, Stan Milne. I would like to 
mention to the students that the House this afternoon (as soon as we have finished introducing you) will 
move into what we call committee of the whole. It is really third reading of Bill No. 13, so you will have 
an -opportunity to watch some of the debate that will take place on this particular bill. I hope that you 
will enjoy the proceedings of the House. I will be meeting with you immediately after you leave the 
Chamber for pictures and drinks. I hope that you enjoy your visit here and have a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act (continued). 
 

Section 1 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3736 

MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have had an opportunity to consider 
some amendments that have been passed, and quite frankly we are shocked at the amendment proposed 
by the Leader of the Unionest Party. The Leader of the Unionest Party in his resolution feels that no 
regulation may be made to prevent competition in the manufacture, distribution, leasing, sale, 
maintenance or use of computers. It’s very pointed that he only restricts it to computers. Why by 
implication the Leader of the Unionest Party would allow a monopoly for such accessories as telephone 
answering, recording, mobile phones and accessories such as that is beyond comprehension. I think it 
was obviously poorly thought out and I don’t believe that the hon. member realizes the implications of 
the proposed amendment. It is quite clear in statutory interpretation that by excluding a narrow area of 
computers, you are by implication saying it’s acceptable in the other areas. I’m frankly shocked that 
such an amendment would be brought into this Assembly. It indicates, I suggest as well, a lack of 
comprehension about the bill. 
 
Sask Tel — and I use that advisedly because I think, having talked to officials in Sask Tel, that it’s the 
government that’s insisting on this legislation — wants to continue a trend that started some four or five 
years ago when it extended far beyond the traditional role of Sask Tel into property acquisition, 
redevelopment of the Cornwall Centre, expropriation of property, building of hotels in the Cornwall 
Centre, a role far beyond the traditional and accepted role of Sask Tel. It’s surprising. 
 
Sask Tel, of course, is embarking on dangerous ground as it goes far beyond that mandate. I don’t 
believe that anybody other than the government opposite endorses the action of Sask Tel in jamming the 
TV signals in Saskatoon. The only support for that operation is on the government benches. I don’t 
believe that anyone other than those on the government benches opposite support Sask Tel’s getting into 
compulsory and retroactive expropriation — retroactive in the sense that an amendment brought in last 
year allowed Sask Tel to be the vehicle for retroactively expropriating property. 
 
So the government’s sole defence to the bill is, oh, we wouldn’t do that. We can give you the assurance 
that we wouldn’t take the action that the opposition is saying we would take. We’ll give you our 
assurance. Your assurance, Mr. Minister, isn’t worth the paper it’s printed on. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — The public has no grounds and no track record by which to believe you when you say 
that you are going to put this to very limited usage. When you bring in a bill which allows the 
government to basically control all aspects of the computer industry and telecommunications, we don’t 
believe you when you say, oh, we wouldn’t do that because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Who cares, 
he says? I think the public of Saskatchewan cares; and that particular attitude is precisely why the 
opposition has to fight this bill and intends to fight this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — It’s because you say, who cares? I’ll tell you that we care, and I think the public of 
Saskatchewan cares although you may not. 
 
When a government brings in a bill which says (and I’ll come to the House amendment) that no person 
shall attach or connect to, or use in conjunction with, any part of a  



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3737 

telecommunication line of the corporation, any attachment without the express written permission of the 
corporation. That’s a damnable piece of legislation, and that’s a damnable section. And it deserves to be 
opposed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — How any government, with any sense of responsibility, could propose such a clause is 
beyond comprehension. It’s wrong and you know it’s wrong. An amendment, which says it won’t have 
to be written permission, it will have to be in the regulations, is no better because all you have to do in 
the regulations is say you must have written permission. You can do that in the regulations. You can 
change the regulations tomorrow from the ones you propose. There’s no review. It doesn’t have to come 
back before this Assembly. All you have to do in the regulations is say you must have written 
permission. You’ve successfully avoided the act; you’ve successfully avoided the legislature; and it’s 
perfectly legal. And you stand up and ask for that type of authority. He’s proud of the fact that’s the type 
of authority he wants. 
 
When a government brings in a bill which says — ‘no person shall advertise their offer for sale to the 
public any attachment whose primary advertised purpose is to attach to or connect to or be used by any 
person other than the corporation in conjunction with the telecommunication line of the corporation, 
unless that attachment is specifically permitted by the corporation to be attached, connected or used in 
conjunction with a telecommunication lines of the corporation’ — that, as well, is damnable legislation. 
Because that means it Woolco or your local Robinson store (the Attorney General is against Radio 
Shacks, not realizing they’re a franchise operation and are locally owned here in Saskatchewan by local 
businessmen) wants to advertise a telephone answering recording they would have to have the 
permission of Sask Tel. If Woolco wants to advertise a line of telephones, which they’ve been doing for 
years, they would have to have the permission of Sask Tel. And if your local TV or radio shop wants to 
advertise and use telephone recorders, or if someone wants to put in the yellow pages the fact that he 
sells mobile telephones . . . Let me tell you what they’ve been doing. You check your own telephone 
directory for heaven’s sakes. Companies are advertising that they will sell and install mobile telephones. 
Now they are going to have to have your approval to do that. 
 
You threaten everybody who has been in business in this province, who has carried on a business, with 
this type of legislation. And for some reason you’re proud of it. You threaten every existing business in 
Saskatchewan that has either sold mobile telephones or has advertised or sold telephone answering 
recorders. That’s what this bill does. 
 
Then we take a look at what you do with the computer operation. When I am told in this Assembly that 
Sask Tel wants to go into computer word processing . . . They have no business being in computer word 
processing. That’s a competitive retail operation Sask Tel is going into. That doesn’t enhance . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . He says Exxon. If Exxon is so bad, why did you sign a deal with them in 
uranium mining? Why did you get into bed with Exxon and Esso (if they are so bad) on uranium 
mining? Somehow you’re going to have to justify that; you can’t have it both ways. 
 
We have had multinational corporations and you are in fact saying that people with Xerox, IBM, or 
Olivetti, or AES, (being sold by Wascana Office Equipment and by local dealers) are no good. They’re 
not competent; they’re not qualified; the only one who can do it is your government. That’s what you’re 
saying. Local people who are selling 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3738 

word processors should now be faced with the competition of the Government of Saskatchewan. That’s 
precisely what this bill does: the member knows it. 
 
You know we’ve been through this debate many times in other bills, and even the Attorney General has 
backed off on a couple of occasions. The government brings in a right to break into anyone’s home; if 
anyone’s home has a telephone answering service that doesn’t have the approval of Sask Tel, the 
government has the right. You may not agree with it. 
 
Every other bill has required a search warrant properly issued, because it’s a dangerous power to have. 
The House amendment you propose still doesn’t require a validity issued search warrant. Why shouldn’t 
they require a search warrant? Why should you be exempted from the accepted law in this province that 
you must have a search warrant before you break into a man’s home? Why should you be? The only 
exceptions are the drug prosecutions and customs and excise and income tax — very, very serious 
provisions in the law, requiring extraordinary remedies. 
 
The corporation may seize any attachment mentioned in section 44.2 which is the one I referred to 
earlier. If you don’t agree with the telephone answering service someone has in their home, you can 
seize it. That means going into the house because you don’t expect them to stand outside waiting for 
you. You can break into anyone’s automobile to get their mobile answering service, their telephone; you 
have the power. All that happens is every time you come back you say, oh, but we wouldn’t do that. 
 
In fact you will do it. Remember what you had to do in the expropriation cases? When some people 
didn’t sign and sell their property, you brought in retroactive legislation to backdate the date of the 
expropriation. You undercut several local businessmen in the city of Regina, cut them off at the knees, 
when the Attorney General brought this bill in last year. Don’t tell me you won’t. 
 
Why don’t you bring in a bill which sets out the minimum you need, and be able to justify it. Don’t 
come in asking for the maximum, asking for all the powers, and then say you won’t use them all. Why 
don’t you do as a responsible government would and come in with the minimum? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — If you don’t use them, you don’t need them. 
 
MR. LANE: — Come in with the minimum. You say you won’t use them but you don’t hesitate to cut 
off telecable in Saskatoon and jam its signal. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You didn’t hesitate to threaten to cut my service off either. 
 
MR. LANE: — You won’t even take the normal judicial process to try to see whether you have a case. 
You just arbitrarily jam them. You don’t have the courage to go to court to defend your position. And 
you ask the opposition to give you all these powers to do whatever you want in the field of computers, 
television and actually, household accessories. The amendments are an attempt to soften what is a bad 
bill, but they are ineffectual and they don’t in any way, shape or form lessen the powers given. They 
don’t in any way, shape or form require an obligation of Sask Tel or the Government of Saskatchewan 
to come before this Assembly for approval. They don’t in any way require Sask Tel to justify its actions. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3739 

Mark my words that a year from now Sask Tel will be in the retail computer business. It will be in the 
retail office business on word processors, and as well, Sask Tel will have stopped the vast majority of 
communities from getting cable television and a number of channels because it won’t allow the satellite 
receiving disc. 
 
That is not the positive direction Sask Tel was originally to take. Sask Tel was originally established to 
supply service — not to stop service. Sask Tel was never set up to jam television reception; Sask Tel 
was never set up to stop people from getting cable television; Sask Tel was never set up to get into bad 
investments like CPN; Sask Tel was never set up to get into land assembly and expropriation. Sask Tel 
was set up to supply a necessary service to the people of Saskatchewan and for God’s sake, get back to 
that basic premise! 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Chairman, I want to make a comment just before 
the question takes place. I want to make an observation or two to the members of this House. First of all, 
I invite the members of the House to recollect the pattern and the flow of this particular debate. You will 
recall the speeches such as they were, yesterday — myself, the member for Regina South. I congratulate 
the member for Regina South on the wide extensive press coverage that he received on it. I thought it 
was a speech which was certainly worthy of that. Then followed by the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, no, he got very large coverage by it. 
 
I then recollect to the members of the House opposite that the Leader of the Unionest Party, (so-called) 
the member for Nipawin, then entered the debate and I think tried to crystallize the issues with respect to 
the monopoly control aspect of Sask Tel by this bill, as it related to computers and computer technology 
and the offspring. I think you all recall that. And then the Unionest Leader said, you have these 
regulations that have been on the floor of the House now for months; why don’t you lift those 
regulations away from regulations and incorporate them in the bill, because the regulations clearly 
indicate that it was not a monopoly. You will recall that banter back and forth. And then after the 
intervention by the Leader of the Unionest Party, the hon. member for Moosomin entered into the debate 
and this is the way the proceedings ended yesterday. On page 3710 is the position of the PC official 
opposition, as of 5 o’clock yesterday. Now I realize almost 24 hours has gone by so anything could have 
happened, but this is their position. 
 
I’m reading in part; he’s referring to the committee. I could read it all but his intervention was about the 
regulations committee. I think members of the press will still remember this, and his quote is this: 
 

It’s that committee which could have a very meaningful input in terms of taking a look at the 
regulations you may propose from time to time. 
 

And certainly the concerns are well expressed from the opposition. Get these words, Mr. Chairman: 
 

We want to be assured, because you can change regulations by order in council any time you feel 
it’s necessary. This is what we are looking at here — a situation where you can just up and 
change the regulations and make acoustic couplers or whatever kinds of couplers far more 
expensive for one particular group than for another or for yourselves, particularly in regard to 
computer technology. Mr. Minister, you say it’s nonsense (because the 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3740 

minister made some interjections). Obviously we don’t think it’s nonsense or we wouldn’t be 
expressing these concerns. 
 
In conclusion, I think that the regulations committee could be utilized in this particular way. 
 

There are other quotations on page 3709 from the member but the essence of that PC position at 5 
o’clock adjournment time was, come on, get those regulations implemented either by statutory 
amendment or by regulations committee review to assure us that you will not, by regulation, some way 
down the road unilaterally change the regulations with respect to computer technology. In other words, 
we were approaching some form of — I won’t say consensus — an emerging consensus in this area. 
 
And then the House reconvened today to consider Bill No. 13. The Leader of the Unionest Party gets up 
again, advances the idea which quite logically was the last item for discussion yesterday at 5 o’clock. He 
suggests an amendment. The Sask Tel lawyers meet with legislative counsel and prepare an amendment 
which in effect transfers now from regulation to statutory provision that safeguard respecting this area 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The member for Thunder Creek says, nonsense, but he was not here for most of the time this morning. 
And I say to the hon. member for Thunder Creek what happened was — and I don’t expect to convince 
you people opposite — that the member for Wilkie and others were expressing the view that that 
amendment, subject to a final look by caucus over lunch time, might just do the trick. It might satisfy the 
guarantees for competition in this area. They asked for early adjournment to caucus. 
 
And so before lunch, consistent with that pattern of development, this caucus was, as of three hours ago, 
of the view that this statutory guarantee would provide the competition which was being sought. And I 
invite hon. members opposite to deny that was a reasonable and fair interpretation of the position taken 
by the PC caucus. They can’t. 
 
So they come back after lunch; the PCs have taken a look at it and they say that proposed solution or 
approach is no longer any good. Now I am going to ask the question, why the change from that 
perceived position since 5 o’clock yesterday afternoon? And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Chairman, I have a 
few theories about this. 
 
But may I say first of all that the Minister of Telephones accurately predicted before lunch that there was 
a fundamental, basic difference between Sask Tel . . . I made my speech yesterday and I won’t repeat it 
again on privatizing and privateering Sask Tel on their side and ours. He said, I predict that they will 
vote against the amendment. Frankly, I felt before lunch that he was wrong. We had lunch together and I 
was convinced that the amendment would likely provide the Conservatives an honorable way out and 
give them a modicum of success on this bill for guaranteeing competition. It would allow the 
government a way out. I don’t believe the government needed a way out because the matter was in 
regulations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll repeat again, allow the government a way out. It makes no 
matter to me because it’s not relevant to my argument. But the elements of a consensus for an agreed 
change were there. 
 
The Minister of Telephones was right. Fundamentally it is more than just the guarantee of competition, 
it is the destruction of Sask Tel that’s at issue here. Why the change, Mr. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3741 

Chairman, over lunch time? I say, Mr. Chairman, that the change over lunch time is very simple. I think 
the change over lunch time is that Mr. Devine, the Leader of the Conservative caucus said, you cannot 
accept a proposal or an amendment which comes from the former leader of the Conservatives, Mr. 
Collver, because the press will say that the Conservative caucus is following the line of the old leader of 
the Conservative operation, and as a result we need to oppose the amendment in order to show our 
differences from the Unionest Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says that I am sick, and I must candidly confess 
to the hon. member that I am sick. I’m sick and tired of the childish, irresponsible flip-flopping position 
that the PC caucus is taking on Bill No. 13. But I ask you, Mr. Chairman, (and I’m not now speaking to 
the PCs because they have made their decision) but I ask you sir; I ask the other members of the House; 
I invite the press — you tell me what other rational explanation there is. They at 5 o’clock yesterday 
could have taken the position that the elevation of those regulations into statute was the wrong way to 
go. They could have taken the same position that the aspects of the bill which the member for 
Qu’Appelle (the future leader of the Conservative caucus) says — the fundamental arguments in Bill 
No. 13 — are wrong. They could have taken that position at 5 o’clock. They could have said, don’t 
worry about the amendments. They are not acceptable to us because Sask Tel is into all these other 
areas. They could have done it this morning, and they didn’t do it this morning. They asked an early 
adjournment at 11:50. Why, Mr. Chairman, on a simple one line amendment which everybody in this 
legislature and in this House and those who watch this debate know would have allowed them to say that 
they achieved their objective. That doesn’t change the facts of the proposal, but they changed. You tell 
me why they changed? You say I’m being political? I tell you they changed because the simple fact of 
the matter is that their leader, Mr. Devine, living in the shadow of the Leader of the Unionest Party, 
living with the fact that he has no seat in this House, living with the fact of a serious caucus division on 
Bill No. 105, has told them that they have to drop, not a half a mile away from the former leader but a 
mile and a half away from the former leader. Anything that he proposed, they are going to oppose. 
That’s the position. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to make one last comment if I can as to where this leaves us. This leaves us 
now in the situation where the amendment having guaranteed (although the regulations would have done 
that) by statute, which the members opposite said, judging by the words of Mr. Birkbeck and others — 
competition statutorily agreed. Their having rejected that amendment, where does it leave us, Mr. 
Chairman? It leaves us clearly in the position pure and simple, as the Minister of Telephones has said, 
where the Conservatives are out to destroy Sask Tel in the future evolutionary development of 
telecommunications. 
 
I am going to conclude my remarks today Mr. Chairman, by referring tot he historical position taken by 
governments in this province to protect the end to end responsibility of Sask Tel. I said yesterday that in 
the 40 year history of this province every government, from Tommy Douglas to Woodrow Lloyd to the 
late premier, Ross Thatcher, to the Premier Allan Blakeney government, always adopted the end to end 
responsibility approach. The hon. Member says not. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I am going to table for the members of this House a brief submitted by the former 
administration, 1971, of the late premier, Ross Thatcher; I hereby ask that a copy be tabled. I shall ask 
also that copies be forwarded to members of the press, if 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3742 

someone will care to do that, in case they might want to take a look at it. I am going to say to you, Mr. 
Chairman, that this is a brief submitted to the Canadian Radio Television Commission, dated April 16, 
1971, submission by Saskatchewan Telecommunications, signed by the Honourable Gordon B. Grant, 
Chairman and responsible minister (and I would say a leading and respected member of the Thatcher 
administration) on the position of telecommunications and Sask Tel in the emerging era of 1971. I invite 
the press to read the report. What you will see when I give it to the press is a summary of the report. 
Don'’ accept my summary of it; take your own, if you will. But that submission by the Thatcher 
government said this, Mr. Chairman: 
 

1. Sask Tel is the proper agency of the government to administer telecommunication policy in 
Saskatchewan (first paragraph, page 1). 

 
2. Sask Tel must have control (I underline the word control) over the transmission and 

distribution system (first paragraph, top of page 4). 
 

3. Sask Tel must avoid wasteful duplication of facilities or permitting specialized carriers to 
cream-skim the lucrative markets, in order to ensure an expanded quality, quantity and 
variety of all communication services (clause D(a) on page 3; What we’re arguing this bill 
is doing and what they say they want to allow to be done). 

 
4. The telecommunication carrier can facilitate the sharing of remote signal costs among all 

users on an equitable basis (rate averaging, which is what we’ve been saying in this 
debate). 

 
5. Specialized telecommunication carriers serving the lucrative markets will impair the 

development and expansion of communication services to the sparsely populated areas of 
Saskatchewan (will impair — the top of page 7). 

 
6. To be economically viable an integrated network should include both voice band and wide 

band capacities complementing each other under the electronic control and supervision of 
the telecommunications carrier. 

 
There are other points in the brief. Those are the six fundamental points which the PCs fundamentally 
have opposed. They say that this comes from the socialist government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, 
these fundamental six points, if you transferred them to Alberta, are the same in their legislation. These 
fundamental six points have been the cornerstone of end to end responsibility of Sask Tel during the 
height of free enterprise philosophy of the late Premier Ross Thatcher. 
 
I don’t say this in a patronizing way to the member for Thunder Creek. Whether you liked him or you 
didn’t like him, Ross Thatcher was a man who knew where he stood and how he got there and he did it 
with vigour and integrity, but he was not going to sabotage and privateer away Sask Tel. He wasn’t 
going to do that; he wasn’t going to barter it away. And nobody could say that the late Premier Ross 
Thatcher was some sort of sell-out to socialism. 
 
That’s what that brief says. Don’t take my word. Take your readers and go through it point by point and 
tell me where I’ve gone wrong in the operation. That is the forty year history of Sask Tel. There is no 
other way that we could provide services to rural Saskatchewan without this kind of an operation. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3743 

That’s not to say we’re going to eliminate competition. The amendment which the member for Nipawin 
(the Unionest leader, so-called) will provide would guarantee from regulation to statute to competition 
safeguard. That’s something I thought the hon. member for Moosomin yesterday seemed to be grasping 
hold of and accepting. That’s something I thought the hon. member for Wilkie, this morning, today, was 
urging us to do in his interventions right up until 11:50 a.m. 
 
We said we’re going to do it; we bring it in to do it, and after lunch they change. Why? Because they 
looked at the bill, the amendment? No. Because they know something that Ross Thatcher didn’t know? 
No. Because they spotted something that Ross Thatcher and Gordon Grant, in their socialist mentalities, 
let through? No. Because they’re smarter than Peter Lougheed or Richard Hatfield or Sterling Lyon (and 
I have some views about the latter that I’m not going to express)? Because you think that they’re a more 
able opposition to hold up this bill for five or six months? Because this issue is more important than 
deterrent fees, or any other issue that we’ve taken on in this House in the 13 years I’ve been here, inside 
and outside. And what great debates we’ve had. Why? All of that, Mr. Chairman, why? 
 
And this position of Sask Tel — I tell you why I make the conclusion and I invite anybody to give me 
another rational explanation. You can’t. You’re reduced to that kind of a situation. You are reduced 
therefore to the position where this is indeed a major issue. Indeed this is an issue of the survival of Sask 
Tel because this section, which is the proposed amendment, does not satisfy them. They obviously do 
not subscribe to the six principles of Ross Thatcher’s government which were embodied in Bill No. 13 
— the control. They don’t subscribe to that. If they don’t subscribe to that and they say that it isn’t Mr. 
Devine, who for political reasons is telling them to get some distance between themselves and Mr. 
Collver, then the only other conclusion is that Sask Tel is in jeopardy because then they’d believe what 
they say. Then they really do believe the member for Wilkie and the member for Qu’Appelle and all the 
others who attempted to say that Sask Tel should be piecemealed away — something they don’t even 
allow in many parts of the United States with respect to carriers involved there. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, the paranoia that this party opposite has about that man over there in the corner 
is driving them to absolutely ludicrous political policy positions. This is a ludicrous policy position 
because of your paranoia of that man over there. I tell you that you ought to reconsider. I am saying to 
you one more time before you dig yourselves in, you don’t need to follow the man who has other 
ambitions and other purposes for advancing the views that he does. I tell you, before you say to floss 
Thatcher and Gordon Grant and Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd (forget about Allan Blakeney but 
some historian will say Allan Blakeney); before you say to all of the pioneers of Sask Tel in its infancy, 
(the member for Kelvington has the book; I invite you to read it), who struggled in those difficult years 
to build up this great telecommunication system; before you say to all of them, goodbye all those 40 
years of work, don’t dig yourselves in. 
 
It won’t matter a bit politically whether he advances that idea of I advance that idea or you advance that 
idea. For goodness sake, let’s keep the integrity, the end to end responsibility of the carrier system in 
tow. Let’s not forsake that principle because not even the most free enterprise of governments, the 
Thatcher government, was able to do that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I know that I made the remarks in perhaps somewhat colourful language 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3744 

or inflammatory language. I honestly say to the PCs, you have something here. You have something 
here which we’re prepared to adopt by legislation. You want to get on to Bill No. 105; you want to get 
on to other House business. The press knows what the effect of that amendment was and is. They know 
it because you said the same thing yourselves at lunch time when you spoke to them. You changed 
totally on a flip-flop and I say, do not dig yourselves in. Here is something which we can adopt and 
agree to this bill and get on with the business of safeguarding Sask Tel and get on with the business of 
debating Bill No. 105 and the other issues before this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to provide some advice first of all to the 
members to my right who seem to think that by sending a note to Mr. Chairman I’m somehow 
developing a triangle. Those who have been in the Legislative Assembly before, might remember that in 
committee it is customary, when you wish to speak next, to send a note to the Chairman to tell him so. 
He puts you on his list and then you get up to speak. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Make a ruling on that. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I’m not going to make a ruling on that. I just want to inform the hon. 
members that I haven’t been keeping a list and I don’t keep a list. I try to recognize members and give 
everyone an opportunity to speak. I recognize the first person I see. I happened to see the hon. member 
for Nipawin first; the member over here sitting behind me. I didn’t see first. I saw the hon. member for 
Nipawin first and I called on him. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. However, I would suggest to Mr. Chairman that was 
the custom before this Chairman took the Chair and has been for some considerable time. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to take issue with what the Attorney General has said today. I am going to 
open by saying I’m absolutely shocked and amazed at my former colleagues in this House this 
afternoon, absolutely shocked. Mr. Chairman, I am sorry to say to the Attorney General that it is not my 
opinion that Mr. Devine did what the Attorney General suggested, because I think Mr. Devine is a first 
class Leader of the Progressive Conservative party and will be the next premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what I believe. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — But for the benefit of members to the right, I do not believe the member for 
Qu’Appelle will be the next premier of the province of Saskatchewan, not if you tried to elect him for 
the next 30 years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I don’t know where the members to my right are getting their advice on this, but I 
suggest it comes from the member for Qu’Appelle and I’m sorry he’s not in this Chamber. The fact of 
the matter is that what you have asked for, in all of the debate I have listened to in this House, is 
precisely what the government finally gave in on this morning. You were successful. You did your job. 
For five months you pushed it; you 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3745 

fought for it and you said, we want competition; and the government caved in this morning. 
 
Mr. Chairman, now they stand up in this legislative Chamber and make themselves look ridiculous; I am 
shocked and disgusted. Mr. Chairman, they stand today in this Chamber and say that mobile telephones 
should be competitive. No one has fought against socialism in this province harder than I have for the 
last number of years; no one believes more in the free enterprise system. But I tell the member for 
Thunder Creek, and I tell the member for Qu’Appelle, and I tell the Attorney General that in free 
enterprise Arizona, telephones at the end of the line have to be approved. Mountain Bell requires an 
approval sticker on every single telephone answering device in the state of Arizona; it is required by 
law. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Nonsense. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — He says nonsense. He should go down there to check, Mr. Chairman. I have had 
occasion of recent date to obtain just such a device from a place in Phoenix called the Price Club. They 
get seconds; they had some seconds and I was told they could no longer sell them. I saw them, but they 
could no longer sell them because Mountain Bell withdrew their permission for the sale of those 
products. Every telephone company in the world has that kind of protection, and must have that kind of 
protection. 
 
I don’t agree with Sask Tel taking all powers unto itself. I don’t agree with the socialists wanting to 
monopolize everything and going into every single business in Canada. But my goodness gracious, they 
were willing to do exactly what was asked for by the Conservatives and the Conservatives would take 
all the credit. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not quite, not quite. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, I say to the members to my right that if they persist in this kind of display, if 
they persist in this kind of effort, the people of this province will never choose them. It is a very sad day 
when, on the very thing you’ve been asking for, the government finally caves in and you can go to your 
people and say, I did my job. They are the legitimate government of the province of Saskatchewan; they 
are entitled to pass laws after you present your case. I can tell the members to my right that saying 
something over and over and over, the same arguments in January, February and March, is not going to 
sell. They presented in this legislative Chamber the same argument. The same ones came from the 
member for Qu’Appelle today as were presented yesterday, as were presented during second reading, as 
were presented since that bill was introduced. Saying them over and over is not going to change 
anyone’s mind. Once you have presented your case, it’s presented and people know where you stand. 
You don’t want the government into every business; if they don’t know that by now, then you’re not 
doing your job. Saying it over and over in this legislature is not going to make it so. The very thing, Mr. 
Chairman, which members to my right have been pushing for, the government finally caved in on as a 
result of their pressure — not mine. 
 
I am absolutely shocked that they would then rise in this Chamber today, after they said to the press and 
to the television, how anxious they are to get on with Bill 105. I tell them I have been ready for nine 
days. I am ready today. I’ll be ready tomorrow and no amount of repeating these arguments on Bill 13 is 
going to change that. If you are so anxious to get on with it, accept the success you have had and get on 
with it. If you have some other amendments, propose your amendments; but for goodness sake don’t 
believe 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3746 

that by repeating in this House the same arguments, the people of this province are going to listen. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am here right now with mixed 
emotions. I have very mixed emotions because I can’t decide which one to comment on, the Attorney 
General or my former leader. I am disappointed with some of the comments of my former leader. I think 
his comments were inappropriate. I don’t think we need him passing judgment on us. I will leave it at 
that point. 
 
I return to some of the comments of the Attorney General. As I listened to him talk and as I listened to 
his arguments, at the risk of sounding a trifle corny, it reminded me of a little novel written by one 
George Orwell. It was entitled, 1984. Did any of you ever see that movie? If you didn’t read the book, 
maybe you saw the movie. Remember the government had electronic access to every single household 
so that some unseen big brother (in the movie) could monitor what every single citizen of that country 
was doing? The government controlled all the electronics; the government kept every single citizen of 
that fabled country under surveillance. When I listened to the Attorney General today (I’d like to remind 
you this is 1980) I thought maybe the 1984 of George Orwell is not as far-fetched as many of us would 
think. 
 
The difficulty we on this side of the Assembly have with this bill, as with the vast majority of bills of 
this type which come from you, is simply one of credibility. We don’t believe your intent, because far 
too often you have confirmed that we should not believe your intent. Mr. Chairman, normally it is the 
Attorney General’s style and his tactic to get up at about 4:45 in the afternoon. Then he’ll whale blazes 
out of the opposition and kill the clock. Well, today we watched them do it again. He gets up at 2:20 
p.m., goes on until about 2:40 p.m., and then vanishes. 
 
A MEMBER: — He dishes it out, but can’t take it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — If the NDP Whip would care to go get the Attorney General, I’d be happy to ad 
lib for a moment. 
 
The Attorney General made reference to the governments of T.C. Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and spent 
some time dealing with Sask Tel as it was in my father’s administration. Well, there is one area that I 
would say the administrations of T.C. Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and my father ha din common and that 
was Sask Tel. In those days Sask Tel was doing something that it’s not doing now. It was running a 
telephone company and continuing itself to running a telephone company. It was a neutral telephone 
company that was concerned with providing service and bringing top-notch telephone service to rural 
Saskatchewan. It was basically through three administrations . . . Welcome back to the Attorney 
General. I was afraid you might have left. 
 
Back in the days of Tommy Douglas, and back in the days of Woodrow Lloyd, and back in the days of 
my father, Sask Tel concentrated on providing a service and was probably basically as close to a 
non-political entity as any Crown corporation could be. It wasn’t a top-notch company. 
 
Then the Blakeney government came to power in 1971. I think we all know what happened after that. 
You have turned Sask Tel into a political tool. You have prostituted Sask Tel for political 
gamesmanship. You have turned Sask Tel into a combination of secretariat and imported political hacks, 
and used it for your own political games. You have forgotten what Sask Tel was about. I’ll point to one 
of the hacks over there that you 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3747 

brought out of the wilderness and brought into the Assembly. He’s typical of . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’ll get there. I’m telling you about it. He is typical of the kind of people you put in Sask Tel. 
 
Let’s go into some of the problems you’ve had at Sask Tel. You lost your manager a couple of years 
ago. It is common knowledge that there was a morale problem in Sask Tel. It’s common knowledge that 
you beat the bushes, that you advertised all over North America because of the morale problem and that 
you needed outside help to head Sask Tel. You kept that position open for an abnormally extreme length 
of time. Finally, you hired someone. That morale problem within Sask Tel ha snot been solved. 
 
There still is a problem of competency in Sask Tel. Whatever happened to Sask Tel? When did you 
forget the basic premise that the job was to serve the people of Saskatchewan? Why do we have a bill 
like this in front of us when we don’t need it, and when we have thousands of miles of rural telephones 
still above ground, facing the ravages of frost and wind? Let me tell you, in the case of Thunder Creek, I 
think we have the highest percentage in the province. I don’t suggest we’re discriminated against. I say 
we’re discriminated against. Sask Tel, a long time ago, every since the Blakeney government took over, 
forgot its job was to serve the people. 
 
Let’s take a look at the job you did in cable vision. You kept Sask Tel basically under the direction of 
the Attorney General. You methodically, cruelly, kept cable television from the people of Saskatchewan 
when every other population centre and area had access to it, but you denied it. You denied it for rank 
political purposes down the road. And for what purpose? Let me tell you for what purpose. I’ll give you 
a prime example. 
 
One of the great benefits the people of Saskatchewan received from Sask Tel was the holding up of 
cable vision for about 2.5 years, and in one jurisdiction for example, it’s costing about $1.10 for Sask 
Tel to own the hardware. I’m going for numbers off the top of my head but they are pretty close. They 
pay about $4.60 to Sask Tel for the use of the line per subscriber. Without Sask Tel owning that 
hardware they could do it for $3.60 - $3.60! If you want me to substantiate that, I can; challenge me to 
do so. You know it’s true; $1.10 it’s costing them in Moose Jaw, and you know very well that it is. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Attorney General, if you are going to talk from your seat — Caronport, Tuxford, Marquis 
are still waiting for it. Nine-tenths of this province is still waiting for it, so don’t tell me about the great 
job that Sask Tel is doing. I’ve heard that Sask Tel’s technical people say over and over again, under the 
existing technology, it is impossible to take cable vision to rural Saskatchewan, so don’t tell me about 
the great job that they are doing because it is virtually zero. But what they are doing is, where they have 
it now, every single subscriber is paying more by Sask Tel having the hardware, than they would be if 
that hardware were owned elsewhere. Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well except, Mr. 
Attorney General, you know very well that I do know what I am talking about. You know that I’m dead 
on; you know that I’m 100 per cent right. The fact of the matter is we know, we believe, that you will do 
the same thing to the electronic industry, the mobile telephone industry and everything else that’s in this 
bill if you have control of it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to say that Sask Tel, even though it has borrowed vast amounts of money, has 
done a lousy job in getting rural telephone lines underground in the province of Saskatchewan. Sure 
you’ve done some. Sure you can quote some miles. But it’s not good enough. You’ve had time to get it 
all under and you should have had it 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3748 

all under . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh you better believe it. I invite the minister. I’m quite 
confident that in your constituency Sask Tel is doing a marvellous job. But travel to someone else’s 
constituency. Come and give me a couple of hours in Thunder Creek and I’ll show you miles and miles 
and miles of lines above ground. That’s where Sask Tel should be, not dabbling around in this nonsense. 
 
Why is it that Sask Tel’s equipment is so far behind every other telephone company in North America? 
Why don’t we have zero plus dialling in Regina? It’s brand new in Saskatoon. Everybody else has had it 
for years. It’s standard equipment everywhere in North America. Even Newfoundland has it. Every state 
in the U.S.A. has had it for years. We don’t have it in Regina. We don’t have it in Moose Jaw. 
Saskatoon just got it. 
 
Tell me about the mobile telephones; I’m a mobile telephone user and I was fed up with using that 
crappy piece of equipment that Sask Tel forced me to rent, so I bought my own. I bought my own and I 
bought it for one-third of the price of yours. It’s about one-third the size, with about three times the 
range, and I own it personally. And I bought it in that horrible place known as Los Angeles. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you are going to tell me I can’t use that unit which is vastly superior to yours. 
You’re going to tell me I have to use that pile of junk Sask Tel has as standard. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I don’t know why the government is so sensitive on this bill, probably because it is so typical of the 
philosophy of this government, which is to control everything. And the action of the amendment, as the 
Attorney General knows, is virtually zero. I think that amendment has been dealt with very capably by 
the member for Qu’Appelle and isn’t really worth commenting on any further. 
 
But basically behind this whole thing is the concept that has monopolized the thinking of the Blakeney 
government since 1971 and that is control with a capital C. Control everything! We all know that the 
action of the future is in the field of electronics. I don’t think you have to be an expert in the electronics 
field; if you read anything at al, you know that the changes are coming so rapidly that they can hardly 
keep up with the patents. 
 
But they are coming in this area because it is a competitive area and competition must be ensured. Mr. 
Chairman, there is simply no reason or justification for Sask Tel to be putting in a bill to control this 
industry. It has done very well by itself. Set the rules; yes, set the rules; there’s nothing wrong with that. 
But to control it in the way that you’re going to do it and the way past history says that you’ll do it is 
outlandish. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, I recall (if I can diverge for a second) a bill like this appeared in about 1973 
which affected the livestock industry. It was called The Natural Products Marketing Act and there were 
some clauses in it like this — open-ended ones. And the minister in charge at that time, presently the 
Minister of Mineral Resources said, oh well, we would never use this kind of power. We would never do 
that. Nobody believed him then but I am sure the question was put by the opposition at that time, well, 
why put it in then? Why have it if you’re not going to use it? And, of course, the answer (as I recall, not 
being a member at that time) was, well, in case we need it we should have it there. We may need it in the 
future. 
 
Do you know what happened about one year later without a vote and without 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3749 

consultation? Every single hog producer in this province was told, you now sell your hogs to the 
Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Board. You established a hog marketing board and you consulted 
nobody! They woke up one morning and all of a sudden a group of government bureaucrats, a group of 
government appointed people, were running the hog business. Let’s take a look at that hog business 
now. It’s 1980 and that was about 2973. Back in those days we had about 1.5 million hogs going 
through this province . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I must caution the hon. member to keep his remarks on the bill before us. 
Passing references to the hog marketing commission I think are in order but long, detailed explanations 
of what has happened in the hog area probably are not. I’ll call on the hon. member for Thunder Creek. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I acknowledge your ruling except that I believe I was 
drawing an analogy of past history between two bills which may have pertained to different areas, 
granted. But I’m pointing out what happened in a bill that was written in a very similar fashion to this, 
affecting another segment of our economy. Here we have a bill that’s written in a very similar fashion 
and I’m hypothecating what may happen under that. I respectfully pose to you, Mr. Chairman, that in the 
normal course of debate I should have the latitude to do that. I’ll try to stay within the confines of your 
parameters but I would ask you to give me a little latitude on this. I’m pulling out of it very quickly. 
 
Anyway, the result of that bill put the hog industry down from a kill of about 1.5 million hogs to the 
present 350,000. You changed the whole hog business; now two-thirds of it is run by the Hutterite 
Brethren, a huge operation. I say that respectfully about the Hutterite Brethren; they run superb 
operations, but they are the hog business of the government delving into an area in which it had no 
expertise or knowledge of the problems. 
 
In other words, we’ll create the problem, then we’ll solve it. There’s no problem here in the electronics 
business. You are not trying to solve a problem that has been brought up. You have created a problem, 
and it’s the oldest NDP trick in the book. Create the problem, then we’ll solve it. You know it’s like 
your rent control. You put in rent controls and people get out of the apartment business. They let them 
go. Then you have problems and we have a Crown corporation like Sask Housing Corporation. We have 
to have more apartment buildings. The old NDP story — create a problem and then move to solve it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . May I proceed, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes. I was wondering if you had anything to say about Bill 13? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, the electronics industry and the technological changes coming in 
the electronics industry are far too important to be left to that crew in Sask Tel. The developments that 
are happening are unbelievable if you believe the normal courses and the normal channels. I don’t want 
the Minister of Telephones having any input into the normal course of the development of that industry 
or the use of those products in this province. He doesn’t have to. There is no need. 
 
Now the minister yesterday (and I didn’t get the opportunity to ask him a question) told us that this bill 
was the result of pressure from some quarters. I would like the minister at some point in time today to 
tell me where the pressure came from. Now, if he says it came from within Sask Tel I will attempt to 
keep a straight face and not laugh. But tell me what sections of the electronics industry asked for this 
legislation. Tell me what people 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3750 

in Saskatchewan, outside of the top echelon of Sask Tel (if in fact they did), asked for this, Mr. Minister, 
I respectfully suggest to you that it came from within the confines of the New Democratic Party. I would 
suggest to the Attorney General in the case with the Minister of Telephones, don’t tell him, don’t give 
him the advice verbally. Write it down for him. He’ll find it much easier to respond. 
 
Mr. Chairman, nobody wants to get out of this Assembly more than we do. This bill may very well have 
been on the order paper for five months or whatever it is, but why haven’t you been calling it? You 
didn’t start to call this seriously until the past week. You know very well you didn’t. You have been 
going through what has become the famous tradition — shove everything to the end of the session. Look 
at the important estimates we have to do which have been deliberately left until the end — agriculture, 
the Attorney General’s department, the Executive Council, Bill No. 13, Bill No. 105 — and you’re still 
dropping bills. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, your tactics have become about as familiar and about as shop-worn as the carpet 
in this Assembly was until it was refurbished. Deliberately, you have left all the important items until 
the end and then you hang it on the opposition when these important things have to be dealt with. If we 
didn’t deal with them, if we didn’t put up a battle on them who would be the first on his feet to say, what 
a lousy, irresponsible opposition. No opposition — they didn’t fight this; they didn’t do that. 
 
You left Bill No. 13 this late in the session and you left it there deliberately. We don’t need you to 
consult us on digging ourselves into a hole; we can find our own holes. We can dig ourselves in quite 
adequately. When it comes to a bill which we have to fight, which is against everything we stand for, we 
have to fight it with what we have at our disposal. You left this bill this late in the session deliberately 
because in effect, by leaving it this late you ’re trying to pull closure on it. In a roundabout, sneaky way, 
you are trying to pull closure just like you’re trying to do it to the member for (inaudible). You’re trying 
to pull closure on his Bill No. 105. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, we make no apology to you whatsoever for fighting you on an issue like this 
which is control, and we’ll fight you on this or any other issue when your party attempts to politicize 
what should be a neutral Crown corporation (and I’ll repeat again for your edification) on what was 
formerly a neutral Crown corporation, which was dedicated to providing a service until the Blakeney 
government came to power. I believe you were out of the Assembly when I made the analogy. If there 
was one thing the Douglas, Lloyd and Thatcher administration had in common it was a neutral, 
non-political Sask Tel, and it has been under the Blakeney government that Sask Tel has become highly 
politicized, useful tool for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have no apologies to make whatsoever. The issue here is control — control over the 
electronics of the future — and it is just too important to be left to the planning political secretariat of 
the New Democratic Party. We’re here to fight you. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Again, I want to make a comment in my capacity as House Leader, and as a 
member of this House and committee. I have here in front of me the whites of the legislature which are 
presented everyday. I invite the hon. member for Thunder Creek to take a look at it. Sometimes there is 
some interesting reading in it, and I think you will find that Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend the 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act, was introduced and first read on December 4, 1979. The hon. 
member delivered his second reading speech about five weeks ago, and it wasn’t read a second time 
until May 21. You people did not let it go out of second reading until May 21. There is no 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3751 

other way that . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Nonsense! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Nonsense. You check the record of the filibuster by the hon. member for Wilkie. 
Look, don’t believe me; ask any of the press guys and they’ll tell you the guy said in the Chamber every 
day. I’ve only started here — look at the material I have. He was taking pride you know. I’m digging in; 
this is the biggest thing since the Magna Charta. That was the member for Wilkie; he went ahead and did 
that, so don’t blame us for the delay. Then when we call it at the first opportunity we have had to call it, 
all of a sudden we are trying to ram it down your throat. I think you can take as many days or weeks as 
you want in debating it. Point number one, on the House business. Point number two, Mr. Chairman, 
(and I point this out specifically to the hon. member for Thunder Creek and perhaps you would like to 
follow me and rebut me), I strained very carefully to hear whether or not the subscribed to the principles 
of Mr. Gordon Grant on telecommunications or the use of the words control, supervision, total control of 
the administration of telecommunications’ policy in Sask Tel, cream skimming and on and on. Just take 
a look at the brief. 
 
I say this to you, member for Thunder Creek, I am talking about this brief. This is ridiculous. This is 
where, in politics, credibility has something to do with success. I mean you guys are incredible in this 
operation. How can you twist this brief that way? The integration of Cable Television in the Canadian 
Broadcasting System, that’s the title of the brief and the offshoots from cable vision, not television. Take 
a look at the brief and I tell you that. And it’s incredible the kind of position you dug yourselves into 
because you have virtually . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sit down. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’m not going to sit down. I’m going to stand up and make my speech on this 
area for as long as I am going to. You people have dug yourselves in; you flip flop in private 
arrangements and you do publicly as well. You flip flopped publicly on postures that take . . . Yes, I will 
talk about flip-flopping. The hon. member for Indian Head is an expert on that at every stage in the 
game. Nobody could trust any commitment that you or any member of the party could make. Mr. 
MacMurchy notwithstanding. And I tell you I don’t intend to make that mistake again as long as I’m 
House Leader in this legislature dealing with any of you people. Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to say to 
the hon. member for Thunder Creek (and I say this to him because the hon. member really has a little 
personality pique), I’m sorry I don’t bow down five times a day and then thank him when he betrays me 
publicly. In any event, I say to the hon. member for Thunder Creek . . . 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — He’s making insinuations against me that I can’t be 
trusted and that I betray him and I demand he withdraw those. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I’ll take the opportunity to examine the record and we’ll get back to the 
hon. member later. I will take the opportunity to see if there is a breach of privilege there, and I’ll get 
back to you. A question of privilege is a very serious charge, and I don’t want to . . . 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — I was called, one time in this House, for calling the members 
next to me traitors. Betrayal is the same connotation I would think. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3752 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. When we talk about unparliamentary language, words like traitor, racist, 
are easy to pick up and I have always ruled that they are not breaches of privilege but they are 
unparliamentary language and I ask them to be withdrawn. That’s easy. Questions of privilege are more 
difficult. The hon. member has raised a question of privilege; I’ll examine the record as soon as I can 
and get back to the hon. member. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I should give you a little less work to do. I unqualifiedly 
withdraw any remarks which could be viewed as having said that the hon. member is untrustworthy. 
And having said that, I do want to say the record on all matters will speak for itself and I say, Mr. 
Chairman, that the hon. member for Thunder Creek . . . Well, I have made my point now and I think I 
have wasted the time of the House. But I do say that the six points here are fundamental, and you 
haven’t told us yet whether you subscribe to them or not. Because I tell you Bill No. 13 is these six 
points. And you haven’t told us whether you subscribe or you don’t. I just want to know whether I’m 
right — the first time in 40 years Sask Tel is taking a different position. 
 
The hon. member for Regina South is going to speak and I’m going to ask if you would please, pages, 
forward this to the hon. member. Just have him take a look at that and tell me where he stands on it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I will advise the Attorney General in due course. That day we 
will advise you where we stand on it. I would just like to remind the Attorney General of a statement he 
made in the House last night and I want to remind the Minister of Telephones of the same statement. In 
this House last night, Mr. Attorney General, you said the last thing in this House and I’ll read it: 
 

Mr. Chairman, nowhere in the six months of debate on Bill 13 has the official opposition 
suggested the incorporation of the draft regulations in the legislation. It has only been mentioned 
since the member for Nipawin raised it. And I say the position of the PCs has been 
philosophically and fundamentally opposed to Bill 13. 
 

Now that last statement is right. However, I would like to remind the Minister of Telephones that we 
spent five days in the Crown corporations debating and scrutinizing your Crown corporation last year. 
I’m going to read to you verbatim what was said and I can understand the Attorney General saying what 
he said last night, because he wasn’t in Crown corporations. But what you repeated in this House this 
morning is no more than a parrot echoing the words of the Attorney General when you don’t know what 
the hell you’re talking about. I’m sorry, I withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Minister, on April 10, I’ll just read that part or if you want me to read it all I will: 
 

MR. CODY: — We’ve had this tariff since 1928 and nothing will change other than that we 
think we should have, in legislation, that which we now have in tariff. Now I think that’s only 
being reasonable. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Why don’t you put your tariff in legislation which points out yes and no to 
which items then, if that’s what you’re saying. 
 
MR. CODY: — What happens when you have a technological change? Then you have to call 
the legislature into session to change the legislation. Certainly (and these are your words) you 
can’t do that. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3753 

Now isn’t it strange that in Crown corporations we spent five days (and I wish the member for Biggar 
were here today; he accused us the other day of spending more time on television than we did on Crown 
corporations), and you should remember, which we spent on Sask Tel in Crown corporations. You were 
there but you didn’t recall it the day that the provincial treasurer . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, it wasn’t until the member for Nipawin yesterday made a similar suggestion, that the 
government side all of a sudden took notice. Coming from the Progressive Conservative Party your 
answer is, certainly you can’t do that. It was argued far more than just those two lines that I read out 
today; it was argued for days, as you well know. We suggest it; you say, certainly you can’t do that. The 
member for Nipawin suggests it; the government then decides, well maybe it’s something worth looking 
into. Maybe we can take it from the member for Nipawin; it won’t matter, because he’s not going to be 
around for much longer. But let us not give Her Majesty’s Official Opposition any credit at all. And 
that’s exactly what you’re saying. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Now, when you look at the amendment that was brought in, I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that I don’t know whether it has been checked by your lawyers or not, but the amendment 
proposed today by your government and suggested by the member for Nipawin, is even worse that the 
legislation you had proposed under Bill 13. I’ll tell you why, and you may just want to check this with 
your lawyers if you haven’t already done so. Maybe this is your intention, maybe you want it worse than 
you have it now, for the very simple reason that by law, you are preventing a monopoly on only one 
item — computers. Now that, in fact, makes a monopoly of everything else by law. That makes a 
monopoly on answering devices, for example, that no court of law can change. So by presenting and 
proposing this amendment today, you have made Bill No. 13 worse than it was this morning. You would 
be the first to accuse us (if this bill had gone through, and we had discovered a year from now how bad 
the legislation was) of not doing our job of scrutinizing this horrible amendment. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Take it out! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Take it out? You put it in! I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that we will — as a 
responsible official opposition — be presenting amendments today which will eliminate the possibility 
of creating a monopoly in any area of telecommunications, other than in the telephone system. You will 
get them. The member for Wilkie will be proposing these amendments today. I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, and to the Attorney General, who is a lawyer and who has a number of lawyers working in his 
department, that to present this kind of amendment is irresponsible on the part of the government. You 
have created a far greater monopoly with that amendment than you had with Bill No. 13 as it stood 
yesterday. 
 
You talk about flip-flops! Why would you call an opposition responsibly debating this kind of 
amendment a flip-flop? We never said we were for this amendment. I read to you out of Hansard what 
we asked for in Crown corporations. It has nothing to do with this amendment. The amendments we will 
bring in today will point out to you that you have not done your homework, nor have your lawyers, nor 
have the lawyers for Sask Tel. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, the accusations you have been making today are absolutely shameful, coming 
from a legislator and the Attorney General of the province. It is not a 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3754 

flip-flop to look over an amendment to determine whether or not it is responsible and whether or not it 
will in due course create chaos, as other legislation which you have brought into this House in past years 
has created. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — . . . not accept his amendments and you then found . . . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Exactly the point. I am glad you brought it out. Mr. Attorney General, tell me 
why the minister responsible for Sask Tel was so adamant when we brought out the suggestion, back in 
April, to include this in the legislation? The minute it is brought out by this side over here . . . You say 
you are not in cahoots with this party! You say you are not working together! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I don’t care what you say . . . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I think the people of Saskatchewan will know what the government and the 
members to my left are as a team. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You gave Mr. Collver a standing ovation last November. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — We may have given him a standing ovation last year, but you have been doing it 
ever since this session began this spring. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I wanted to point out to the members opposite those facts which 
they have chosen to ignore today. I wanted to point out the fact that what we have done with this 
amendment is the responsible job we were supposed to do and that is to look it over and to determine 
whether or not it could bring repercussions further down the road. That is exactly what we have done 
with it. As I said earlier, the member for Wilkie will be presenting and proposing amendments to this 
which will be responsible. If you find those amendments to your displeasure, I would like to hear from 
the minister and the Attorney General the arguments they have against the kind of amendment we will 
be bringing in today. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, first I would like to react to the statements of the Attorney General 
and the member for Nipawin following the after dinner session. It seemed there was a great amount of 
dismay and disappointment that we did not come in and immediately adopt the amendments brought 
forth before dinner. As the Deputy House Leader well knows, I asked for time to study these. I spoke to 
the Chairman and I think that it is only responsible that we would look at this amendment and see how 
we think it affects the total bill. We have done that and as my colleague from Regina South points out, 
we will be bringing in amendments alter on this day. To say that we were not responsible in doing that, I 
don'’ feel is really a fair criticism. I think we did what we were elected to do. You brought in any 
amendment from your side of the House; we took that amendment into caucus, studied and are coming 
back with counter-amendments. To me that is what the legislative process is. 
 
The member for Nipawin indicated that perhaps we were rather weak in that we had the government 
collapsing or fading on this and bringing in an amendment. I will agree that perhaps the government is 
deciding this bill isn’t as great as it thought in the first place and it is making some change. But the 
member for Nipawin must realize that perhaps there are further changes that need to be brought to this 
legislation. That is why we, on this side of the House, have been continuing to debate this bill this 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3755 

afternoon and will continue debating it and bringing in the amendments. 
 
As I read the amendments the Minister of Telephones brought in, they dealt mainly with section 44.3, 
the monopolistic control possible under that section of the bill. The amendment indicates that perhaps 
that is going to be changed. 
 
If you were to go back and look through all of our debate since we started debating this bill, you will see 
that one of our major concerns was section 44.2. Section 44.2 in its original form read as follows: 
 

No person shall attach or connect to, or use in conjunction with, any part of the 
telecommunication line of the corporation, any attachment without the express written 
permission of the corporation. 
 

That was how the bill was originally brought in. The minister, after considerable public pressure and 
concern (I think), in his second reading (if I am correct on that) brought in some House amendments. 
Those House amendments changed the last line to: ‘where any attachment except as permitted by the 
subject of the conditions established in the regulations.’ Now that is still the situation as it exists today. 
The amendment brought in by the minister has to do with the monopoly of the machines or technology 
that can be hooked on to the line. However, that is only one part of it and, as has been pointed out, it 
dealt mainly with computers. Now I think the hon. minister realizes that there are many things now, 
things that you and I don’t know about are coming on the market that can be hooked on. That 
amendment only dealt with computers. The member for Nipawin, there are many things, as you realize, 
that are not computers which will be part and parcel of our way of life within the next short period of 
time. 
 
However, getting back to the important part of this bill and that is the attaching of anything to the 
government’s line. As I understand it, the way to attach is by an acoustic coupler. That, my friends, is 
where the control lies. The monopoly is one thing. We seem to see a bit of a change there. But I haven’t 
seen any change by the government opposite in the attachment to the government telephone lines. To 
me, that is the important thing. That is what my friend for Thunder Creek talked about, controlling 
communication in this province now, and in the future. 
 
Let me make a little analogy for you. The computer is one thing. We’ll compare that to the buggy with 
the attachment, the acoustic coupler, as the horse. You don’t go far in the buggy without the horse. Or 
it’s like having a car with no gasoline. You can have the computer, but if you don’t have the right to 
attach it to the line, you have nothing. You know that, Mr. Minister. That is what this member is talking 
about. That is one of the major concerns. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3756 

I want to read to this House what an acoustic coupler is because I’m sure that some of the fellows on the 
other side have no idea what these are. This is the essence of this bill. I haven’t seen any amendment yet 
to allow the attachment of acoustic couplers to the Sask Tel line. It says here and I want to read this: 
 

An acoustic coupler is a device which can be attached to as all, personal computer or a computer 
terminal and be used to communicate with or control other computers and give a user access to 
huge amounts of information stored in computer data bases. The coupler is electrically attached 
to a computer and mechanically attached to a telephone handset. The microphone and speaker of 
the handset sit into the cup-lie receptacle on the coupler. Electrical signals from the computer are 
transformed into sound in the coupler. This sound is picked up by the microphone and the 
telephone handset and transmitted over the phone lines like any other sound. 
 
Signals arriving at the computer as sound from the phone are picked up by a microphone in the 
coupler and converted back into electrical impulses that the other computer understands. In this 
process, the coupler is connected to the telephone system indirectly just as a human being is 
when speaking on the phone. 
 

The only thing with a direct, electrical connection to Sask Tel’s wiring, is Sask Tel’s own telephones. It 
is impossible for couplers to damage the telephone system. The machines come under their own 
manufacturer’s warranty and are serviced by the manufacturer or the local retail outlet. Sask Tel is under 
no obligation to service couplers and no owner of one would expect them to. By making the use of 
acoustic couplers illegal, the government is restricting free speech, potentially restricting free press, and 
restricting the lawful working of commerce. 
 
Many small businessmen, both now and especially in the future, would be unable to afford to assess 
their computers at their places of business where more and more of them will be keeping their financial 
and other business records as the prices of personal computer systems continue to drop. 
 
As we look at the next coupe of decades, we will see that more and more people with jobs which do not 
involve physical labor will be conducting their work far from their offices at home through the use of 
computer communications. This could potentially save a huge amount of energy now used for 
commuting to and from. Bill No. 13 would negate this possibility in Saskatchewan by making it far too 
expensive for the worker. 
 
Bill No. 13’s restrictions on acoustic couplers are absurd and unfair. Hundreds of thousands of these 
devices are at work throughout the world, totally harmless to telecommunications, and immensely 
beneficial to people in all walks of life. The forbidding of the use or sale of these devices in 
Saskatchewan does not benefit a single person in Saskatchewan. It benefits only Sask Tel, by giving 
them a monopoly they neither deserve nor need. Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to see you come forth 
with an amendment if you would like to do that. I would like you to get up to explain why you think 
Sask Tel needs the exclusive right to control the acoustic couplers. That is the 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3757 

whole, important issue in this bill. You’ll get your chance to explain it. I’ve asked you to do this. 
 
I would like to read from a letter from one of my constituents to tell you, (because you don’t seem to 
understand the feeling of the people out there regarding this bill) why we have continued to debate it, 
why we see there are other changes needed. I’ve mentioned section 44.2. I mentioned section 44 where 
Sask Tel has the right to seize any material they think should not be hooked to the telephone line. Is 
there any type of warning for a person? Is there any type of appeal procedure in this bill? There is none 
whatsoever. There is exclusive power by Sask Tel to seize it, and that is it. For awhile they were going 
to cut off the services but you brought in a House amendment on that. I’d like to read from this letter 
from a constituent. 
 

I am further concerned that no appeal procedure is contained in the legislation allowing the 
public to present their side of the case in question. Section 44.4 authorizing the corporation to 
seize attachments, there is no warning, no discussion, and no appeal. I do not at all understand 
how the proposed sections can be passed claiming public interest as the reason for their 
existence. To the contrary taken to an extreme, and I have the feeling that the day will come if 
this is passed, the government of the day will be able to determine what our province'’ citizens 
can see and hear. This is controlled information at its worst. 
 

The constituent, a man who has a considerable business in my constituency, one of the biggest 
businesses, (not in the communication field) supplying one of the greatest needs to our constituency, 
says: 
 

I have no desire to live in a province that leaves that possibility open. 
 

MR. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Mr. Chairman, it’s pretty obvious that the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley is very misinformed. He just simply doesn’t know what the situation is. He talks 
about acoustic couplers. If he only knew that an acoustic coupler doesn’t belong to Sask Tel, it belongs 
now to the subscriber. It’s built right into the machine itself, and really all it is is just a little cradle 
which you hang your telephone into and there it goes; that’s the end of it. We don’t rent them or lease 
them to anyone and we don’t own them. They are owned by the subscribers themselves, and the only 
possible way they can be used is by the piece of equipment itself having the coupler attached right to it. 
 
We don’t rent or lease them to anyone. We don’t charge them for an acoustic coupler. So I don’t know 
what the member is talking about. He obviously doesn’t know what he is talking about, because if he did 
he would be square with this Assembly and tell the people exactly what he’s talking about. But he 
doesn’t know. Pretty obviously he doesn’t, so I’ll tell you one more time just so you understand. The 
coupler which you are speaking of, an acoustical coupler is a cradle you put your telephone set into; it is 
attached to the piece of equipment you have. There is no charge for it. We have no control of it now, and 
we will have no control tomorrow. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What does section 44.2 say then? 
 
MR. CODY: — Section 44.2 says that no person shall attach or connect or use in conjunction with any 
part of a telecommunications line of the corporation anything which isn’t regulation. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3758 

Let me tell you what the regulation says about couplers: 
 

. . . datasets connected to a telecommunications line of Sask Tel either acoustically, inductively, 
or by means of a coupler supplied by Sask Tel. 
 

It says ‘or by means’ not ‘and by means’. Surely the hon. member can read but obviously he doesn’t 
want to understand. That’s exactly what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I’m on my feet I just want to ask the member for Indian Head-Wolseley and the 
member for Thunder Creek a question. The question is, do they believe the Alberta government should 
have this power? This is the power they have and I’m going to read directly from their act. If the hon. 
member is looking for his copy, he won’t have a copy of the latest amendments because I have them 
with me. If he wants to have a copy, I’ll give him a copy. It says, under attachments, section 28(1): 
 

No person shall fix to any telecommunication equipment of the commission any equipment, 
attachment, device, apparatus, or contrivance, capable of transmitting or receiving messages 
passing through a telecommunication system of the commission that is not approved or 
authorized in writing from the commission or supplied by the commission. 
 

Now, that’s the wording in Alberta. There is no problem whatsoever in Alberta. They don’t even have 
what we have, and are going to give you — regulations to this. They are asking for specific written 
permission before they can put any attachment on their lines. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, when we’re going even further than that and allowing you to put in regulations 
what you can or cannot attach to our lines, you say that is somehow wrong. Surely you can’t say your 
friends in Alberta — I’m sure they would be friends of yours. They’re a Tory government. You’re 
surely not telling us now that they are doing the very bad things we want to do to our computer industry. 
If that’s what you’re telling me then I don’t know what the government of Alberta is doing with this 
piece of legislation. But it’s there; it’s law, and it tells you specifically what has to be done. 
 
I’m going to tell the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley one more time that in Saskatchewan you 
are not required to lease from Sask Tel a coupler which is acoustically attached to a piece of equipment. 
That belongs to the subscriber. It’s on the subscriber’s piece of equipment. It’s there now, and it will be 
there in future. 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find it amusing that the minister of Sask Tel is 
comparing his government with that of Alberta. But he stops short in his comparison. He doesn’t 
compare the 36.7 tax rate with the 53.5 tax rate. He doesn’t compare no sales tax with sales tax, but the 
basic difference between the Government of Alberta and this government here is that the Government of 
Alberta (like the vast majority of Conservative governments in Canada) respects the rights of the 
individual. They respect the rights of creativity. They respect the rights of initiative. And they’re not like 
your government, where they stifle the individual, where they stifle initiative, and where they stifle 
creativity. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Look what they did to Herman. They stifled him. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3759 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps it’s just as well that the Attorney General left. He’s been 
carrying the bill. It seems that in every set of estimates, if there is a little bit of trouble, they call in the 
Attorney General. We saw it in northern affairs. Now we’re seeing it through these bills. Heavens, it’s 
about time some of you ministers carried your own bills. 
 
The Attorney General, when he was on his feet, made quite a thing out of what he perceived to be the 
continuity of Sask Tel policy for 40 years. I think that is what he said. He said Sask Tel policy has never 
changed and it has always been, through every single government which has administered Sask Tel, one 
of complete end to end use. 
 
I suppose for my specific edification he held up a brief which came from Sask Tel under my father’s 
administration and suggested that it was the identical brief, the identical philosophy, which is in Sask 
Tel today in 1980. He was chastising me, asking why I am opposed to Sask Tel’s philosophy now. It has 
been the same for 40 years; it has never changed. I’m sorry the Attorney General isn’t here. I sent him a 
note to please stick around, but I don’t blame him for leaving. 
 
Anyway, the Attorney General has made a great deal about the six points that he says were elucidated in 
the brief back in 1970. On the surface, there’s not too much disagreement about the six points. When I 
was on my feet earlier I said the one common factor between three governments — the Douglas, Lloyd 
and Thatcher governments — was that Sask Tel was a non-political Crown corporation devoted to 
providing service to the people of Saskatchewan, useful service. I qualified the statement by saying that 
on the assumption of power by the Blakeney government, Sask Tel has simply become a highly 
politicized tool of the New Democratic Party and that Bill No. 13 is a prime example of the extension of 
that power. 
 
Let’s briefly examine the philosophy that the Attorney General said has remained unchanged for 40 
years. This is the brief that was put in, in 1970, by Sask Tel to the CRTC, the brief which has never 
changed, and the philosophy which has never changed (if we’re to believe the Attorney General). 
 
On the very first page, it contains a line that reads something like this: the role of a common carrier is to 
provide the common facilities required to carry the message, the medium function. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that about that, the role of the common carrier required to carry the message. There is no 
talk about the fact that the common carrier, being Sask Tel, should run the station. There is no 
mentioned about that, just the talk about a common carrier. Who’s going to argue about the common 
carrier? 
 
But under the Blakeney government you decided Sask Tel will run the cable vision. You will be the 
station; you will do it all. You forgot about the role of the common carrier. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — This is a prime example that Sask Tel, under the Blakeney government, forgot 
about its original commitment that was there for 40 years, of being a common carrier. You were going to 
be the initiator. You were going to be the propagandist. This resembles the days of . . . Somebody by the 
name of Goebbels had a medium like that in the ’30s. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3760 

One of the other functions of Sask Tel in that brief that’s elucidated . . . (inaudible) . . . It is properly 
concerned with the content, quality, variety and economics of the message. Fine, we agree with that; you 
agree with that. 
 
Oh now, isn’t that interesting. The Minister of Telephones just said, we do not agree with that. I just 
listened to the Attorney General for half an hour saying that the philosophy of Sask Tel hasn’t changed 
in 40 years. I just read one of its briefs and the Minister of Telephones says, we don’t agree with that. It 
is properly concerned with the content, quality, variety and economics of the message. The Minister of 
Telephones doesn’t agree with that. Tell me, Mr. Minister, what else don’t you agree with? Mr. 
Minister, maybe there are a couple more things here that you might not agree with. 
 
Sask Tel submits that the common carrier responsibility for the medium function will best serve the 
interests of quality, quantity, variety in economy in the message function for all communication 
services. Is that something else that you don’t agree with? 
 
Oh, he agrees with that one. Here’s another one. I wonder if the minister disagrees with this one because 
this was also in the brief. Equal access to the use of facilities is available to all without discrimination. I 
won’t even ask you that one. You and your government disagree with that one fully and I’m sorry the 
Attorney General isn’t in here because he has been telling us, about the philosophy of Sask Tel not 
changing in 40 years. Well, let me tell you the philosophy of Sask Tel since 1971 whereby equal access 
to the use of facilities is available to all without discrimination is out the window. Tell the people in 
Saskatoon, tell the people running the cable vision in Saskatoon that the use of facilities is available to 
all without discrimination. Only under the government, only under people with a philosophy like that of 
the Minister of Health, only under people who would believe that the tactics of Goebbels, etc. In Nazi 
Germany would there ever have been an instance of jamming something like the House of Commons 
broadcast. Only under a government like this would the jamming of Saskatoon cable vision of House of 
Commons broadcasts occur. 
 
I say it would never have happened under Tommy Douglas. Tommy Douglas would have booted the 
people responsible out like that, so would Woodrow Lloyd and so would my father; but under the 
Blakeney government, those tactics are acceptable. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — I wish the Minister of Health would do something 
useful like getting the Attorney General . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, I’m sure he’ll be able to 
read all about it tomorrow. Mr. Minister let me read you another bit about that unchanged philosophy for 
40 years. 
 
The sharing of common transmission and distribution facilities with other operators and users will 
achieve the most efficient utilization; the sharing, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, that philosophy is long 
gone out the window under the philosophy of the Blakeney government. Another line — regulation of 
the common carrier ensures efficient service at equitable rates and again, without discrimination. 
Without discrimination — that is something I think you people over there have forgotten about. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me stop at this point and point to a few facets of Bill No. 13. Let me relate them. 
Through this brief, which was made by Sask Tel in 1970, the words 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3761 

without discrimination’ appear frequently and freely. Let’s use some of yours out of Bill No. 13. Let’s 
look at some of the present day philosophy of Sask Tel, since you’ve turned it into a propaganda 
instrument; no person shall attach to or connect to; no person shall advertise; no person shall offer for 
sale to the public. (Oh heavens!) Where a person contravenes this, the corporation may refuse to provide 
telecommunication service to that person. 
 
All through bill No. 13 there is nothing but discrimination. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Bill No. 13 reeks of discrimination and that is exactly what has happened to 
Sask Tel under the Blakeney government. Since 1971 Sask Tel has lost sight of what it was set up for. 
Sask Tel under the Douglas government, under the Patterson government, under the Lloyd government, 
and under the Thatcher government was employed to serve the people and respond to the needs of the 
people. And they did not a bad job. But under the Blakeney government, Sask Tel has stopped serving 
the people. Sask Tel has started manipulating the people, controlling the people, and long ago forgot 
about ever responding to the needs of the people. 
 
Tell the people of Moose Jaw and Regina and Saskatoon and North Battleford why the were denied 
cable service for two and one-half years because of Sask Tel. I think the people wanted it. I think they 
asked their government, give it to us; give us what everybody else in Canada takes for granted. But Sask 
Tel, looking down the road, was not going to allow that stuff to happen. Oh no, they were going to get 
their way. Never mind what the people wanted; that wasn’t Sask Tel’s primary concern. Sask Tel’s 
primary concern was what’s good for Sask Tel, and more specifically, what’s good for the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
And all through Bill No. 13 discrimination is the watchword. Discrimination is the philosophy, and 
discrimination is the backbone. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Too bad the minister doesn’t have one. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Isn’t it interesting to contrast this with the Sask Tel brief of 1970, the one the 
Attorney General has held up as ensuring that the philosophy of Sask Tel hasn’t changed for 40 years. 
And I’m sorry the Attorney General still hasn’t reappeared. 
 
Let’s go back and do a little bit more in this brief. 
 

Better overall planning and coordination of communication facilities to meet all needs and serve 
all communities by utilizing the great resources of a common carrier, expertise and experience. 
 

And here’s a lulu — here’s one that Sask Tel has been a dismal failure in and a colossal bust: 
 

Improving the economics of extending service to remote or sparsely populated areas with a 
multiplicity of services on an integrated medium. 
 

The next sparsely populated area you get that cable to will be your first. You have failed; you are not 
trying; you are making no attempt to do so. You have failed completely. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3762 

But another administration — that was their plan. Are you asking to make an introduction? I yield to the 
member for Yorkton. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The hon. member for Yorkton has leave to introduce some students. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — I would like to thank the member for Thunder Creek for allowing 
me the privilege to introduce another 44 students from Yorkton, from the Yorkton Composite Junior 
High School. I met with them in the halls before this and they had quite a time coming on the bus this 
morning. They had a flat tire and they had to bump over the rough roads at a very slow speed, so they 
didn’t arrive when they had wanted to. But we hope their stay here in the Chamber will be informative 
and that the tour of the city, such as they will be having since it will be shortened, will be interesting as 
well. I would like all members to join with me in welcoming these students to our legislature and to our 
capital city. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the people on this side of the House. I 
hope the students enjoy their day in Regina and have a safe trip home. We’re having a very quiet day in 
the Assembly. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 Section 1 (Continued) 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Here comes the Attorney General. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, welcome back to the Attorney General. I’m torn as to whether I should 
repeat my earlier remarks for the edification of the Attorney General, but I understand he has been on 
television. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Looking good boy, if I have to say so myself. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I understand he has been on television talking about how Sask Tel is being 
maligned. Very briefly, Mr. Attorney General, I would like to recount to you the brief which you have 
been tossing at me for about the past 15 minutes and while I would like to go back to a few lines, I will 
refrain from the temptation. Nonetheless, Mr. Attorney General, I feel obligated to point out a couple of 
things about this brief. 
 
Interwoven in the speech you made with a great deal of eloquence in this Assembly as the assertion that 
Sask Tel’s philosophy has not changed in 40 years. There is no question that Sask Tel’s philosophy did 
not change for a great many years. Once upon a time Sask Tel concentrated on providing service, but 
since the time this brief was put forward discrimination has been the watchword. And discrimination is 
interwoven all through Bill No. 13, discrimination against all segments of society and specifically the 
electronic industry. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, I’m on page 6 of the brief that you described as a continuation of the 40-year 
philosophy of Sask Tel. And to the Provincial Secretary, would you stop bothering the Attorney General 
for a moment? I would like him to respond to some of 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3763 

these lines. 
 
In the brief there is a statement by Sask Tel that this is a more efficient regulation because there would 
be a distinct separation of common carrier and broadcasting functions. You say that the philosophy 
hasn’t changed in 40 years. I say to you, when that brief was written, the intention of Sask Tel was never 
to go into the cable broadcasting business, ever. And yet what happened? Sask Tel immediately bounces 
its way into muddying up the licensing of the proposed licensees in Saskatchewan by applying for every 
single license. You tell us that the philosophy of Sask Tel has not changed? 
 
In 1970, it asked only to be the carrier of the medium. Under the Blakeney government, under its 
penchant for control and propaganda and perhaps its down the road philosophy that ultimately we’ll 
have electronics into every single home in true Orwell tradition, you took Sask Tel into the field of 
propaganda. You took Sask Tel into the area of being a propagandist, a propagandist for the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, here is another line that came from that brief: ‘less chance that consideration of 
medium ownership may influence broadcasting licences.’ 
 
Can you believe that, Mr. Attorney General? Sask Tel in 1970 saying that if they controlled the common 
carrier, there would be less chance that considerations of medium ownership may influence the 
broadcasting licence. And you have the gall to tell me the philosophy of Sask Tel hasn’t changed in 40 
years. The philosophy of Sask Tel has changed dramatically under the Blakeney government. Had it not 
been for the CRTC you would control every single cable licence. You would control everything that 
went on to that cable. And you tell me that the philosophy of Sask Tel hasn’t changed. 
 
I say to the people across the way (and man of you I don’t think have even read Bill No. 13), Bill No. 13 
is laced with discrimination. Bill No. 13 shows a complete disregard, a complete unacknowledgement of 
the right of an individual, and the right of people to compete. We have no hesitation in opposing this bill 
with everything we have. I say categorically, electronics development is far too important to be left to a 
highly politicized instrument such as Sask Tel. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I could probably go on and on, but I invite the Attorney General to respond to some of 
these charges. I say categorically in closing, Bill 13 reeks of discrimination. It’s a bill that Sask Tel does 
not need. It is a bill, if we are to believe the Attorney General and I don’t in this area anyway, that Sask 
Tel has gone along for 40 years without. I say to the minister it’s a bill that Sask Tel can get along 
without for another 40 years. We say to you, regulate the electronic business. Regulate it; set the rules, 
and be the appropriate referee where necessary. But you’re getting into the business. You’re going to 
control it. Eventually you are going to dominate it in this province. It is far too important; it is far too 
essential. You haven’t the people. I can’t think of anybody else who has the people, who should 
dominate it in the fashion that you intend to. 
 
The minister says, there is maybe more power here than what we need. We’ve heard that one before. 
Every time a bill passed in this Assembly that gave this government more power than it needed, 
somebody was shafted within 12 months. Somebody always gets shafted and we believe that people will 
get shafted in the future. In short, Mr. Minister, we don’t believe you. We think you’ll 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3764 

misuse this bill. We think you’ll misuse this power just as this government has misused virtually every 
power that it has acquired for itself. We intend to fight you on this and we make no apology. We’ll await 
the Attorney General to bail the minister out of this one. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, Bill No. 13 is not just An Act to Amend The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act, but rather, a piece of legislation that threatens the freedom and 
liberty of every citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. I do not say that lightly, nor do I say it to score 
partisan points in this Assembly. I say it because I know, and the people on the other side of the House 
know that I know, what the real intentions of Bill No. 13 are. Bill No. 13 is a concerted effort by the 
technocrats of the present government to have complete control of communications in Saskatchewan. 
Why, Mr. Chairman? I will tell you why. It is because there are certain dogmatic, doctrinaire individuals 
in the current government who have dedicated their souls to a document called the Regina Manifesto. In 
that document is a commitment for the socialization of communications. That is why we see Bill No. 13 
before this Legislative Assembly. It is because the socialist government on the North American 
continent is blindly carrying out the goals of the Regina Manifesto. 
 
There are those who have forgotten that we do indeed have a socialist government in this province. It 
seems that it is extremely old-fashioned or unfashionable to point out the truth about those who sit on 
the government side in this province. 
 
The fact of the matter is that these people are socialists dedicated to complete state control, no matter 
which way you look at them. Bill No. 13 is a prime example of the dangers of this sort of philosophy. 
 
I am very serious when I say that Bill No. 13 is a threat to freedom and that there will be those on the 
other side who will attempt to brush aside such a claim. I would suggest that perhaps there are those who 
suffer from oversensitivity to words such as freedom and liberty because they are an inherent part of the 
conservatism and not in line with socialist thinking. There are those on the other side who would claim 
that things such as freedom and liberty are out of date. I say such a claim is preposterous. To suggest 
freedom is out of date is akin to saying that the golden rule or the Ten Commandments is out of date. 
The Conservative approach is that freedom depends on effective restraints against the accumulation of 
power in a single authority. That is why we are so opposed to Bill No. 13. 
 
Bill No. 13 is a dangerous bill. It represents and symbolizes all that I am opposed to. It is a threat to 
freedom and dignity of the individual because it has a collective mentality that big brother (in this case 
Sask Tel) knows best. 
 
It is my belief that the maximum amount of freedom for individuals is consistent with the maintenance 
of social order, and we must maximize freedom or in the final analysis we will lose it. It is legislation 
like Bill No. 13 which erodes and chips away at the freedoms we know. Throughout history, 
government has proved to be the chief instrument for thwarting man’s liberty. 
 
This is what is happening here in the province of Saskatchewan with Bill No. 13. Absolute state power 
always restrains freedom and Bill No. 13 will swing this province down the road to complete state 
control. Freedom vanishes every time lawmakers give approval to legislation such as Bill No. 13. The 
tendency to concentrate power in the hands of a few deeply concerns me. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3765 

Mr. Chairman, it has been noted that Bill No. 13 is strongly opposed by the two largest daily newspapers 
in this province, and I’m speaking of the Regina Leader-Post and the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. Bill No. 
13 is also opposed by such organizations as the Saskatchewan Library Association. For the record I 
would like to read a few excerpts from a letter which was received from the Saskatchewan Library 
Association, Saskatoon: 
 

It is very important to our membership that information be freely available to all those who seek 
it. Any attempt to restrict access to information by centring the knowledge base or by restricting 
them or monopolizing communication channels is against the interests of our members, and very 
definitely against the interests of the clientele that we serve. Library patrons come from all walks 
of life and all parts of the political spectrum. 
 
Further the new section 44 provides Sask Tel with the power to exclude by fiat any competitive 
products or even advertisements for competitive products from Saskatchewan’s market place. 
The primary purpose clause is so broad and ill-defined that virtually every tele-processing 
service that a library or information centre might use could be abridged or jeopardized by the 
internal policies of Sask Tel. 
 
The Saskatchewan Library Association has no choice but to strongly oppose such legislation 
because it puts the whole future of the electronic information systems under the control of one 
corporation. This is unacceptable in a free society. Gordon L. Ray, President, Saskatchewan 
Library Association. 
 

Mr. Chairman, the letter from the Saskatchewan Library Association is just one example of the hundreds 
of letters which we, on this side of the Assembly, have been receiving from concerned groups and from 
citizens from every part of Saskatchewan in opposition to Bill No. 13. 
 
I warn the government to take heed. The people of Saskatchewan will not tolerate such dictatorial 
legislation. Mr. Chairman, Bill No. 13 is of such a restrictive nature that not only does it give Sask Tel 
complete control of communications in this province, but it also severely restricts free enterprise and the 
activities of amateur radio operators. 
 
I’m sure those on the other side of the Chamber are aware of that, but they are the ones who are wearing 
the horse blinders. They are the ones who are inflexible and blindly partisan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Regina Leader-Post was right when it said on its editorial page that this government 
is becoming too dogmatic and socialistic. Bill No. 13 is clear proof of that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Regina Leader-Post was right when it said on its editorial page that this government 
is becoming too dogmatic and socialistic. Bill No. 13 is clear proof of that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General has said he will not allow the opposition to hinder Bill No. 13. The 
Attorney General can give this House all the socialistic rhetoric he wishes but that will not alter the fact 
that Bill No. 13 is a threat to freedom. 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I suspect my words will fall upon deaf ears on the other side, I will take a few 
moments to outline some of my reasons for opposing this restrictive bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Bill No. 13 does the following: 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3766 

 
1. The amendments will produce a more restrictive environment with regard to telecommunications 

equipment, and give Sask Tel a virtual monopoly on telecommunications equipment. 
 
2. Bill No. 13 would prohibit all attachments to telephones except with the permission of Sask Tel. 
 
3. Bill No. 13 would put the whole future of electronic information systems in Saskatchewan under 

the control of Sask Tel. 
 
4. Sask Tel would be the sole authority to manufacture, distribute, or lease communications equipment 

in Saskatchewan. 
 
5. Sask Tel would have sole control of many devices used by ham radio operations which would 

restrict their activities. 
 
6. The computer industry would be more regulated because of Sask Tel’s regulations on use of 

telephone lines for computer operations. 
 
7. Bill No. 13 would give Sask Tel control of cable vision in Saskatchewan because of fibre optics, 

and an amendment that Sask Tel would control all of the communications. 
 
8. Bill No. 13 has absolutely no provision for public appeal of any of its regulations, and has had no 

public input to date, in the regulations it is proposed to enact. 
 
Mr. Chairman, many of the provisions of Bill No. 13 will be under cabinet control as opposed to Sask 
Tel itself, making it simple for the cabinet to unilaterally change or amend regulations. 
 
In each instance Bill No. 13 is a threat to freedom. 
 
I would like to point out that in light of the ongoing dispute between Sask Tel and the private telecable 
operators in this province, I am very concerned about the ever-increasing control the government has 
over our lives. It is a threat to our democratic institutions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, time and time again, we on this side of the legislation have called upon the government 
to allow more public input into Bill No. 13. It is a well known fact that we have called for a standing 
committee of the legislature, to be established to hold public hearings throughout Saskatchewan on Bill 
No. 13. As you know, Mr. Chairman, the government has absolutely refused this request. One need not 
wonder why. The reason is they are afraid of public opinion and public input. They take the attitude that 
the technocrats, bureaucrats, and big brother knows best. Once again I challenge the government to 
allow public hearings on Bill No. 13. I dare them to. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in closing I would like to emphasize how serious Bill No. 13 is as a threat to freedom. If 
we allow this bill to pass it will serve only to erode individual liberty and freedom in this province. That 
is a sad legacy to pass on to future generations. 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, in recent days it has become exceedingly clear 
that the dogmatic socialists on the other side of this Chamber and blindly committed to Bill No. 13 — 
An Act to amend the Saskatchewan 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3767 

Telecommunications Act, which would be more appropriately called the bill to incorporate state control 
of communications in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m opposed to this piece of doctrinaire socialism, because I represent a philosophy which the vast 
majority of free thinking people in this province subscribe to. That is the concept that freedom depends 
on effective restraints against accumulation of power in a single authority. I make no apologies for 
defending that concept of freedom against the godless and dictatorial beliefs of socialism as manifested 
in Bill No. 13. 
 
Lord Acton said, and I quote: ‘Power corrupts men and absolute power corrupts absolutely.’ That is 
what Bill No. 13 will do, Mr. Chairman. It will corrupt and restrict freedom in a province which can 
proudly boast to be the home of the author of Canada’s Bill of Rights. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — There is no doubt the concept of freedom is threatened by Bill No. 13. I should 
like to quote the Right Honourable John Diefenbaker, who, I am sure, would have been a leader in the 
battle against Bill No. 13 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I notice the minister has been getting very low 
in his seat this afternoon. He sat pretty high this morning, but he sure has been sinking out of this sight 
this afternoon. I don’t blame him. 
 
There is no doubt the concept of freedom is threatened by Bill No. 13. I would like to quote the Right 
Honourable John Diefenbaker, who, I am sure, would have been a leader in the battle against Bill No. 
13. In a speech to the House of Commons on August 4, 1960, he said: 
 

The principles of freedom are never final. Freedom is not static. It cannot be fixed for all time. It 
either grows or dies. It grows when the people of the country have it in their hearts and demand 
that it shall be preserved. I would be the last to contend that any document made by man, 
however impressive, can assure freedom. But I think that what we have done will provide an 
anchor for Canadian rights. 
 

At the graveside of Abraham Lincoln in Springfield, Illinois, there is carved in marble a timeless quote 
which says: ‘There is no weapon so powerful as the truth.’ 
 
I recall that, Mr. Chairman, because when I see the Attorney General make a spectacle of himself in this 
Chamber and revert to the role of hatchet man for the government — the Spiro Agnew of Saskatchewan 
— I know the truth has hit home. I feel sorry, Mr. Chairman, for the Attorney General. 
 
My colleague, the hon. member for Wilkie, has spent countless hours of hard work, documentation, 
study and representation on Bill No. 13, and it troubles me when I hear the Attorney General suggest my 
colleague has never read Bill No. 13. Now, Mr. Attorney General, I say you should be ashamed of 
yourself to stand up in this Chamber and say my colleague never read the bill, when he’s been working 
for months. A bill like Bill No. 13 needs months of hashing over because it’s a bad bill. You know it is. 
It was then I began to realize the truth has hit home. The government is beginning to feel the pressure of 
an angry electorate — angry that they would dare to try to bring about such state control. Did the 
Attorney General hear what I said? State control in Saskatchewan, 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3768 

that’s what we’re talking about? The Attorney General would rather call it socialism. What’s the 
difference? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I ask the Attorney General, what is the difference between socialism, state control, and 
communism? They are all the same thing? The Attorney General calls us, every day, the Devine 
Conservatives. I’m proud to hear him say Devine Conservatives. But I never hear anyone say the 
Blakeney NDPs; it’s always the Romanow NDPs. 
 
We never hear, Mr. Chairman, from tier no. 1; we hear from tier no. 2. Since I’ve been in this House, 
Blakeney has not come to defend himself on any item. He comes in and runs out. It’s always this poor 
man here, who has to defend the whole works. At least we can put men up here to speak. 
 
Mr. Chairman, at least on this side of the House we all can get up and speak on Bill No. 13. But over 
there you have only the Attorney General, who has to come and go to them all. 
 
As I stated, Mr. Chairman, my colleague has put a good deal of sincere, hard work into Bill No. 13. I am 
proud of the member for Wilkie, who has put so much work into this bill. And the Attorney General has 
the audacity to say we have to go out at noon and change our tactics. 
 
We don’t have to go by what you say. Just because you bring an amendment in, we don’t have to jump 
to what you say. We’ll put our own amendments in. I’ll tell you, Mr. Attorney General, he has some 
amendments. You’ll get them when we’re good and ready to give them to you. 
 
I am sure the powerful language he used, in the course of his remarks, hurt and shocked a few of the 
so-called social intellectuals, who live in ivory towers. To them I say, wake up. This is Saskatchewan, 
not Cuba or Sweden. This is a province of people who have fought against tyranny and communism. 
Bill No. 13 is a threat to the people. 
 
He must wallow in the mud and have his image tarnished to protect his government in a losing battle. 
One wonders what thanks, what appreciation his fellow party members will show him at the next 
election convention. Yes, one wonders just what they’ll show. With the Attorney General’s heritage and 
background, I would expect him to be opposed to such restrictive legislation as Bill No. 13. But the 
possibility exists that his last trip to China completely warped his thinking. 
 
A recent headline in the Regina Leader-Post stated: Bill No. 13 Scares Telecommunications Industry. 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I assure you Bill No. 13 scares a lot of people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if you think for one moment that only the Conservatives in this caucus are against Bill 
No. 13, I assure the Attorney General and the minister who brought the bill in that had he contacted the 
people . . . The Attorney General and the minister know that a group met in my office. I sent them to 
your office. Did you listen to them? No, you did not, because they’re still . . . You listened, but you 
didn’t do what they asked. They wanted Bill No. 13 dropped. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this article in the paper, Sask Tel power play — if a private company operated a 
telephone system in Saskatchewan, would the provincial government give it 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3769 

the power it proposes to give Sask Tel, given the long-standing record of the NDP against monopoly 
power? It seems certain that it would not. 
 
The bill now before the legislature apparently would give Sask Tel the power to prohibit attachment to 
its telephone lines of any equipment other than Sask Tel supplies. The bill would give legislative 
approval to Sask Tel to manufacture and sell various telecommunications gadgets. The telephone 
company is already leasing some equipment at high rates, equipment which could be bought by a 
customer for a relatively small sum. Given the present, and likely future extent of such gadgets, the 
possibilities for control are horrendous. 
 
It is pertinent that the Supreme Court of Canada refused a Bell Canada appeal of a federal court ruling 
that prohibited Bell from preventing consumers from owning and maintaining direct-dial automobile 
telephone equipment. In this case, Bell was relying on its own regulations and not the law. The decision 
has been interpreted as likely opening up the entire telecommunications market to competition. 
 
Similarly, the Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission, CRTTC, last year 
ordered Bell to allow CNCP Telecommunications Limited to connect with its lines. Telegraph and 
telephone companies incorporated under federal legislation are subject to the jurisdiction of CRTTC. 
The Saskatchewan bill would effectively rule out competition in any telecommunications area related to 
the Sask Tel system which the phone company cared to enter. 
 
The most startling area as far as the general public is concerned, (and that’s who you refused to listen to, 
Mr. Chairman) . . . They refuse to listen to the public. The general public’s concern would be that of 
home computer terminals which must be connected to the telephone system. 
 
For business it would be in a variety of areas, for some of the possible ramifications are very serious. 
Minister of Telephones, Don Cody, said Saskatchewan telephones will never use its power to create a 
monopoly for selling its products. Well, then, why put it in there? Why put these powers in there if 
you’re not going to use them? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You woke the Minister of Telephones up, Gerry. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — It will never make all the items required by its customers. This is not very 
reassuring and of course not at all reassuring for the items it does make. Sask Tel should be viewed 
essentially as a carrier. It is apparent this is a view of the supreme court and the CRTTC with respect to 
Bell Canada. No one has aired any reason Sask Tel should be viewed differently. 
 
Then, Mr. Chairman, there was an editorial which appeared in the Regina Leader-Post titled ‘Bill would 
grant Sask Tel more power than necessary.’ It was dated April 1, and reads as follows. I urge the 
backbenchers on the other side to heed. I won’t read all this bill. I’ll just read the headlines. ‘Bill would 
grant Sask Tel more power than necessary.’ There’s one in here: 
 

Colin Turnbull, manager of the University of Regina’s computing service says, our real concern 
is that we may be locked into a closed market place. The ominous thing about Bill 13 is that 
Saskatchewan Tel could have full power over how telecommunications are used in 
Saskatchewan. Bill 13 is wrong. It goes too far. It should be dropped. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3770 

Then the Attorney General says it’s just the Conservatives sitting in this caucus that are against Bill 13. 
He never thought of asking the people. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, not only are the two major daily newspapers of this province strongly opposed to 
Bill 13, but also a vast majority of the people. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I am speaking on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. The Attorney General speaks on behalf of his caucus. 
 
Bill 13 is a piece of repressive legislation in that it ignores areas of interest to the users of 
telecommunication products and services, and, indeed, is destructive to the concept of free enterprise in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
My reasons for opposing this legislation can be summed up as follows: 
 
1. The amendments will produce a more restrictive environment with regard to telecommunications 

equipment and give Sask Tel virtually a monopoly on telecommunications equipment. 
 
2. The bill would prohibit all attachments to telephones except with the permission of Sask Tel. 
 
3. Bill 13 would put the whole future of electronic information systems in Saskatchewan under the 

control of Sask Tel. 
 
4. Sask Tel would have the sole authority to manufacture, distribute or lease telecommunications 

equipment in Saskatchewan. 
 
5. Sask Tel would have sole control of many devices used by ham radio operators, which would 

restrict their activities. 
 
6. The computer industry would be more regulated because of Sask Tel’s regulations on the use of 

telephone liens for computer operations. 
 
7. Bill 13 would give Sask Tel control of cable vision in Saskatchewan because of fibre optics (and 

that amendment that Sask Tel would control all telecommunications). 
 
8. Bill 13 has no provision for public appeal of any of its regulations and has no public input to date in 

the regulation that it proposes to enact. 
 
9. Many of the provisions of Bill 13 will be under cabinet control as opposed to Sask Tel itself, 

making it simple for cabinet to change or amend regulations. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I resent it when I hear the Attorney General suggest that we on this side are undermining 
Sask Tel. That, Mr. Chairman, is not the truth. 
 
I would like to use the words of John Diefenbaker in describing the Attorney General on his suggestion 
that we are undermining Sask Tel. He said: 
 

If that person and the truth ever met each other it would be pure coincidence. 
 

Mr. Chairman, along with others on this side of the House, I recognize the dedication and loyalty of all 
Sask Tel employees. Sask Tel made a significant contribution to this 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3771 

great province of ours and it must hurt employees’ morale when they receive a government sanctioned 
bulletin threatening them with job cutbacks if Bill 13 does not pass. That, Mr. Chairman, is what you 
might call undermining Sask Tel. 
 
Mr. Chairman, such actions as threatening employees of a Crown corporation with job cutbacks is 
immoral and downright disgusting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to take the opportunity to point out that we on this side have called for a 
standing committee of this legislature to have public hearings on Bill 13. Let the people of 
Saskatchewan have some real input and I am sure the verdict would be that this bill would be defeated. 
Let the people say and it would never be passed. But you, on the other side of this House, do what you 
want to do. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. L.E. JOHNSON (Turtleford): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity 
to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, a group of Grade 9 students who have just arrived 
in the Speaker’s gallery. They are from the Turtleford High School. They comprise two different classes. 
I have been told they started out as 41 members in total; 8 were unable to attend and 1 person missed the 
bus, so they are no longer 41 members. Mr. Chairman, I would like to tell them that this is the 
committee of the whole, and they are observing the discussion on Bill No. 13, which is a bill to amend 
the Sask Tel act. I’ll be meeting with them later, and I hope they find their stay in the city of Regina, the 
capital of Saskatchewan, educational and that their trip home is a safe one. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — Section 1 (continued) 
 
MR. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Chairman, I have a very important amendment to introduce to this 
Assembly this afternoon, which will give my colleagues the opportunity to voice their concerns about 
Bill No. 13. There are two or three points I would like to touch on first of all. One thing that really 
disturbs me is that the Attorney General stood up three or four times this afternoon, trying to deflect the 
issue on to the Conservatives, saying that it’s our fault Bill 13 is dragging on. Mr. Attorney General, I 
tell you that this morning I couldn’t get into this debate until 11:40. I was ready to get in at 10:30. Don’t 
blame this opposition. It won’t wash. 
 
Then you say Bill No. 13 isn’t important. Have you the courage to tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
Bill 13 isn’t important. He said it wasn’t important, Mr. Chairman. I am not only for Radio Shack or big 
corporations; if there is anything the Conservative opposition stands for, we are the freedom fighters for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — I will not be, and neither will my colleagues be, manipulated by you or by big 
business or by anyone, but I will listen to the people of Saskatchewan. Then I hear him say, you are 
trying to drag out the session. Mr. Chairman, it’s a privilege for me — an honour — to be down here 
representing the Wilkie constituency. And Mr. Chairman, I 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3772 

will represent my constituents and every other individual in Saskatchewan, but I’ll tell you one thing, 
when the workload is over I want to be out of here too. Maybe it’s not evident to some of the members 
opposite, but I’m a family man. I miss my family. I miss my wife. I’m here on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. I’m not staying down here purposely to be away from my family. Maybe some of the 
members opposite are — but I’m not. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there are two major points with Bill No. 13. The first one is monopoly — total 
government monopoly of telecommunications in Saskatchewan. The second point is total control — 
control of the media, television, telephones; and finally, the ultimate end for them, total control of all the 
people and their lives in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this morning or maybe it was this afternoon, the minister responsible for Sask Tel read a 
letter from our leader, Grant Devine. Mr. Chairman, you tell me where it states that the Leader of the PC 
Party doesn’t have the right to correspond with the people of Saskatchewan. I can see where they don’t 
want that, because they don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to find out about the dangerous piece of 
legislation before this Chamber today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, this is just the direction this government is going. They don’t want 
anyone to know what happens in this Chamber. That’s why we don’t have television cameras in here. 
That is evident as well. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to read this amendment. It is an Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act, proposed House amendment. To amend section 6 of the printed bill, amended 
section 44.1 of the act as being enacted by section 6 of the printed bill, by striking out 44.4 in the first 
line and substituting 44.5, add the following section after section 44.4 of the act, as being enacted by 
section 6 of the printed bill: 
 

44.5: no regulation may be made to prevent (a) competition in the manufacture, distribution, 
leasing, sale, maintenance or use of computers, or any related equipment; or (b) the connection 
of any attachment to a telecommunication line of the corporation. 
 

Mr. Chairman, that is an amendment, a real amendment to Bill 13. The minister gave me a copy of his 
amendment this morning, just before noon. Our caucus took its lunch break in the lounge, to go through 
it very carefully. 
 
The first amendment was worded to leave out, related equipment, acoustical couplers. Mr. Chairman, 
this is the reason for the big fuss about Bill 13. It is not only the computers or the terminals but it is also 
the connection of the terminals to Sask Tel’s lines. Now I want very much to clarify one point. 
 
The Attorney General has stated that we want to destroy Sask Tel. That is false! I am a complete 
believer, and so are all my colleagues, in Sask Tel. Sask Tel is doing a very good job, whether it be in 
the cities or rural Saskatchewan. Putting the wires underground is a good program. I am the first one to 
compliment you on that. But, Mr. Chairman, we do not believe that any government needs the ultimate 
power and control that they are asking for in Bill No. 13! 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3773 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — I am the first one, Mr. Chairman, to admit that Sask Tel’s lines have to be protected. 
I agree completely. We want to protect the system. But also we want to protect the people of 
Saskatchewan and the rights of the people of Saskatchewan! 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m going to try to give you a short example of something else that isn’t in this bill . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’ll try to get it to his level. 
 
Mr. Chairman, saw we have a firm in Saskatchewan, (we could call it the Wang firm) which takes the 
technology and develops a terminal and an acoustic coupler. They come to the government and ask to 
sell, (not ask to sell, they will be allowed to sell it) ask that this be used in the system to be connected to 
their lines. So, the government decides no, we don’t like it. You can’t connect it — the cabinet decides 
this. Now, Mr. Chairman, I say, what avenue of appeal does that private individual or corporation have? 
They have no avenue of appeal, Mr. Chairman, none whatsoever. Their door is closed. This is wrong, 
Mr. Chairman, very wrong and the Attorney General knows it’s wrong and the minister of Sask Tel 
knows that it’s wrong also. 
 
What more powers; what more rights. We are coming into the ’80s, Mr. Chairman. It is the ’80s and it is 
going to be the ’80s of technology, of rapid change in Saskatchewan and in the world. It could be the 
decade of progress, yes. But, Mr. Chairman, how much progress will there be in Saskatchewan with this 
type of a bill, this type of power? Where is business going to go? Where is private enterprise going to 
go? I know where they are going to go, Mr. Chairman, and so do the members opposite. They are going 
to go right past Saskatchewan — welcome to Alberta — that’s where they’re going to go. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, it’s quite evident, the effect that Bill No. 13 will have on 
Saskatchewan. Why the government, when they have a bill before the Chamber, (this Bill No. 13 and 
knowing the powers they’re asking for) would start to scramble the telecable signal in Saskatoon . . . I 
mean, talk about dumb politics. It’s real dumb politics if you’re trying to work it through. So, Mr. 
Chairman, I don’t think the members opposite realize the implications of Bill No. 13. Because, Mr. 
Chairman, the scrambling of Saskatoon Telecable just shows what this government will do if Bill No. 13 
is put into force in its original content. 
 
I want to right now thank the Minister of Telephones for listening to some of our ideas. He'’ brought in 
some House amendments. He brought in another amendment today and the amendment I have there is 
just an addition to that. I don’t think there’s much wrong with it, Mr. Minister. I think it gives the people 
of Saskatchewan a little more protection. It gives them their chance to still retain their rights. Mr. 
Chairman, I think my colleague for Thunder Creek brought out a very, very valid point this afternoon. 
Everyone in Saskatchewan should have the right to telephone service. They should have the right. But 
the way it goes right now, those rights of the people of Saskatchewan are being eroded by this 
government, and Mr. Chairman, I say that is very wrong. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have additional amendments to bring in to Bill No. 13, but in all fairness to the 
minister I will thank him for giving me the opportunity over the noon hour to look at his amendment, as 
I gave you the opportunity over the supper hour to take a 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3774 

look at our amendment. 
 
Now, I would like . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the Attorney General saying, we can deal with 
yours right now. You’ve been in the debate four times this afternoon. If you are hurting that badly, you 
can get back into it afterwards. 
 
You know, there is another thing which amazes me with Bill No. 13 and the minister in charge of Sask 
Tel. I’m seeing this tired government over there and I’m seeing ministers who can’t even carry their own 
weight. They need the Attorney General to bail them out. It’s getting to be a weak, tired government 
which is run down. They’ve run out of ideas, Mr. Chairman, I can’t believe that the members opposite 
can completely agree, in whole, with Bill No. 13 the way it is. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We had a caucus on it. 
 
MR. GARNER: — They say they had a caucus on it. Mr. Chairman, last year Sask Tel turned a profit 
of $25 million, and still increased the rates to the people of Saskatchewan. To me, Mr. Chairman, a 
Crown corporation is set up to provide service at the most reasonable cost to the people of 
Saskatchewan. A $7 million increase . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . don’t tell me what to do. I’m 
getting sick of you trying to tell me what to do. I don’t listen to you; I never have and I never will. Mr. 
Chairman, how much more does this government want to tax the people of Saskatchewan? Just how 
much more? They want to keep adding additional taxing, additional powers; so what is the end result? It 
will not be known as the province of Saskatchewan, but the state of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, maybe the minister of Sask Tel would like to answer a few questions on that. First of all, 
I would like to know, Mr. Minister, who is funding the teledon system? 
 
MR. CODY: — The federal government. 
 
MR. GARNER: — O.K., Mr. Minister, who else is in on the funding of the fibre optics program? 
 
MR. CODY: — Sask Tel only. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, it has been brought to my attention that SED Systems of Saskatoon is 
developing a special panel for Sask Tel to fit on the back of television sets. Is that correct? Could you 
bring me up to date on what you’re doing with that? 
 
MR. CODY: — There is nothing being developed of that nature that I am aware of. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Is any other company developing, or have you requested any other company to 
develop any systems or equipment for Sask Tel? 
 
MR. CODY: — Yes, we have. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Who are they, and what are they developing for Sask Tel? 
 
MR. CODY: — SED Systems is doing some work with regard to reducing the line load on multiparty 
lines. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Are they the only ones, Mr. Minister? 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3775 

MR. CODY: — To my knowledge, yes. 
 
MR. GARNER: — What is the cost for that? 
 
MR. CODY: — We are not quite certain because the program that they are in at this point in time has 
not been completed. It will be in the area of $500,000 to $600,000 likely. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, I had asked you the other day about acoustic couplers re the 
connection to the terminal. You said you would be giving me that information. I believe that was 
yesterday. Do you have the information for me right now? The acoustic coupler costs, comparing 
renting and comparing buying from Sask Tel and from private enterprise . . . 
 
MR. CODY: — We don’t provide acoustic couplers. I told the hon. gentleman for Indian 
Head-Wolseley that this afternoon. If you had been listening you would have heard it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. It now being 5 o’clock I leave the Chair until 7 o’clock this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


