






















































Hansard: April 24, 1980


2203 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
April 24, 1980. 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
GOVERNMENT SERVICES 

VOTE 13 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Thank you. That’s the first time in this Assembly I’ve been 
called a minister. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, I received your photocopy of the office space which was dropped. Do you have a copy of 
the office space which was added or all space which was added? I wonder if I could have a look at that. 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — I guess we can provide that to you in a moment. My 
understanding was that it was Regina you are interested in particularly. This indicates the new building 
space which was acquired or occupied in 1979-1980. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — It is, as I tried to indicate a little earlier . . . When you replied to my question the 
other day you were referring to what your department, pretty well, as handling when you said there was 
a drop in inventory. I’m going to assume you would agree when I say that, in fact, total government 
space in the city has increased somewhat if you add those buildings you’re not involved with. I notice 
you don’t have, for example, on here the T.C. Douglas Building, was it the year before that it came on 
stream? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Right. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That was the previous year. Did that increase your inventory considerably that 
year, and then subsequently it came down because of these new buildings which came on stream then? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think it would be accurate to say that it probably increased the inventory of space 
for that particular year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Those buildings like the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) came on 
stream actually last year, but that wouldn’t be part of yours. Any other Crown corporation that has added 
. . . 
 
MR. SNYDER: — That wouldn’t be part of our space inventory, except for that space we might lease 
from the Crown corporations, from the SGI. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — But DGS (Department of Government Services) is not handling any space in the 
new SGI building. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The C.M. Fines Building is on that list and you’ll find there is space leased for the 
highway traffic board in the C.M. Fines Building. We’re attempting to tie in together the highway traffic 
board with the SGI operation. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I apologize. I was thinking of the SGI building and forgetting it was called the 
C.M. Fines Building. How many floors does that 1,553 square metres take? 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2204 

MR. SNYDER: — A little bit in excess of two floors. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, I almost forgot about a whole new set of buildings 
which are going up in Saskatoon and over the supper hour for some reason I remembered them (reasons 
I won’t give you). There’s a jail built near Saskatoon. I understand your department is building that one 
and the one at Prince Albert. Do they show in the space in this document I have, or will they show in the 
space document I have? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Construction will not show except in our inventory under construction. They will 
show after they are completed an don stream and they’ll become part of our space inventory. Do you 
have a niche or a corner picked out for yourself, Ralph? 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Well, Mr. Minister, I remember there was a little concern (and I say this 
maybe with a little tongue in cheek) last year when they first were thinking of building it. The location 
was right in the wind’s stack area of the chemical plants and they were removing discharge . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . There was concern they were in the exact line of the emissions and that 
people in there might be injured. 
 
Then the facts came out that the location is where it is now and not where it was assumed to be. It was 
rather interesting to watch the reactions of individuals that suggested, well, at least this will be one way 
to keep the cost down for the government when the chemicals came over. It was a rather interesting 
situation because it’s not far from home. The people who said that? Some of the people in the area . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. No, Mr. Minister, you make the comment. I think if there was a vote 
tomorrow on the capital punishment . . . It is a very red-neck area on the capital punishment issue. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think the capital punishment issue doesn’t have much to do with the 
government services debate unless we’re talking about building gallows at these jails. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, what’s the estimated cost of the one in P.A. that’s being done 
and the one in Saskatoon? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The current estimate is $12,690,000 for the Saskatoon Correctional and Remand 
Centre. I’ll get you the P.A. one momentarily. And for Prince Albert, $11,760,000 is the current estimate 
and expectation is they will be on target. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — I assume, maybe I’m incorrect, but shouldn’t a portion of that figure show up 
in Vote 14 under Attorney General or under social services or is the majority of that $10 million for 
social services? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Yes, social services. You are going to confuse estimates if you start dealing with 
subvotes. I should draw to your attention that in days gone by when we began estimates, and I refer this 
perhaps to the Chairman also, the practice was during subvote 1 a degree of latitude was used in terms of 
giving the questioner the opportunity to talk about almost everything that wasn’t covered by another 
subvote in the estimates. We have strayed rather badly from that. I don’t know whether by accident or 
by design. If you want immediate answers from the staff people . . . No, no, you don’t know what I am 
talking about so don’t wave me off until you know what I’m talking 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2205 

about. The only point I’m making is if you want immediate answers from staff, then following the 
subvotes in the estimates book is the easiest way of doing it. They’re all designed in such a way as to go 
from subvote 1 right through to the end of the estimate. Of course that makes it much easier for officials 
to keep track of the questions being asked instead of being all over the waterfront as we ultimately are. I 
think we’ve dealt with questions from every subvote at this stage and obviously it’s a good deal easier to 
do it. I don’t know whether the Chairman has any remarks to add in this connection but it is a practice 
we have fallen into. I’m not sure it is a good one, but as long as it expedites estimates I suppose that’s 
the way to do it. From the standpoint of getting quick and efficient answers to questions which are 
directed, it is a lot easier for departmental officials in the event that you go from subvote 1 — 
administration — and through the piece. This makes it a good deal easier for our people, but I leave it 
with you and with the Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I don’t know if the minister is raising a point of order or not. Did you want to do 
that? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Not really. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I can kind of raise one myself. I think the general practice has been to ask 
more or less general questions under item 1 — make speeches, statements, generally beat up on a 
department, or that type of debate on item 1. The more detailed questions generally have taken place. I 
think, under the items as they come up, and that strikes me as probably being the best way to operate. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, just to address your last comments. We normally establish, 
when we’re not sure where something is, by asking the question now so that we can make sure we ask 
the questions under the right vote. 
 
Now I realize, Mr. Minister, that we have changed a little, mainly because we have tried to follow the 
total of your book rather than doing the buildings individually, and this may have caused us some 
problems. If it has caused your people any problems, I will apologize for that. It seemed to be the easiest 
way to go when we are covering the whole province in total figures. 
 
But, back to the department — furniture and so forth is not basically, from what I understand, a subvote; 
if it is, tell me and I will wait for that area. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — If you want to deal specifically with furniture, you will find it under our capital 
subvote dealing with furniture; the government services subvote, capital, is where you will find it. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — That’s fine. I can wait for that. I’m glad that yesterday you picked up on what 
I was about to suggest to you (you indicated over the past years you had been looking at it and you were 
looking at it again to see if there was a way to put it into action), and that was the showing of your costs 
for what you absorb in your budget for other government departments. I personally don’t mind seeing it 
as an in-and-out figure, if it must be. But the thing is, so that we could all work on a true cost we used 
the dental program yesterday, if you remember correctly, to show my concern. I understand your 
comments, and I accept them, and I’m glad to see you are hopefully, going to improvise something 
which will work in due course. 
 
On that note, I have no more questions on item 1, but if I happen to make a mistake and 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2206 

wish to retract, I hope you will allow me that privilege. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, if you would like to read the number and just the total, that 
would be sufficient. The training branch — the expenditures are up. I would assume that is just the 
normal salary increase and so forth? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — That is basically in negotiated and incremental increases. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — I will use this department, Mr. Minister, rather than ask about it for all the 
departments. We will do a little more study here. Increments — how many people in the year under 
review would be getting an increment? This shows 12 people. I am looking for a percentage. Is it 3 per 
cent or 4 per cent? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — That is a shade awkward because unless a person has worked his way through the 
system and has arrived at the top of the range, he will receive an annual increment. It is a six-step range, 
and unless the person has arrived at the top of the range, he will receive that incremental increase each 
year, I guess, on his anniversary date. I can’t tell you and I’m not sure that the departmental people have 
at their fingers the exact number of people who are at the top of the range. Of course, in the event of 
reclassification, they will find themselves in another range and will receive an annual incremental 
increase. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, that is what I was getting at exactly. Every year we get up and 
we ask about the difference, if it is just the annual salary increase, or increments in reclassification. I 
said we were going to use this one for an example, rather than do it in all the rest. What I am trying to 
establish is that if you have a lot of long-term staff, they are at the maximum and now they are just 
getting their yearly, newly negotiated rate. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don’t know what percentage but the bulk of our employees have not arrived at the 
top of the range. They are not employees with the kind of length of service which would put them at the 
top of the range. So the great bulk of them would not be at the final step. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Would it be through your whole department about that type of percentage? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Your bulk is in there. I am not hearing you. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Would that 3 per cent or 4 per cent which you indicate to be at the top and the 
rest not, be about normal in your department? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Of that number 12, my people tell me probably there are 2 who are at the top of the 
range and the other 10 would not be. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — The reason I asked that, Mr. Chairman, is because it was a nice, easy number 
to work with. It is $30,000 and 12 employees. I have the feeling you are going to need a supplementary 
or you haven’t put in the total amount of money you are going to need to give them both the increment 
and the percentage raise. I think the figure may be low. That is why I am asking — the percentage on 
increments. 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2207 

MR. SNYDER: — Well, provided for in our estimates generally was a figure of 8.5 per cent. Assuming 
the salary adjustments generally would be 8.5 per cent. That was added into the overall budget with 
respect to permanent positions and other permanent services. In addition, you have to take into account 
there is a vacancy rate that ranges somewhere between 6 per cent and 10 per cent which covers off in 
large measure for some of the additional increases accorded to staff as a result of their incremental 
increases and salary adjustments as a result of the collective agreement. So between the provided for 8.5 
per cent increase and the vacancy rate of somewhere between 6 per cent and 10 per cent, that covers off 
the basic dollar needs for staff. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Well, it doesn’t quite work out. But what you’re saying now is 6 per cent 
there, 8.5 per cent, increments are usually around 5 per cent, some are higher, some are lower, the 
difference. So 5 per cent and 8 per cent is 13 per cent and 6 per cent is 19 per cent. You need almost 20 
per cent, is what you’re saying, to fluctuate, but I don’t think that’s what you mean. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don’t think the hon. member understood what I was saying. I said essentially that 
we have provided in the estimates for a general increase of some 8.5 per cent. Additionally, there is a 
vacancy rate within the department, unfilled positions, that ranges somewhere around another 8 per cent 
(between 6 per cent and 10 per cent), of jobs that have been vacated and bulletined and have not yet 
been filled. Sometimes it’s a considerable period of time before they’re filled because the appropriate 
person can’t be found for the position and accordingly that takes care of the dollar needs to take care of 
increased costs for staff. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Just to make sure I have it now. You budget for the full 12 positions and the 
full costing. Then because you have 6 per cent of the total of your department vacancy, you pick up a 
little there and that’s how it works out. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — No. I don’t think I’m saying exactly that. I’m talking about within the entire 
department not just in personnel and training. We’re using it as a specific example. But any vacancies 
which may occur in property and planning or operations administration or wherever — any vacant 
positions where moneys are not spent — that can be used in any portion or any subvote of the 
department. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — In other words, if the vacancy falls anywhere in Vote 13, then you can mix 
and match and that’s how it works out. I understand. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Right. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — The $40,000 figure which was other personal services is now gone from your 
budget. What would the reason be? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The $40,000 was in the budget last year for temporary staff to do a particular job 
which is not a recurring one. I think it was space needs or space inventory 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2208 

and that isn’t included this year. It was a one-short affair and that’s why it’s not included in our budget 
this year. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I guessed that was what it was for but is that now . . . Will you 
be able to update it with your present staff and continue to keep it inline with a computer now that 
you’re caught up? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — It’s not intended that it will be done again this fiscal year in any case. I’m given to 
understand that there will be some of the continuing work associated with this program, but we will be 
able to absorb it with the existing complement of staff. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — That was my exact question, if your complement of staff could handle it. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Item 6 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Are you doing any architectural work for buildings which are not your own — 
buildings you own or have a lease for, for example, a Crown corporation as we have the situation in 
Prince Albert, or architectural work for something like your joint project in Weyburn? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Ours basically will be architectural work which is being done to alterations of some 
leased space, a very limited amount of leased space. Basically it’s in-house work for our own buildings, 
but there will be some architectural drawings and design work which will be done by our own people for 
in-house work predominantly, with some exceptions with leased space for minor changes and 
renovations. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — If the minister prefers, and if this question is impossible to answer here, we 
can take it in another spot, but in your architectural engineering branch do you do studies on, for 
example, we talk about the Westinghouse furniture things . . . Do you design the type of things you want 
and then the furniture people take it from there and find somebody to bid? We can handle it on the other 
end if you would like, but is this the type of work they’re doing? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Well, initially, because of the nature of the program, the work with respect to the 
Westinghouse furniture for both Sturdy Stone and the T.C. Douglas Building was done by a consultant; 
but having a great deal of that work behind us and some experience gained over that period of time, we 
expect we will be doing that in-house work from this point onward. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — O.K., if this is the vote then, Mr. Minister, first of all I commend you on the 
system you have, because I think it’s probably going to end up being the cheapest system there is 
because of the total flexibility and the open design you work with. It makes it cheaper to renovate, to fix 
up and to repair or change requirements of an area. So, on the opposition side, we hope you continue to 
look at plans which give you that flexibility. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — We agree with you. We say and we believe that by this process we will be saving 
something in the order of $1 million or $1.25 million a year, which was 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2209 

formerly spent in adjusting to different space needs in different departments and by having to move 
partitions here and there when we were routed out of leased space and had to move. This will help us we 
believe to effect a large number of economies which will represent savings of over $1 million a year. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — One final question on this. I assume you will be working on the idea from now 
on of the open space concept, and you will be able to use these things for anything else you are 
designing. Am I correct? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Not every building is going to be designed for that purpose. A large number of our 
buildings — I’m thinking more particularly of buildings which have been in place for some time and do 
not have that wide-open space feature about it. The Westinghouse furniture really doesn’t adapt very 
well to that unless it’s a large, open area. But we believe, wherever applicable, that the Westinghouse 
furniture or that type of moveable partition which can be moved by a couple of men in a few hours can 
change the whole complexion, the whole nature of the layout in an office building. We believe that’s 
probably the way we’ll go — wherever the furniture is adaptable. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — No. I’m saying it’s for new structure. I should have made myself clear. I hope 
you would continue the open space. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
Items 7 and 8 agreed. 
 
Item 9 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure why the staff complement is so large. Is there some 
special reason? Is it because your department people are all placed here? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Well in the Regina legislative area district we’re basically in a position where 
virtually all of the buildings we occupy are our own buildings. For example, the T.C. Douglas Building, 
the Legislative Building, the old health and the old administration buildings are all owned by us and 
serviced and staffed by our people. Apart from the fact that this is of course the seat of government and 
that a large concentration of people in this area need to be serviced, basically, it is because of the fact 
that the buildings here are our own buildings. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — I would assume then this would be the fellows who service this area for the 
needs . . . Is the mail service still part of your department or is that revenue? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — You’ll find that area when you get to revenue, supply and services. The mail room 
and those peripheral responsibilities now belong with revenue, supply and services. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the question I am getting to (and it’s always a sore point in 
Saskatoon when they talk about the Wascana area and the Centre of the Arts down here, and 
Saskatoon’s Centennial Auditorium) is what full-time government staff you put into the maintenance of 
the grounds area. I assume from their plot there are none of your people in grounds and you just pay 
whatever the department pays toward the central body. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — You’ll know that the Wascana Centre Authority has the responsibility 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2210 

for maintenance, upkeep and the other arrangements. If you refer to item 16 (if we can make a little 
move which is probably appropriate at this time), you will see that the ground maintenance of Wascana 
Centre Authority has $1.4 million in our budget for that purpose, and another statutory grant to the 
Wascana Centre Authority of $863,100. That’s basically what you’re looking for I believe. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Yes. I was just making sure there were no funds coming from this area. It was 
all in these later two supplements. 
 
One other question if I may. Do you have any idea (I assume you will have to furnish the answer later) 
of the regular costs of the repairs that go on in this building? They must be atrociously high because of 
the continual changes. For example, if you remember in the last year or two you demolished, or gutted I 
guess would be a better word, the west wing, the south portion right to the bare walls and bare floors and 
did it over. Those costs must be high. Do you find that over 20 years or so they amortize out or do you 
do like the city of Saskatoon and not charge for the man hours, just the material? Which formula do you 
use? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Well, I think the hon. member will remember that a motion for return was provided. 
I think our people are in the process of assembling information that can be given to you by that process. 
Obviously if you’re saying it’s an expensive process to refurbish a building of this kind, of course it is 
an expensive process. 
 
Refurbishing of this Chamber was an expensive process but this was a building that was built and 
completed, I believe, in 1912 at a cost of $3 million. It would probably cost something in the order of 
$37 million or $40 million to replace. If we were talking in terms of today’s values. Obviously, window 
replacement and a number of other things that have been done, stripping to the walls and finally 
insulating a building that was never properly insulated when it was built in 1912, represents a fair cost. 
There is no question about that. I think the details will be provided for you when your motion for return 
has been answered. I believe it has already been ordered. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — I don’t want the floor by floor and office by office as the question on the order 
paper asks. What I’m trying to figure out is if you have a ball park figure. Every year, to do the 
renovations as you slowly move around the building, is it a half million dollars or something like that? 
And the second part of my question was, is your labor for these employees who do the work charged to 
the project? Or is it as the city of Saskatoon, my former employer, used to do, just charged to wages no 
matter what they are doing? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The internal refurbishing, for example, of the Legislative Chamber was done 
largely, except for some contract work, by the public works advance account. The total cost of course 
involves the cost of labor supplied by the public works advance account. Obviously the entire cost of 
refurbishing, which included a host of things including this new public address system or sound 
reinforcing system, comes into the total cost of the package. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, just to make sure I understand you, the cost of the labor of the 
individuals is charged to the account and is charged against any operation they are doing? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The figures that finally emerge and that you will receive when the motion for return 
is replied to will include the labor charge which the public works 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2211 

advance account laced inhere along with the other charges for the electrical and other work. Incidentally, 
laying the conduit in the event we are inclined to put television in the Chamber will even be included in 
this scheme of things. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I understand from the member for Wilkie’s benefit that a lot of 
that cable is already in for television if it is necessary — the conduit and so forth. So the cable can be 
pulled. What I was looking for, and I think the minister has given me the answer, is in the advance 
account you have some employees who don’t show up on the list of employees here because they’re 
charged to the advance account. That’s why you have X amount of employees there. That’s the group of 
the plasterer, the painter, the rug layer and so forth. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Yes, they don’t show because it is an advance account which is, I guess, done 
different ways in different jurisdictions. In some other parts of the country they use something in the 
order of a Crown corporation, which is, I suppose, something remotely close to the advance account for 
this particular purpose. So these do not show in terms of our staff complement. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Could you tell me what vote I should ask for the amount of bodies and so forth 
under the advance account? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — There is no vote. That doesn’t come before the House. It’s not shown on this 
subvote because it is an advance account. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — So then I guess I should just ask how many employees are handled under the 
advance account. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I’m told the staff there varies depending on the workload, depending on the 
specialized projects being undertaken. Usually the permanent component there is about 80. It will be as 
high as 112, depending in a very large measure on the kind of work that’s being undertaken by the 
advance account. They have, in the advance account, a large number of people who are specialized in 
certain fields, artisans who do some pretty remarkable cabinet work and things of that nature, 
refurbishing the Chamber. Some very skillful people do the kind of work you see done here with a good 
deal of success and a good deal of acclaim. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Is the Apollo warehouse in this area or was it in Regina east or west? I mean 
Gemini, Gemini warehouse, is it in this vote? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — You can back up to the last page. It’s in the Regina east district. That’s where you 
find the Gemini warehouse, a storehouse of all sorts of materials for different agencies and departments. 
The Gemini warehouse is a leased space we use for storage for a host of things. That will be subvote 7 
really, which we have passed. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, is there any thought to a storage area of the Gemini type within 
the government’s own property rather than leasing? I think of all the things from the archives and things 
like that which are stored. Maybe some of your older buildings which you aren’t using for staff would 
be handier than that particular warehouse, even though I realize you need railroad and big truck space 
for certain things. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — We’re finding that we’ll always have a balance between leased space and owned 
space. For this particular purpose that Gemini warehouse has been found 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2212 

to be particularly well adapted for our purposes; and the price is right. Accordingly, the department 
doesn’t have any intentions at this precise moment of building. I think if we were to make out our list of 
capital projects which we believed were necessary, on a scale of 1 to 10, it would probably find itself off 
the end of the Richter scale because I don’t think that’s regarded as a particular or a special need area for 
us. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
Item 10 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — When you move into the new office tower in Weyburn, will that release rented 
space or owned space? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — It will involve both. We will be leaving some space currently owned and occupied 
and there will be some lease space. Do you want detail on it? It’s mostly owned space I am told but there 
will be some lease space we will be vacating also. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — What will happen to this owned space? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — We have two particular locales, one of them out at the old Saskatchewan hospital. 
The office space has been determined to be pretty antique and not really adaptable in terms of current 
use for office space. There is a suggestion that there may be some need found for it with respect to 
training programs for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. That’s one of the things being explored at 
this point in time. 
 
The other building which you may know of on Railway Avenue currently houses a number of agencies 
and departments including, I believe, health, social services and the Department of Labour. The 
understanding is that building will be demolished. It’s an ancient building and probably has outlived its 
usefulness in terms of electrical, mechanical and other features. I am told it will disappear from the 
landscape within 90 days. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the new building is a joint project. Who is the joint partner with 
you? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Oxford developers are the partner, if you can refer to them as a partner. They were 
the developer which was involved in the project from the beginning. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — I understand during a bill we discussed earlier that in the Weyburn situation 
you bought out some people. Somewhere along the line I picked up a statement (I’m not sure exactly 
where it came from) that most of the people you bought out remained within the community and 
reinvested in the community, so the dollars all stayed in Weyburn. Nobody pulled and ran. Am I correct 
in this piece of information? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Yes, that’s right. We are more than delighted and I think the hon. member for 
Weyburn will echo this. Every one of the businesses that was disturbed in any way has rebuilt and 
reinvested; not one of them went out of business or went elsewhere; 140 some new jobs appeared in the 
entire process. In general terms we think it has been a rather remarkable success. And not only that, it 
has had the effect of having businesses in the immediate area spruce up their operation. It has had the 
effect of rejuvenating the whole downtown core which has been a real advantage to the Weyburn 
downtown business area. 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2213 

MR. R. KATZMAN: — Just before you have a problem with breaking your arm patting your back, I 
think we should also say the same thing happened when a private developer did the whole thing in 
Saskatoon when they built the centre down there; it rejuvenated all the businesses around the area and 
created new employment. The CNR didn’t take their money and run. They stayed within the area as 
well. So it happens on both sides. Go ahead, Paul. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’d just like to pursue the line of questioning on that Weyburn downtown 
development. You said the Oxford group is from Edmonton. Is that correct or is that Toronto? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — No, they are headquartered in Toronto I understand. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What interest does the government have in that development; what interest does 
Oxford have? Start with that question. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I provided all of that. It’s all on the record from yesterday. I gave an indication of 
the cost analysis and the fact the Government of Saskatchewan had begun the whole operation by land 
assembly in the order of $4.6 million. It’s all on record. If you want me to repeat it I can, but you can 
read it in the Hansard. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Perhaps just one final question. What attempts had been made to negotiate with 
the Saskatchewan firm at that time? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I would have to remind the member this was something in the order of three years 
ago. The Department of Government Services did not have a direct involvement in terms of that sort of 
negotiation because of the direct involvement of the Department of Municipal Affairs. I understand 
Department of Finance and municipal affairs had direct involvement in making the arrangements and the 
consultation that took place prior to choosing the Oxford group. I understand there was an offer 
submitted by a number, but pretty limited involvement by Saskatchewan developers I am told. So the 
Department of Government Services did not have a direct involvement with respect to the developer that 
was engaged. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You say a number of proposals had been submitted. I really would like to know 
if any proposals had been submitted by a Saskatchewan firm or if they had been asked to submit a 
proposal on it. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Our understanding is that at that time, some three years ago, there were no 
Saskatchewan developers which submitted a proposal. I wouldn’t want to stake my life on it, but that’s 
the recollection of our people. The suggestion was there was limited interest from Saskatchewan. I think 
there has been a good deal of expertise acquired by Saskatchewan developers over the last 24 to 36 
months, but that I understand was not that evident three years ago. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That isn’t saying very much for the developers and the contractors we have had 
in this province for many, many years. I am sure the developers in this province will certainly take 
objection to the statement you have just made, Mr. Minister. I think the government, (and I’m looking at 
the minister over there who has a grin on his face) should start taking a darn good look at the 
Saskatchewan developers and keep that business at home. I don’t know why it is this government seems 
to favor out-of-province developers for these very lucrative projects that are coming on stream in this 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2214 

province. We have the case of the Regina Cornwall Centre; we have the Weyburn one. I believe the 
Swift Current one (I stand to be corrected on that), I believe the one in Prince Albert, and I don’t know 
how many more. Isn’t it about time you started negotiating, and not necessarily waiting for local 
developers to approach you, but for you to approach them? What is it the developers in this province 
have? Is it bad breath, or odor, or what? 
 
I know they are capable. There are firms large enough in this province to handle this work. They have 
the expertise. I don’t agree with the minister when he says they’ve developed that expertise in the last 24 
months. They’ve had that expertise for many years. I say this to you and I say this to the ministers across 
in this government. Unless you start taking a look at spending that money which you are so easily 
spending in this province and start spending it at home, two of the people of this province . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The Minister of Urban Affairs has a twisted sense of humor. 
 
I’ve asked this government on numerous occasions now to ask for proposals from local developers, to 
give advantage and recognition to them, and I get jokes from the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. 
Minister, I think it’s high time we recognize the abilities and the capabilities of local developers, and 
started handing some of the lucrative contracts to them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don’t believe, Mr. Chairman that the member for Regina South is saying anything 
we on this side of the House don’t concur with fully. In the event that Saskatchewan developers are able 
to provide a product for us which will fill the needs of Saskatchewan and will do it at a cost which is 
competitive, then we’re certainly more than anxious with respect to a sort of buy-Saskatchewan policy. 
Certainly, I don’t believe there’s anyone on this side of the House who’ll disagree with that sentiment. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, just one more comment on that. The minister mentions buy Saskatchewan 
products. This could become a bit of a joke in itself; look at not only these lucrative contracts you’ve 
handed out, but also all the advertising. Look at your own buildings, which you were responsible for. 
Take, for example, the Tommy Douglas Building. You went to Toronto for that work and that was your 
department — for the signs. Internal and external signs for that building. I understand, were done by a 
Toronto firm as was the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) sign for change of the logo. 
 
One more comment on that, Mr. Minister. You said a minute ago you’d be happy to go to local 
developers if they could handle it. Well, I don’t know of a project in this province which couldn’t have 
been handled by a Saskatchewan developer. You name me one which couldn’t have been. I don’t think 
you’d be wise in starting to name any developers in this province which couldn’t handle that. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think we have to respond to the hon. member and suggest he direct his questions to 
someone who had some direct responsibility for it. Obviously, not having had the responsibility for 
making the arrangements with the developer, we have no intimate knowledge of the terms and 
conditions. I indicated to you earlier, this was not a decision made by the Department of Government 
Services but was made, I think probably for excellent reasons, by both municipal affairs and the 
Department of Finance at that time. I’m sure there was a good, sound and logical reason for the 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2215 

decision they made. 
 
With respect to the signage, you were saying (I am not sure of the actual connotation) something about 
the signage at the T.C. Douglas Building, that we were supposed to have gone elsewhere for. Our people 
have no knowledge at all of what it is you are talking about because any signage done with respect to the 
T.C. Douglas Building was not contracted for out-of-province. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would you mind telling me who did it? The information I received was that it 
was done. I had it in fact in my file somewhere. I had the name of the contractor from Toronto who did 
it. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — August 3, 1979, contract no. 38, fabrication of interior signage and directories, T.C. 
Douglas Building, Regina, ABC Engraving and Regina Visual Display (both Regina-based firms). 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What was the cost of that contract? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — $47,554. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K., who did the designing? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Gordon Arnott was directly involved. He may conceivably have had some 
consultants advising him, but Gordon Arnott was the architect who was directly responsible and ABC 
Engraving and Regina Visual Display. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — As I said, I stand to be corrected, but I will check my files and come back with 
the name of the firm given to me that actually manufactured those signs. Obviously, I was given wrong 
information. I will check it out. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — We can’t give assurances the persons with whom we contract do not do some 
subcontracting on their own. It is very possible that Gordon Arnott and associates contracted with 
someone else for some of the additional work that could conceivably have been done out of the 
province. But we have no way of knowing that. We contract to them. They make whatever arrangements 
are adequate for their purposes. 
 
Item 10 agreed. 
 
Items 11 and 12 agreed. 
 
Item 13 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — There are 42 employees; there were 25. Explanation? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — McIntosh Mall. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — O.K., now this is McIntosh Mall. They are not as they are in the other 
accounts. They are not like the other 80 or 90 people in the advance account. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — These are basically caretaker and maintenance people who are and will be employed 
during this fiscal in the McIntosh Mall. That will replace, of course, the people who were doing this sort 
of work in leased quarters in other parts of Prince 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2216 

Albert. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, this is strictly the maintenance staff in this building and around 
this area. Is this what you are informing me? 
 
Item 13 agreed. 
 
Item 14 agreed. 
 
Item 15 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — In Swift Current, with I believe it is called the Wood Building or something, 
there were problems, I understand, with the footings and so forth. I assume by now that problem has 
been resolved and the costs have been doled out to those responsible. What are they? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think the answer for that has been provided in an order for return. Yes, that has 
long since been solved and more appropriate pilings were put in place. That’s something like a 24 month 
old problem that has been solved and the building is finished and officially opened. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — At the time you told us there was no cost back to you and that’s why I was just 
asking again. To this date you haven’t been asked for any more costs? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — No, that’s not entirely true. There was some cost to the government, but the part 
charged to the government was the incremental difference between putting in the new piles and the cost 
of the original piles had the appropriate piles been put in place in the first place. That is the cost that was 
absorbed by the Department of Government Services. The additional cost such as blasting off the caps 
and that sort of thing was not charged. I believe it was Western Caissons that were held responsible for 
what was believed to be an error in judgment on their part. Accordingly they absorbed the additional 
costs, except those costs that would have been incurred had the appropriate piles been put in place in the 
first place. 
 
Item 15 agreed. 
 
Item 16 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Now 16 and 17 are what? They are both to the same party. One, I guess, is 
strictly grounds and the other is buildings or what? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The $1.4 million represents the normal operating maintenance and the $863,100 
represents development, which will be new washrooms, new landscaping and new turf, things of that 
nature. Things of that nature will be absorbed in the $863,000; the $1.4 million is normal maintenance. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Where does the landscaping for the T.C. Douglas Building show up? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — You’ll find that under capital when you turn the page. It’s under capital expenditure. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Which vote? Give me a vote. Just a minute while I find it under capital so I’ll 
know where to ask about it. 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2217 

MR. SNYDER: — Item 4 will be where you’ll find it, in that $4,739,400. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — There are no charges other than the grounds caretaking and the additional 
improvements you referred to in your statement, am I correct? There are no funds here for say, the 
Centre of the Arts, around that building? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — My understanding is that we do share in the cost of the landscaping work on a pro 
rata basis. You’ll know of the tripartite arrangement with the university, the province of Saskatchewan 
and the city of Regina. If you’re talking about the maintenance in that sort of operation, such as the 
Centre of the Arts, that’s largely the responsibility of culture and youth. You’ll have an opportunity to 
get them directly. I don’t know if they follow us tonight or not. 
 
Item 16 agreed. 
 
Items 17 and 18 agreed. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, earlier you made a comment, when you were speaking to the 
member for Regina South, about effective savings by using your department to do certain things for 
other areas because you had the expertise. Your department used to be the purchasing agent, if I 
remember correctly, and is not now any more. While that’s the case, I wish to make a comment. Who 
does the purchasing of all the furniture and so forth in this building, and are you charged for it in this 
particular vote? Do you purchase it or is it purchased and then billed to you? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I made a mistake here. This last vote isn’t designed to elicit any 
questions. What item did you wish to discuss that under? 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — It’s O.K. I can do it under Capital Expenditure. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would that be O.K. then? I was out of order in allowing that. 
 
Government Services Vote 13 agreed. 
 

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 
VOTE 14 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — What are you going to construct or build for the Department of Agriculture? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This particular expenditure for agriculture represents space to be occupied in the 
southwest wing of what is popularly known as the Administration Building, the building directly south 
of the Legislative Building in this legislative area complex. This $552,500 represents the cost of 
providing that space for agriculture. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — The building is on the grounds. It’s a government services’ building. You’re 
going to charge it out to them? Try it one more time. Are you doing something special for them in that 
building, which they’re paying for? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — It’s just a simple matter of identifying this because this space is to be occupied by 
the Department of Agriculture on completion. It will not be charged to them. It’s a capital outlay and 
merely identified here for practical purposes to indicate 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2218 

that this is money spent for space that will be provided to the Department of Agriculture in the 
Administration Building. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Why the extra $1 million? He’s not worth it. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This represents court renovations in North Battleford, and the court house in Regina. 
The cash flow this year represents something in the order of $380,008 and $375,004 (for the court house 
in Regina) for a total of $756,000. And the total of Attorney General if $2,194,900. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Excuse me, Mr. Minister, what is the rationale behind spending 
over $2 million for the Attorney General when in your own words the Attorney General is closing and 
has made the decision to close several court houses in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — There have been a number of projects approved with respect to court house 
updating, refurbishing, and construction. Among the new projects approved were the court house 
addition in Saskatoon at a total cost of $4,000,000, with a cash flow of $194,008 this year; court house 
relocation and renovation in Prince Albert, another $750,000, with cash flow of $45,000; and court 
house addition and property purchase and construction in Regina. There will be a total figure there in 
excess of $6 million. Something in the order of $1 million is basically for land purchase during this 
fiscal year. This makes a total cash flow this year of $2,194,000. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Minister, you undoubtedly heard earlier the member for Indian Head-
Wolseley talking about the heritage of the buildings, the court houses being closed down in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Is there not some means by which some kind of a trade off can be developed by which 
those so-called historical buildings can be exchanged to create a situation in which this kind of 
expenditure for new court house facilities is not possible? 
 
What we’re hearing is that court houses are closing in Saskatchewan and the government is spending $2 
million for new facilities. Doesn’t that seem to you to be a little bit ridiculous? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think the hon. member has to have cognizance of the fact that there has been no 
announcement made at this time to close Moosomin, Arcola, or wherever it is you’re talking about. I 
don’t know. That question would be more properly addressed to the Attorney General. I don’t know 
what the ultimate plans are. 
 
I think that what you should do, if you believe that the changes, additions and renovations to the court 
houses are unnecessary, is talk to some of the judiciary. Perhaps you do. In any case it would be a good 
idea because they don’t agree with you that in any way the services provided in the Saskatchewan court 
houses are adequate for a whole bunch of reasons that I needn’t go into. But you should have a chat with 
some of the judiciary because they wouldn’t agree that it was improper or unwise for us to make some 
investment in the judicial system, which I think in many instances is archaic and in need of updating in a 
very major way. 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2219 

MR. COLLVER: — As the minister is aware, I have had many discussions with the Saskatchewan 
judiciary of one kind or another and I’m certain the minister will understand that’s not the information I 
have been given. It is not the facilities that are outdated. It is the administration that is outdated, but 
that’s a matter I have to take up with the Attorney General and not with you. 
 
I would think that the minister responsible for government services, who has available to him this 
amazing array of talent he has boasted about this evening, and for which they are spending huge sums of 
money, could possibly make up some kinds of trade-gifts when he knows there are going to be closures 
of some kind in the Attorney General’s office. Surely that’s right. We know there are going to be 
closures of some kind. The Attorney General has announced that in this House. Doesn’t it indicate a lack 
of planning in your department not to have some kind of idea how you can trade off the closing of court 
houses against the expenditures of (in the minds of most people in Saskatchewan, $2 million is a huge 
sum of money) huge sums of money for new facilities? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think the member has to recognize the fact that the court houses in our province are 
not portable court houses. And that represents a few problems for us. But I think you have to take into 
account as I mentioned to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley that we have given a good deal of 
thought and have expressed a good deal of concern with respect to heritage buildings. The Minister of 
Culture and Youth will be introducing or has already perhaps introduced legislation with respect to 
heritage buildings. A good deal of emphasis is going to be placed upon the whole question of 
refurbishing and retaining historical sites in the province of Saskatchewan. I think we are prepared to do 
our part, along with the Department of Culture and Youth in order to make sure heritage buildings do 
not fall by the wayside unnecessarily but are not necessarily retained just because they are old. 
 
I think we have done a good job. I think the Land Titles Building in particular, where SaskSport is 
housed, is a rather remarkable example of taking a beautiful building and maintaining it for a very useful 
purpose. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I couldn’t agree with you more and I commend the department for the excellence 
of its work on the Land Titles Building in Regina. However, if a little more planning were put into the 
situation today, perhaps we wouldn’t be back her next year talking about $2 million net expenditure on 
the Attorney General’s department. You might be saying to us, we have been able to take some of these 
old court houses and convert them into government offices in these various centres. We have been able 
to take some of these old court houses and convert them, retaining their historical significance, into 
liquor outlets in these various centres. We have been able to take these various outlets and convert them 
into educational facilities in these various centres. And, in that way, exchange an expenditure on the one 
side for the expenditure, the huge expenditures we’re seeming on behalf of the Attorney Generals’ 
department. 
 
All I am suggesting to the minister is that perhaps a little foresight might prevent what’s been happening 
in Saskatchewan for the last number of years. And that is, historical and old buildings in small centres 
being shut down and turned into ramshackle shacks, while at the same time new ugly liquor stores and 
government buildings are being constructed in these same towns. And it seems to me to be a tremendous 
waste of money not to plan ahead and see that the Attorney General’s closing facilities and that they can 
be exchanged for these new facilities that you’re constructing on his behalf. 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2220 

MR. SNYDER: — I can’t help but agree with a great deal of what the hon. member is saying. And I 
don’t believe his suggestions head us in a different direction from that in which we are pointing 
ourselves. For example, the member for Shaunavon will tell you that we are proposing to do a major 
overhaul of a beautiful old building in Shaunavon, the Shaunavon court house, and in that particular 
community we’ve got something in the order of $198,000 which we propose to spend. That’s the cash 
flow for this year, with a total expenditure of something under $0.5 million for refurbishing what we 
believe to be a beautiful old landmark. This is something we are going to continue to do over a period of 
time. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you indicated this would be the place to ask questions about 
furniture. Furniture in this building about December or January became very hard to get. The 
information passed to me from officials within your department is the department had run out of money 
and had to wait until the new budget came to pay for and purchase additional furniture that was to be 
ordered to arrive in the new year. Is that a correct statement or have I got my facts wrong? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think the question the member asked initially was, do we buy furniture? You made 
some reference to the purchasing agency. The purchasing agency, as the member indicated, is now 
located in revenue and supply. They do our purchasing for us and we do the allocation. 
 
I think you are perfectly right when you say that from time to time we find ourselves in a position where 
we have spent our budget. Accordingly, like every good household manager, when you spend your 
budget you have to wait until payday before you have some more money to spend. That obviously was 
the case and that is not an unusual set of circumstances. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I’ll see if I can keep my two friends here a little quieter and 
we’ll get into it. You suggest you ran out of money. You had to wait for furnishings. But yet I look in 
other estimates and I see we’re going to have to vote for $1.5 million. That will come up later. But what 
I’m concerned about is that we buy furniture, charge it to the next year, and then each year keep running 
out because we have had to buy something this year and pay for it out of next year’s budget. 
 
Now for three months you were out of money, is the situation as I understand it. So anything you 
ordered during those three months, you couldn’t take receipt of until the new fiscal year when the new 
cheque came in, as you said, and then you pay for it. But how often does this continue? And do we end 
up next year having four months when we run out of money? And the next year five months? Or is this 
the first time it has happened? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don’t know what the member is suggesting with respect to ordering furniture this 
year and not paying for it until next year because if that was what the member said, that’s not the 
method of operation. On occasions I suppose if we had an unlimited amount of money, the demands and 
requirements made would be excessive 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2221 

and so we allocate for furniture what we believe to be an appropriate amount. Sometimes demands are 
greater than others. Accordingly there will be times when we have spent our allocation. That is not an 
unusual set of circumstances and we really aren’t making any apologies for it. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, in going through government departments we always seem to 
get a supplementary estimate sheet of overspending. Of course your department is no different; we have 
one for you. It comes down to a very fine point. I think you gave a truthful answer; I appreciate that. 
You said you had to wait until more money came. I use this example because it is an obvious example, 
and amounts to millions of dollars. The land bank for example, last year spent $13 million more than it 
had; this year it has a $25 million budget. Does this mean there is only $12 million left for them to spend 
in the next 12 months? You say good housekeepers quit when the money runs out. I agree with you. 
Land bank is the reverse example. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Whose estimates are you handling tonight anyway? 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — No. What I’m asking is hopefully you aren’t going to be in the same boat they 
are, where they’ve spent the years’ budget . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I hope you’re not asking the minister to explain why the land bank 
spent $13 million more. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — That is my example. I hope he is not in the same type of situation. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Question? 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Yes. You’re guaranteeing me you’re not in the same situation where you are 
spending next year’s money and then you’re short next year again as the land bank has done? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I’m not ready to concede what the land bank has done or hasn’t done. I’m here for 
the purpose of attempting to justify the subvotes we’re dealing with under the Department of 
Government Services. I hope you will bear with me and allow me to talk about my estimates and not 
about land bank. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — I will rephrase the question for the minister’s benefit. Am I to assume that 
because this year you were short and you had to wait as a good housekeeper would (as you said), that 
next year we are not going to see you waiting four months, and the following year five months, because 
you’re spending it faster than it’s coming in and more than was allowed to you by the votes of this 
Assembly? In other words do you believe (as you seem to indicate) you spend what you’ve voted for? 
You don’t go out and spend money that was never voted to you normally and as a procedure each year 
you spend the money before you get it? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think you have to appreciate that times and circumstances will change. Obviously 
you know, if we get a bunch of MLAs for space for opposition members and then need some furniture 
and you’re busy making overtures to the Department of Government Services, it may very well be we 
will make some overexpenditures. It might even be we would go to treasury board to ask for an extra 
appropriation for a particular purpose. We have had occasions during the year to go to treasury board for 
overexpenditures on such things as a co-op store which represented to us (in North Battleford)a 
particularly good buy. You know, under these 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2222 

circumstances I don’t think you need to be, nor should you be constrained by . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Say, can you let me finish? I’ll be just tickled to death to listen to anything you have to say. 
 
In the event there is a particular need, it’s economic and makes ultimately good sense, then I don’t think 
I’m going to put myself in a position where I am going to guarantee you we will never spend another 
penny over and above that which we vote tonight. We’ll come back. We will be obliged to justify 
expenditures that are made. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — My point was that it wasn’t a fiscal policy for this to be happening. As long as 
you seem to be indicating it isn’t the fiscal policy to happen every year, it’s one of those situations 
caused by unforeseen circumstances, fine. I’ll buy that. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Hold it. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. You mentioned I should ask about the grounds 
over here under this vote. The Tommy Douglas Building, I should be asking under here? You can send it 
over if you like. You don’t have to vive it to me now. That is the cost of the landscaping around the 
Tommy Douglas Building. You said it is in this vote, if you could send me the information. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I don’t know if we have it grouped. The cash flow this year or the total cost of the 
project — total cost of the landscaping? 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — The landscaping, total cots, and the cost for this year. Last year, you did the 
grounds work. You levelled it out a bit. This year you’ll plant the grass and so forth. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — We can make that available to you. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Items 6 and 7 agreed. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Is this for jails? The $10 million? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Saskatoon and Prince Albert correctional institutions. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Total cost for both jails when the project is complete is what? $23 million, you 
said? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — In the order of $24 million, that’s a good round figure. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
Government Services — Capital Expenditure — Vote 14 agreed. 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2223 

Government Services 
Supplementary 

Consolidated Fund 
Vote 14 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — The member in front of me says, is this a good housekeeping award of $1 
million? What was the overexpenditure? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This overexpenditure has to do with the correctional institutions, and was because of 
good weather and ability to continue with construction into the winter months. You’ll know that earlier 
in the season we had some particularly mild weather which allowed construction to continue, so this 
construction was advanced and an additional $1.4 million appropriated for that purpose. The two 
correctional centres. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — How much in P.A. and how much in Saskatoon? Do you have any idea? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I’m sorry, I erred, in Saskatoon only. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I assume the $1.5 which was advanced is still within the budget 
of the $23 million. Am I correct? So these aren’t additional funds? They are from the original projected 
total, but are just coming on stream a little faster than you expected? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This won’t in any way affect the total cost of the budget. It’s an expenditure which 
was made earlier than expected because of the advance in the construction work, because the 
construction work and the completion date will arrive sooner than we expected. The correctional centre 
in Saskatoon will be finished in advance of the estimated time it was expected to be finished. But it will 
not add to the anticipated or estimated cost of the building. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Supplementary agreed. 
 

Government Services 
Supplementary 
Heritage Fund 

Vote 14 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — What’s the money for? What’s the project? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The money, which is coming from the heritage fund, will be used for the 
Saskatchewan Research Council lab in Saskatoon and we act as project manager for that particular piece 
of work. You’ll find it on page 123 of your estimate book under government services, construction of a 
resource research facility — Saskatoon. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, do you want to do Vote 8 or do you want to do this — which 
one do you do first? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We’re dealing with the supplementals for last year, 1980, from the heritage 
fund, which is found on page 8 and it’s $1,054,900 for a research facility in Saskatoon. The next one 
will be page 123 that I’ll be dealing with. 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2224 

MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I will have to ask the question sort of double — the $2.2 
million under 14 on page 123 and the $1.5 million, when was that voted for the project? When was it 
voted to build the project in your department? Or is this the first vote and you’ve started early? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This is the one that you are voting this year> This is your vote this year, provincial 
lab $300,000; the construction of resource research facility, Saskatoon $2.2 million; restoration of 
Saskatchewan House $822,000; restoration of Northwest Territorial Government Administration 
Building $7,000, for a total of $3.3 million to be voted this year. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Just so that no one is confused. We aren’t dealing with page 123 of the 
estimates at this time. We are dealing with the supplemental estimate, the last year budget, 1980, 
$1,054,900. It’s on page 8 of the supplementary book. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Normally, we see it in the estimates first as we do on page 123, but we are 
seeing a supplementary vote on. When did ewe first vote for the start of this project. I don’t remember it 
in last year’s budget, so why do we have a supplementary? That’s the problem, Billy. It’s page 8 of the 
supplementary. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I understand this is a project that was given to us midstream. Do you want the 
answer or are we going to sit there and chuckle? Well, it was . . . You sit down dummy. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I’m sitting here . . . Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Take your point of order. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I am on a point of order. I am sitting here with my honourable colleague from 
Indian Head-Wolseley who happened to say something to me that was humorous and I laughed and the 
Minister of Labour called me a dummy. Now then, if you heard that then a retraction is in order. It’s 
unparliamentary . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think we were rolling along pretty well here in estimates and I would 
like to finish these estimates in the spirit in which we started. I do believe that to refer to another hon. 
member as being a dummy is unparliamentary and I would ask the hon. minister to withdraw without 
qualification. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I withdraw, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A question rather than a point of order. It was my understanding that members 
must speak from their chair. Is that true or untrue? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — No. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — You can speak from anywhere? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Thank you very much. I have just one question then for the minister. Mr. 
Chairman, if I may? I wonder if the minister is aware of the implications of his 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2225 

comments on midstream? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I’ll allow myself to be drawn into that one. Tell me. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, I’m glad the minister would have someone tell him what midstream is. But 
the minister will be aware that when a doctor is taking urinalysis for whatever purpose, there is always 
the midstream analysis the doctor takes and I am sure the minister is aware of that. It proves a very 
unfortunate illness if it’s wrong. I think in this particular implication the minister has been talking about, 
the midstream reference is not particularly appropriate. That’s why I believe all the members laughed. I 
don’t think the minister quite got the implication of what he said. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Be that as it may, Mr. Chairman. The point I was attempting to make was that the 
program or the construction of the resource research facility in Saskatoon was given to the Department 
of Government Services midsummer, midseason if you like. Accordingly, we were obliged to go to 
treasury board for approval and received approval from treasury board to use something in the order of 
$1,054,900 for the construction of the research centre. This money is being provided, I understand, from 
the heritage fund. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, first of all, I remember correctly, SEDCO announced this project 
at the university campus. I assume we are talking about the same project. Are you suggesting they 
started something and then dumped it in your lap? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This was announced initially by SEDCO because it’s being constructed in the 
industrial park on SEDCO land. That was the reason as I understand it for the announcement to be made 
by SEDCO. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Well, SEDCO makes all the foofaraw and gets up and takes all the credit. 
Then they dump it in your lap and you have to bail them out. Are you charging SEDCO as you’re not 
allowed to by the rules, but are you at least charging them for the mess they left you? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! Let’s not visit back and forth across the House. Let’s try to get 
these estimates done. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I believe the hon. Member is confusing two buildings in somewhat the same locale. 
There’s the SEDCO centre built by SEDCO. This is the Saskatchewan Research Council building which 
I believe SEDCO did announce. I suppose their reason for announcing it was because there was some 
coordination done. The research council building was contracted and is being built. It was not a mess 
left by anyone. It’s a building being constructed by the Department of Government Services, or the 
operation and management is being done by DGS. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Who’s going in the building? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Is this Dr. Katz and his group of people who have been doing your work? Who 
are they? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This is the Saskatchewan Research Council. Dr. Pepper is the director of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2226 

MR. R. KATZMAN: — What facilities were they in prior? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This is an additional facility over and above that which has been part of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council operation previously. Its involvement will be directly in resource 
development aimed particularly at uranium and potash. That’s the main scope of the new operation and 
the new research council facility. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Who in the end is going to pay for this building, the taxpayers? Or is mineral 
resources going to pay the costs of the research to protect the citizens? Who is going to end up paying 
for this, the taxpayers? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — As we indicated to you, the money for the Saskatchewan Research Council centre is 
being provided out of the heritage fund which, as the member will know, originates from resource 
development, from revenues from oil, potash and other resource revenues. They will retrieve some of 
that expenditure from agencies and industry that make use of the facilities they are providing and the 
experiments and research facilities provided by the research council. 
 
Government Services — Supplementary — Heritage Fund — Vote 14 agreed. 
 

Government Services 
Heritage Fund 

Vote 14 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Is that for Regina? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — This $300,000 will be a vote to provide for the new provincial lab building out by 
the Plains Health Centre. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I understand (and correct me if I am wrong . . . I am not wrong 
very often, I’ll tell you!) You are going to be proven wrong more often than I am with the trouble you 
are causing in Saskatoon with the telecable people. So stay out of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand all laboratories around the province are going to be moving into the one in 
Saskatoon at the san. The people have already been given their notices and told they may have to move 
into the one in Regina (for the benefit of the people behind you). Is this the reason for it? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I can’t give you any assurances with respect to who moves out and who moves in 
and what the arrangements are because it is a program of the Department of Health. You will have to 
direct your questions to them. We do not have any knowledge of that. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 3 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — On that item, Mr. Minister, are you planning any further expenditures on it next 
year, or is this going to be the completion of Saskatchewan 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2227 

House? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The expectation is we may not spend the entire $822,000 but that will not mean the 
full restoration. There will probably be another subvote for Saskatchewan House next year for the 
completion. It is unlikely the restoration will be completed during this fiscal year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Do you have any idea of about how much it is going to cost to completely restore 
it, including the furnishings? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think it will be necessary to do a little digging. If we can provide that information 
to you in written form, we will get that to you within the next few days. Is that agreeable? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you. Yes, it is agreeable. I am curious. I think the people of Regina are 
curious to know how much you are going to be spending on that because it is certainly a historical 
building. What success are you having in locating the furniture for that building? I read an article in the 
newspaper just recently saying it is quite difficult to find and to replace the furniture which was in there 
originally. 
 
My final question on it (I may as well throw them all out at once), is it the intention of the government 
to return it as a Lieutenant-Governor’s residence? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — The question, I think, the member asked first was, what success were we having 
with respect to furniture and refurbishing and gathering up furniture that was in keeping with the era we 
are attempting to duplicate. The bulk of this (with some co-operation coming from the Department of 
Government Services) is basically the responsibility of the Department of Culture and Youth. They have 
people who are operating in that general field. But in addition to that you will notice a plea in the Regina 
Leader-Post, only a few nights ago, asking for people who had period furniture applicable to that 
particular era to be in touch. They would gladly accept donations and, I thin, even be prepared to pay out 
good, hard cash for some antique furniture that would fit into the general environment of Saskatchewan 
House. 
 
With respect to whether the building will ever be used again by the Lieutenant-Governor, I am not at all 
sure that decision has been made. But I haven’t been given any indication that is part of the overall plan. 
At least nobody has given any indication to me that is what is proposed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I just thought of another question on it too. I noticed from the newspaper article 
there was a greenhouse being built onto it. For what purpose is the greenhouse being built? 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2228 

MR. SNYDER: — When the premises occupied by the Lieutenant-Governor of the day were built there 
was a greenhouse attached to it. This was to restore a greenhouse formerly in place. It’s expected the 
greenhouse would still be used for that purpose. It will be used as a greenhouse. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I realize you’ll be growing plants and so on in it. But what I meant was, are the 
plants, flowers and so on going to be grown for the yard around or just for indoors or for what purpose? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I think maybe culture and youth is in a better position to tell you about the 
programming and what is intended. Government services has a more direct mandate for the construction 
of the premises rather than the programs that go into it. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the member mentions the Lieutenant-Governor living there. I 
understand that may become his office. 
 
MR. SNYDER: — I haven’t heard any proposal or suggestion that it’s to be intended to that it’s part of 
the overall plan of the development of Saskatchewan House. I’m not saying that’s not a possibility. I just 
don’t know it to be a fact. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Government Services — Heritage Fund — Vote 14 agreed. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
FINANCE 
VOTE 11 

 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — The member for Thunder Creek isn’t here, 
but I’m sure the member for Regina South would give this to him. He asked me a question last Friday 
about province of Saskatchewan bonds and how they compared to 1979 to Ontario. I have the 
information, and if I can get a page I’ll send it over, and he can pass it on when it’s appropriate. Thank 
you, Mr. Rousseau. 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, we left off Friday at 12:45 p.m. when the 
minister wouldn’t let me back in. He was a little frightened of the member for Arm River. I have been 
gone for a week. I have been out doing a bit of tractor work, and I was trying to remember what you 
said, but since it was such an absolutely nothing speech I couldn’t remember it so I had to go back 
through Hansard to see what you said. As a Minister of Finance of the province of Saskatchewan, I’m 
ashamed of you, absolutely ashamed. I asked you some questions about Saskatchewan. What are you 
going to do about the serious situation here? And you got up and took it right down to Ottawa, and never 
mentioned the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Repeat it, Gary, see if he can answer them tonight. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Answer them, of course he can’t answer them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
will, don’t worry. I’m not talking to you. 
 
I just had to go back to Hansard to see what you did say, and I went through the whole 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2229 

speech and you never even mentioned Saskatchewan at all. What really got me was when you said the 
whole election the Conservatives were fighting was on interest rates, and you brought the government 
down for interest rates. Interest rates were hardly ever mentioned by you people, and you say right here: 
now, I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, that we brought them down because of their high interest rates. It was 
the 18-cent gas, and you know it was. That’s what your counterparts in Ottawa did, brought them down 
on 18-cent gas. All you wanted to do was get up there and be a big fellow and try to throw us off the 
subject. 
 
You weren’t interested in answering my questions, but boy you are going to answer them tonight or 
we’ll stay here for another week. You people over there seem to think it’s a joke that we have farmers 
and small businessmen and people going broke every day. I never said interest rates were your problem. 
We didn’t blame you for high interest rates, but don’t blame us either. Because we had a change in 
government, but did we see anything? And if we had your government in there, what would have 
happened? You’ll never get there to find out, either. It would have been an absolute disaster. They 
couldn’t do any better, either. It would have been an absolute disaster. They couldn’t do any better, 
either. It’s easy for your federal leader to make promises; he knew he didn’t have to live up to them 
because he wasn’t going to get there. It was a cinch. 
 
I was also really disappointed in the minister. Maybe you’ll remember in my budget speech I said he 
was getting so big for his britches that the Premier had to put him in as finance minister. But I don’t 
think that’s a problem after the way you answered questions here last week; he’s not worried about you. 
You’re gong to go out in that leaky boat and you’ll go down without a rudder, I can tell you that. I 
challenge you to come over to the Humboldt area and we’ll get in the first 100 people we see; we’ll ask 
them where they want this money spent. When I mentioned last Friday the auction I went to, that’s 
exactly who I was talking to, people from your constituency, people who voted for you, who said no 
more of those carryings on. I know you are in trouble, because I see from the new allocation maps you 
had to take a little bit of my bad area to help you out. Thank you. You were worried about the member 
for Arm River. You know he won’t be beaten next time; but you took some of my worst area and put it 
in with your area. Boy, that sure shows what . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I think we have always allowed fairly broad ranging debate on 
item 1, but ranging to the bad areas in the Arm River constituency I think maybe is taking it a little too 
far. I would ask you to confine your remarks to item 1. 
 
I wonder if we could cut down on the visiting from both sides of the House. It makes it a little difficult. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — O.K., I’ll just ask some questions then. Do you think there is a chance we’re in a 
recession right now? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — In Canada we are not at the present time in a period of negative growth, so 
therefore I think it is fair to say we’re not in a period of recession. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, I haven’t entered into this debate yet, but I would like to ask the 
minister a couple of questions on finance, and since we are still on item 1 this might be an appropriate 
time. Mr. Minister, do you ever, in the course of your work as the Minister of Finance for the province 
of Saskatchewan, or do any of your staff, make a comparative analysis with any other province in 
Canada or any other area in North America as to total government expenditures, total taxation, 
demographic layouts and 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2230 

so on? Do you ever do that kind of analysis to see whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan is 
either keeping up or not keeping up with the kinds of policies being established by other governments? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, indeed we do from time to time, as is indicated in the 
budget speech on page 49. We there indicate one of those kinds of comparisons which we make. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, I noticed on page 49, you compared only with other Canadian areas. Do you 
ever make any kind of comparisons with American areas with similar demographic conditions as exist in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We can’t remember any in the recent past which we have done. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well then the minister might be interested in a small comparison of which I know 
something, perhaps. And perhaps he might jot down a few statistics which might interest him. 
 
I think it might be interesting for you people on the opposite benches to hear these figures. It’s only a 
matter of interest I’m sure, but you might be interested to hear them. 
 
In the state of Arizona, the budget projected for this current year by all municipal educational and state 
governments, is $1.75 billion. There are 2.5 million people in the state of Arizona. They have 
approximately the same kinds of geographic conditions as exist in the province of Saskatchewan, and in 
fact, there are more areas of mountainous-type roads, more areas of difficult roads to build than there are 
in the province of Saskatchewan. There exists, for the information of the Minister of Finance, who I am 
sure would want to pay attention to this in case he could find out something from this, a similar 
population pattern to that in the province of Saskatchewan. There exists, for the information of the 
Minister of Finance who I am sure would want to pay attention to this in case he could find out 
something from this, a similar population pattern to that in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Approximately one-quarter of the people of the state of Arizona are native Indians. Approximately one-
quarter of the state is set aside for native Indian reserves, which is approximately the same kind of 
geographic conditions and population conditions we have in Saskatchewan, approximately the same. Yet 
for 2.5 million people the total budget for all municipal, educational and state governments is $1.75 
billion. 
 
It also might interest the Minister of Finance to know that the percentage of service citizens in the state 
of Arizona exceeds the percentage of senior citizens in the province of Saskatchewan. These are the 
users (if you like) of medical care facilities. These are the utilizers of the state facilities and of the 
provincial facilities. These are the utilizers of the nursing homes that are needed and necessary, provided 
both in the state of Arizona and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet, here in the province of Saskatchewan, we have a provincial budget of over $2 billion, excluding the 
cost of municipal government and excluding the cost of education. But as the former minister of finance 
and now minister extraordinaire has mentioned, excluding health care. 
 
It might interest members opposite to know that a very significant portion of the Arizona budget goes 
toward health care. That would shock, I’m sure, the member for Biggar and the Minister of Finance . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . but not as much as the province of Saskatchewan, I’ll admit. Not as much, 
but a very significant portion — in the order of 10 per cent of their budget goes toward health care in the 
state of Arizona. That is health care on behalf — I admit in the province of Saskatchewan it approaches 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2231 

20 per cent. I agree with that, which means that $200 million of the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
money allocated from the $2 billion is in excess of that provided in Arizona and I’ll agree with that. So 
cut the Government of Saskatchewan’s budget to $1.8 billion. 
 
Now we’re talking about 2.5 million people with the same geographic kinds of problems, excessive heat 
there, excessive cold there. They have the same kinds of problems with reference to senior citizens, the 
same kinds of problems with reference to native Americans or native Canadians. For 2.5 million people 
they can do it for $1.75 billion and include municipal costs and educational costs. 
 
Yet in the province of Saskatchewan, for less than a million people we have to expend over $2 billion 
plus the cost of municipal government for which by the way, the figure is not available from any 
department in government because we’ve checked . . . (inaudible) . . . No, it isn’t Paul. The figure is not 
available without phoning every municipal government in Saskatchewan. That is a research job the likes 
of which no opposition could possibly perform. Or try to find out the cost of education relative to the 
local school boards and the figure is not available. Wherever you phone it is not available because I’ve 
looked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to debate with the Minister of Finance the reasons why in the state of 
Arizona this is true and why in Saskatchewan it is not true. Just to give the minister a few ideas, the 
legislators of whatever political party, be they Democrat or Republican (in the case of the state of 
Arizona there is one independent), whatever political stripe, enter into the legislative process with one 
idea in mind. The idea is to maximize the benefits for their citizens while minimizing the costs. I could 
give you example after example in this particular year of extreme economic conditions of the legislators 
in the state of Arizona coming to grips with excessive government expenditure. I could tell you that they 
have, and are limiting the kinds of increases in property taxes which our citizens are facing here; that 
they are setting a limit that government may take on people’s homes. They are setting limits on what 
government departments can spend and they are not setting them in accordance with next year or the 
year after, they are setting them with last year. They are saying to the people of Arizona, we are going to 
stop government expenditure; we are going to come to grips with inflation and we are going to prevent 
this ever-increasing burden on our population. 
 
Now the minister will say, sure but the American inflation at the moment is worse than the Canadian, 
and he’s right, it is. But at least the legislators there are facing up to reality and they are saying that the 
cause of government inflation is primarily governments. The cause of that horrible tax on humans called 
inflation is government expenditure and they say, we’re going to stop it; we’re going to limit it. We’re 
going to limit it not only by law but we’re going to limit it by constitution. That’s why, Mr. Minister, in 
the state of Arizona with 2.5 million people, split up in approximately the same balance as exists in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the fact that they can get away with a far lower expenditure by all levels of 
government and still provide the same kinds of services, except medicare. I’ll give you $200 million on 
the medicare issue. Even then they can expend far, far less money and obtain the same kinds of results 
and, in fact, even better results than we achieve here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have said in this Assembly before and I am going to say it again, there is no possible way 
. . . I can see it now in the attitude of the minister, in the way he is sitting there and the way he’s 
performing. He’s not interested, he doesn’t care about the 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2232 

issues raised by the member for Arm River. He’s not interested in the issues raised by the member for 
Regina South. This legislature is not a committee for finance. It’s a government exercise in presenting 
the people their rationale for expending too much money and for no controls. Why aren’t we debating 
here in the province of Saskatchewan the kinds of important limits on government which are necessary 
in a free society? 
 
Election day is not enough, for the benefit of the new member for — I can’t remember where. Election 
day is not enough. You see that’s the purpose for your sitting here. It’s the whole purpose of each of us 
sitting here and it’s boring. No one will doubt that this whole Chamber is boring during these estimates 
but your purpose in sitting here is on behalf of your constituents, to question why it costs so much 
money in Saskatchewan when it doesn’t cost so much in other jurisdictions. Why aren’t you doing 
something about it, Mr. Member? Why aren’t any members on the other side doing anything about it? 
 
We have a ruling in this Chamber that any member may question the minister. We would love to see 
during estimates on this side of House, (and I have difficulty in speaking for members to my right now) 
but I know they have expressed to me before the opinion that they would love to see the member for 
Saskatoon Centre rise in his place and question expenditures by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Why? Because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, it’s not good enough in camera. Oh, it’s not good 
enough in secret. Oh, the principles of democracy depend upon public debate. 
 
What is the minister saying in this Assembly? My goodness, let’s do everything in secret. We’ll 
accomplish everything back there in caucus. We’ll accomplish everything and these members will make 
the questions that they have but we’ll never ever bring them to the light of day. We’ll never let that 
man’s constituents know he did question the Minister of Finance. Never! That’s democracy in the 
minister’s opinion. I don’t happen to think so. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in my judgment, the reason why the expenditures are so high in the province of 
Saskatchewan is because our system does not allow open and individual debate on the expenditures of 
government. The reason why expenditures are so abnormally high in Saskatchewan compared to 
Arizona is because individual members in Arizona do have a say. They can rise up in their place and 
move motions that they can hope to be passed. They can rise up in their place and vote in accordance 
with the conscience of their constituents. They can rise up in their place and make meaningful 
contributions to the legislature. 
 
But here, what do we see? The minister and his hirelings answering questions. The members from the 
NDP sitting quietly in their chairs and the minister so busy ignoring the comments and valid ones of the 
member of Arm River, ignoring the comments and knows when it comes to the crunch, it’s automatic. 
That’s what’s wrong with our system, Mr. Chairman. It shouldn’t be automatic. This place is supposed 
to be for the open debate in front of the press an din front of the media where we can, as individual 
members, bring forward suggestions that people listen to. That’s why we spend more that we should. 
You could still have socialism and spend less. 
 
I notice the minister extraordinaire smiles. I know the minister realizes what I say is true. He himself 
from time to time has brought some semblance of intelligence to this 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2233 

Chamber. It’s unfortunate I have to admit that but he has. Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, very few of the 
members opposite are allowed to use their intelligence to question the expenditures and the decisions of 
the Department of Finance. 
 
They only sit in their chairs and say, that’s the way it’s going to be — over $2 billion plus what we have 
to raise from municipal governments, plus what we have to raise for education for fewer than one 
million people — while here’s a jurisdiction we can examine that spends $1.75 billion, including the 
whole works, for 2.5 million people and gets just as much service except for medicare. As a matter of 
fact . . . 
 
The member shakes his head. I happen to have some experience. I don’t know what his experience is. 
As a matter of fact, in a great many areas, the government of the state of Arizona provides better, more 
complete, more reasonable, more humane service to its people than the Government of Saskatchewan. 
They don’t do it in medicare and they should. They should! They don’t do it in medicare but you know, 
Mr. Member for Saskatoon Centre, the definition of socialism, which I’m sure you recognize better than 
any. It’s the kind of socialism, unfortunately, the member for Saskatoon Centre believes in. And that is, 
what’s yours is mine and what’s mine is mine. I don’t accept that definition of socialism. To me, true 
socialism means what’s yours is mine and what’s mine is yours. And we share and share alike. And I’ll 
tell you something, Mr. Chairman, if true socialism existed in this world, if true . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . if the member for Saskatoon Centre is suggesting he would like to share with me both 
assets and obligations, I would be more than happy to share with him my share of a lawsuit brought by 
this very group of people over here and I would be happy to share with him all my assets in exchange 
for that. How would that strike the member? You see, he’s backing off already, Mr. Chairman. He 
doesn’t want to debate that now. Now he knows it’s not so great to be such a smart ass in his chair. 
Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, that was an unparliamentary word and I do withdraw that word immediately. 
I withdraw it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister of Finance should recognize the problem. I think he should make 
examples of the various states in the United States, and compare what’s happening in Saskatchewan. He 
might find that perhaps this system, this legislature, could open up. If the legislature opened up, I 
wouldn’t get any supporters at all. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to get into a prolonged debate on the merits 
of Arizona or any other part of the United States. I am a Canadian. I think some of the services and some 
of the attitudes and some of the points of view which we as Canadians have toward life, and toward 
providing services to our citizens in this country, are the kinds of attitudes and services our people want 
to have; that’s why they have them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have services in Saskatchewan which I’m sure they don’t have in Arizona or some 
places south of the border. The reason we have those services, Mr. Chairman, is because the people of 
Saskatchewan have said they want those services. The member talks about medicare and waves that as 
one example because he knew I would use it as an example — and I will use it as an example. 
 
I’m prepared to stand up in this House or anywhere else and compare our medicare system to anywhere 
else, not only in the United States, but in North America. And I’m prepared to say, Mr. Chairman, it is a 
superb medicare system. No doubt about that in my mind. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2234 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The member agrees, and I’m not surprised he would because he has seen 
both. But, Mr. Chairman, it’s not just the question of the medicare system. It’s also the question of the 
hospitalization system. The members must keep in mind that in most places south of the border the 
hospitalization system is privately owned. It’s not just a question of expenditure more or less money. If 
you are a person, or if you are a government with some semblance of social conscience, surely you have 
to consider questions like accessibility to those services? No, they don’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
and I would be glad to hear it. But I doubt very much whether people who have to put down a $300 or 
$600 deposit before they can get into a hospital bed have accessibility — Mr. Cowley will be able to tell 
you. He’s had experience with whether or not they have the kind of accessibility we have in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
There was mention made, Mr. Chairman, of a comparison between the tax systems of Canada and the 
United States. I have one, by the way. We dug it up. It was done by the Department of Finance of 
Canada. Just for the edification of the members and for their information, I want to quote to you from 
this analysis which says: 
 

that the paper leads to the general conclusion that the Canadian tax system compares favorably with 
that in the United States. In aggregate, while tax revenues of all levels of government were 1.8 
percentage points of gross domestic product higher in Canada than the United States in 1977, 
Canadians had the benefit of publicly provided health care services and demographic transfer 
payments in the form of family allowances and old age security pensions. 

 
And you can add more to that list, Mr. Chairman. It is not so simple to compare Arizona to 
Saskatchewan. You have to keep in mind that the system of government between state and federal 
government in the United States is substantially different, from the point of view of their 
responsibilities, from that which is in Canada and the provinces of Canada. The American federal 
government carries much more of the responsibility financially than do the state governments, as 
compared with Canada and the provincial governments in this country. 
 
Now, it’s fine to say, Mr. Chairman, we are expending too much money. But I want to point out to this 
House that for the last five years our rate of growth of expenditures for each of those years has been 
declining, and I think that’s a pretty fair indication of the kind . . . The member for Regina South frowns 
but it’s a fact. Let me make that clear. The rate of growth of expenditures of the government has been 
declining. I ask members to compare this budget to the last four budgets, and I think it will become clear 
the rate of growth has indeed been declining. As I was going to say (and I’m going to then sit down), it’s 
fine to say we are expending too much money, because those are nice sounding words. But you cannot 
just say that without, at the same time saying, where will you cut back? Tell us that. Which programs 
would you do away with? And when you have told us that, I think you will really have contributed to the 
debate (sorry, I should be speaking through the Chairman) in which the member indicated this House 
should be making contributions. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — First of all, I am going to answer the minister’s last question. The minister’s last 
question was, where would I cut back? Well, I’m going to start with one very heavy expenditure of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and that is the $600 million borrowed to buy potash mines. That’s just 
one example of an expenditure of the province of Saskatchewan of some $60 million in interest 
payments (and I am giving 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2235 

the member opposite the benefit of the doubt here because I am only allowing 10 per cent interest). An 
expenditure of $60 million would not have to be made. Now, that’s number one for start. Number two 
— you check your item of budget, Mr. Minister of Finance. The day the people of Saskatchewan don’t 
realize the expenditure of interest on borrowings of $2.5 billion or $3 billion now (which I gather is 
approximately the right level of borrowing in Saskatchewan) that they don’t have to pay for those 
borrowings (when people say to themselves, we don’t have to pay for that), that’s the day when 
socialism will reign supreme because then you won’t ever have to argue your points at all. You’re 
getting money for zip; and you might just as well be Social Creditors then, because that’s what they 
want. They want money for nothing, and that’s what you’re getting, isn’t it, ex-minister of finance? 
 
Mr. Chairman, the point I was trying to make to the Minister of Finance is that there are jurisdictions in 
North America which are curtailing expenditures of government. There isn’t a single economist in North 
America who doesn’t agree that rampant inflation is the result of excessive government spending — not 
one. Mr. Chairman, absolutely everything in the realm of economics is debatable. Every economist in 
North America differs on the means of production and the ways that they shall go about things and the 
means of accomplishing certain areas. There isn’t any set group and I was told this as a matter of fact 
when I went to college. I think I actually said this in this Assembly at one time but perhaps it’s worth 
repeating. 
 
The very first lecture I ever had in economics is the one I remember the best. That was where the 
professor stood before the classroom and said, I am about to prove to you that two plus two equals the 
pope. And we sat there dumbfounded. Sixty students. So what does this mean? The man went through 
an exercise of two plus two plus four plus eight and he went through this exercise for 40 minutes. At the 
conclusion of that exercise he in fact did prove that two plus two equals the pope. He said, any member 
of this class who finds the error in my calculations will get an automatic first. This is a true story. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And you found it, eh? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — No one found it because surprisingly enough, for the benefit of that eminently 
intelligent Minister of Health, no one in that class, some of whom arrived there with a number of 
scholarships (I don’t know whether the Minister of Health received one), was smart enough to pick up 
where the man had made his error. 
 
The point he was trying to make was that economics is such a vast subject and such a broad subject 
matter. The point he was trying to make was that if you make the tiniest of errors the logic that will lead 
to will lead you to a wrong conclusion. He said economics is an art. 
 
I’m saying to you that’s true. Economics is an art and to a very great extent most economists can’t agree. 
But on one thing they are in agreement. Heavy government expenditure at all levels of government 
creates inflation. That’s what they are in agreement on. 
 
Now there are jurisdictions in the United States of America which are seriously attempting, in this free 
society, to answer this problem. We are not doing that, Mr. Chairman. We are not seriously trying to 
curtail the level of expenditure of government. And therefore we are dooming the senior citizens and 
dooming the children to continued rampant inflation. You can hide your head in the sands; you can dig 
your head into books; you can put your head wherever you like (in a place where the sun 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2236 

never shines in the case of the member for Saskatoon Centre). But, Mr. Chairman, the fact is that if you 
hide your head like that you’ll never come to an answer. The answer is that government expenditure 
must be curtailed. And it is being curtailed in the state of Arizona. So all I ask is that the Minister of 
Finance examine how they are going about it in these various jurisdictions, establish his own priorities 
and perhaps he’ll come to the conclusion I have that government can be run for less than it is in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether the member has spent a considerable 
amount of time looking at the estimates but I pointed out before I sat down that our growth in 
expenditures for the last five years has been declining. Now we’ve made that happen, Mr. Chairman, 
while at the same time making sure the services we provide to Saskatchewan people have been 
maintained at a very high level. And I ask the member opposite, since he was talking about needing to 
drastically cut back on government expenditures, to give me an example or give me some examples — 
one example isn’t good enough — of where he would in this budget or any budget in the province of 
Saskatchewan, make the kind of cutbacks . . . The member for Estevan screams across the floor, about 
$600 million. I want to ask the member for Nipawin again, Mr. Chairman, which program sit is he 
would be cutting back. Now he says $600 million borrowed to buy potash mines. Well, that’s nonsense, 
Mr. Chairman. He is very clearly confusing, as he is confused, revenues and expenditures, investments 
and expenditures. 
 
The money in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, is an investment, and it’s a good 
investment. I know the member for Nipawin would love nothing more than to have the province of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan lose that investment. Maybe he would like that 
investment to return to the foreign companies that used to own those potash mines, whether they’re 
located in Arizona, in New York, or Dallas, or wherever they may be located. That is not our view. Not 
only do we get a return from the potash industry, from the point of view of revenues, taxes, and other 
forms of revenues, we now assure we have some capability to direct the development of that potash 
resource in this province so it provides the maximum benefit to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Not only do we get the royalties and the taxes from the potash industry, Mr. Chairman, but we also in 
1979 saw the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan earn $78 million in clear net profit which we would 
not have seen in the province because it would have gone to those foreign owners the member for 
Nipawin so greatly supports in this House when he makes the remarks that he does. 
 
I challenge him to tell me and tell this House where in this budget and these estimates, he would make 
those drastic cuts, Mr. Chairman, so the budget we are presenting here today would meet the amount he 
has in mind. 
 
Don’t talk about money borrowed to go into investment, because that is well-placed. Talk about money 
being spent, Mr. Chairman, on the consolidated fund for programs and services for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Then you might be getting someplace about really indicating what the policy is on those 
programs and expenditures that you’re talking about. 
 
Let me indicate something else about the budget, Mr. Chairman. Let me indicate grants to local 
authorities and other third parties increased this year by 10.5 per cent. They take up 46.2 per cent of the 
expenditures provided in this budget. 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2237 

The grant to program services in government increased by only 8.8 per cent. So we very consciously 
made sure the third party grants we must provide to municipalities, to school boards and others are 
adequate. We’ve done it by being very frugal and managing very well the ordinary government 
operations, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I hadn’t planned on entering this debate. I’m certainly not entering it to reinforce 
the views of the member for Nipawin but more or less to correct some of the statements made by the 
minister. 
 
It rankles and annoys me every time I hear the socialist government sit on the other side of the House 
and expound about the virtues and the money they spend on that one service everybody in this province 
cares about and wants. That’s our medicare and health service. It’s about time the minister took a look 
and understood exactly what the Government of Saskatchewan is spending on health services as 
compared to other areas. 
 
I’m going to give you the comparisons, Mr. Minister. I’ve made comparisons with only three other 
provinces. I haven’t checked with the others yet. I will at a later date. But in just the three provinces I 
checked with in western Canada (British Columbia, Manitoba, and Alberta) — and this may come as a 
shock to you — Saskatchewan ranks fourth in the per capital health care cost provided to the citizens of 
this province. Now I think it’s about time you stopped saying you are the only people in this country 
providing medicare services to the people of the province. 
 
Let me just give you the figures so you can write them down and you’ll have them, or you can check 
with Hansard tomorrow: British Columbia per capita expenditures on health in the 1980-81 budget 
$555.73; Alberta $548.17; Manitoba $639.89. And where is Saskatchewan? At the bottom of the list — 
$543.23. So let’s not have any more of that nonsense that you are the only government which can 
provide health services to the people of this province or in this country. 
 
You indicated another thing I would like to discuss at this point and that is the expenditures. You keep 
referring to a decline in the rate of expenditures of this government. It took you 70 years to reach a $1 
billion budget (government expenditures) and in five short years after that you doubled it. Now that is 
declining the rate of expenditure? I don’t know what school you went to. I don’t know how you can 
calculate a decline when it takes 70 years to spend $1 billion in a year and in five short years another $1 
billion. The Premier, the day I replied to the budget and the day you delivered that budget (and not too 
many people heard him), said, ‘That’s nothing. Before we’re finished we’ll spend a heck of a lot more.’ 
I think he said somewhere around $8 billion. Now if that isn’t being ridiculous! 
 
You refer to the investment in potash. I don’t know why you brought up the investment in potash. That 
has nothing to do with the expenditures of the government or of this budget. You referred to the five 
hundred and some million dollars invested in potash as an expenditure. I don’t know why you would 
refer to that as part of the budget. It has absolutely nothing to do with it. 
 
Then you went on to say you’re happy you invested that money in potash and that the profits are going 
to the people of Saskatchewan and not to the people in the United States or those multinational 
corporations. But what about the exchange on that 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2238 

American money you borrowed from the Americans? What about the interest you’re paying to the 
Americans, which is a large portion of the revenues of that potash . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Don’t 
. . . get away from me. What are you talking about — none? And you talk about exchange. You’re 
dealing with the multinationals in the United States far more than any other government in this country 
ever has. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, at least when the member for Nipawin got up to make his 
remarks he was. In his way, being thoughtful about some comparisons we might make with Arizona. I 
disagree with him, but at least he was getting into some depth in the kind of propositions he was making 
here. 
 
I was interested in listening, on the other hand, to the member for Regina South, who represents the 
Tory caucus over there, and who when he got up did not deal with any specifics at all. He talks about per 
capita expenditures for health care. Well let me ask him, Mr. Chairman, to talk about the services for 
health care, not only about the per capita expenditures. They may not mean very much except they may 
mean the system we run here in Saskatchewan is one heck of a lot more efficient than the system they 
run in Alberta or the system they run in British Columbia. I’m prepared to talk with the member 
opposite in this debate on the kinds of deterrent fees and health premiums Alberta people pay which 
people in Saskatchewan don’t pay. Why doesn’t he mention that? Why when the member for Kelsey-
Tisdale while he was speaking, mentioned the question of what is happening with the Alberta nurses did 
the member for Regina South totally ignore the issue? I’ll tell you why . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well it doesn’t matter whether you want to speak, but the member for Regina South hears very well 
usually. I’ll tell you why, because the members opposite are embarrassed. They are embarrassed about 
the kinds of things that are happening in Alberta in the health care field and particularly with the nurses’ 
situation, where they have, Mr. Chairman, their version of Bill 2. Now members of this House will know 
what Bill 1 was and Bill 2 they have in Alberta doesn’t even work. Ross Thatcher’s apparently did, but 
theirs does not even work. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, the minister asked me in the previous question, how I would cut 
the budget of the province of Saskatchewan to enable the minister to come appropriately closer to the 
kind of budget that exists in the state of Arizona as opposed to the province of Saskatchewan. I would 
like to present just a few, because it would take far too long, far more time than we have tonight to go 
through all of the items. But I’m just going to do it in general terms, Mr. Chairman, from the budgetary 
cash outflows, on page 9 of the minister’s budget. 
 
Let’s start with the expenditures on behalf of the Attorney General. I mentioned already tonight that 
there is $2 million which doesn’t need to be expended on behalf of the Attorney General in the province 
of Saskatchewan; there could be savings and extreme savings in that area. 
 
On behalf of consumer affairs $454 million budgeted for that department, a very large, substantial 
portion of which is dedicated to inspectors for that department who do absolutely nothing to protect 
consumers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s go on to co-operation and co-operative development, $2,406,000 expended on that department. 
Yet, Mr. Chairman, not one penny expended on the part of the government of the province of 
Saskatchewan for corporate matters in the province. Amazingly enough for the benefit of the minister 
responsible for finance, co-operatives exist in Arizona. It will kill him, it will absolutely slay him and 
yet the government of 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2239 

Arizona spends not a dime for a department of co-operation; $2.4 million could be saved in this budget 
because co-operatives exist in that state and they flourish in that state. They are happy in that state 
without government spending $2.4 million on behalf of that particular department. 
 
Now, let’s move down to education. On the total education budget of some $295 million, approximately 
10 per cent of that amount is expended in administration — administration of what? The vast majority of 
the expenditure of the department in the province of Saskatchewan is the transfer of funds to locally 
elected boards. Why does the Government of Saskatchewan need to spend close to $30 million on 
administration for those programs? Local boards can make those decisions, and in fact, make them very 
well in the state of Arizona. For the benefit of the minister, that’s education. 
 
The Department of the Environment, Mr. Minister, $8.601 million. Now, I wonder how much good they 
have done. PCBs in the city of Regina can’t be cleaned up. What kind of regulation does the Department 
of the Environment exert over the nuclear business in Saskatchewan? Nothing, let’s face it, nothing. 
That’s done by the federal government. Yet $8,601,000 expended will be by the Department of the 
Environment. That could be cut, Mr. Chairman, and it could be cut substantially, and obtain exactly the 
same level of service we have today. 
 
Now here’s one that’s of interest I think to every member of this legislature: Executive Council, 
$3,397,000 for 19 cabinet ministers or is it 20? I’m sorry. I can’t tell you whether it’s 19 or 20. I believe 
it’s 20; there are 20 ministers of the Crown expending some $3,397,000 for 950,000 people. It might 
interest the Attorney General to know that in the state of Arizona with 2.5 million people, the total 
executive branch of government for 2.5 million doesn’t spend anything like $3,397,000. They are able to 
do it with far less. They have administrative assistants. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How do you know that? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — How do I know that? I have been there, boy, I have been there. You haven’t. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, $92,850,000 allocated to this government in capital costs. How much of that is 
expended on behalf of the land bank? Because in my opinion, not a dime has to be spent on behalf of the 
land bank. That’s a considerable saving. It seems to me that the land bank allocation is some $20 
million. I’m sure I could look it up; some $20 million in the province of Saskatchewan. Not a dime has 
to be spent on behalf of the land bank . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if I sit down now, Mr. 
Member for Regina South, they are going to really give me heck. So I thought since there are only seven 
minutes left. 
 
He wanted to know, Mr. Chairman, he wanted to know. The minister wanted to know how I would cut 
this budget? We don’t have to spend money on land bank. The land exists. What benefit does it give to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, the huge expenditures of the government for land bank? 
Nothing, not a penny. What benefit do the people of Saskatchewan get from the huge interest 
expenditures? Nothing. What benefit do they get from the expenditures of $2 million in court houses for 
the Attorney General? Nothing, nothing. What benefit do they get from these great huge administrative 
costs? And, Mr. Chairman, I am just coming to the department of welfare. That will be coming up 
shortly in the terms of the administrative costs of delivering a dollar’s worth of welfare to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. I 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2240 

think that the minister could recognize that doesn’t have to be so high and isn’t as high in other 
jurisdictions. He’s pointing out to me a yellow paper. I don’t think that’s a comparison with the state of 
Arizona. 
 
Let me tell the minister, for example, one of the problems they have in Arizona we don’t have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They have a great any illegal aliens coming across their borders for whom 
they have to provide welfare because they don’t speak the language, for the information of the member 
for Saskatoon Centre. The fact is, Mr. Chairman, that they have far more problems down there than we 
have and yet the people’s problems are being met. Sure they could add medicare to their services, and I 
think that would be a good addition to their services. I would support such a move. But in the vast 
majority of areas they are cutting expenditures. I’ve said it before and I’m not going to repeat it. 
 
The Minister of Finance asked me for further evidence of where I would cut. Mr. Minister, I’ve come up 
with about $150 million. The numbers move pretty quickly. About $150 million so far that could be cut 
just in administrative cuts, interest cuts, expenditures on land bank, expenditures for court houses for the 
Attorney General, while at the same time he is scrapping other court houses elsewhere with no trade-off 
of any kind. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the point is, we could go through this budget and produce another $150 million or maybe 
$200 million. Perhaps it would be better if we did. Mineral resources, $9 million. Can you believe that? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How much money does it raise? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Mineral Resources says: how much money does it 
raise? My goodness gracious, Mr. Chairman, the same kinds of revenues are raised in the state of 
Arizona, but they don’t spend $9 million to collect it. They have eight million inspectors out inspecting 
the books of legitimate organizations in the province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Talk to the federal 
government says the minister responsible. I’m not talking about federal employees. I’m talking about 
provincial employees. Provincial inspectors after inspectors after inspectors. $9 million? Would you like 
me to go into that department? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That is going to come out, Mr. Chairman. 
Mineral resources will come up and I am absolutely positive we will find all kinds of expenditures that 
could be cut from the Department of Mineral Resources. 
 
Then, Mr. Chairman, there is some $82.5 million for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I didn’t 
happen to be in the Assembly when the members to my right raised some of the issues about the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, I can assure you I have read some of the issues 
that have been raised: the abysmal lack of controls, the abysmal waste of dollars, the abysmal 
crookedness that exists in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and in fact, the people involved 
outside the Department of Northern Saskatchewan with the department. I think this was shown time 
after time in those debates. Millions of dollars wasted — $82 million, Mr. Minister, surely it is not 
necessary for a government to support that kind of operation surely it is not necessary for you as the 
Minister of Finance to support that kind of operation. 
 
I notice the member for Saskatoon, Saskatoon wherever it is. I can’t remember the 



 
April 24, 1980 

 

 
2241 

name of that constituency just right now. We didn’t win that one so good. The one at the back, the two at 
the back, they weren’t paying attention, and I asked them specifically to pay attention because they 
might want to question the Minister of Finance on some of these expenditures. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan have an interest in the expenditure of $82 million on the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. I believe that, even for the Attorney General, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. They are interested in $82 million. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — So are we. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Oh, so are we. How many years has it been since the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan estimates came before this legislative session? Every year (certainly since I’ve been in 
this legislature) the same kinds of things are brought to the attention, such as shoe boxes filled with cash. 
Every year the same kinds of things brought to the attention of the members opposite. Do you know, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s abysmal, absolutely abysmal. They . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If that were only true, 
Mr. Chairman, if that were only true! 
 
The point is millions of dollars could have been cut out of the budget of northern Saskatchewan. The 
identical service could be provided if the members of this legislature took their jobs seriously. If the 
members for Saskatoon, the members of Regina, the members from all parts of Saskatchewan took their 
jobs seriously and came into these estimates with a view to cutting expenditures, they could come in 
here and say we can provide the same service at less cost, let us get at this budget. This is just a budget. 
Let us get at it properly. 
 
If every member on the opposite side and every member on this side was to take his job seriously, we 
could in fact achieve the results of the state of Arizona, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, 
that’s not possible under this system. Under this system you people make your decisions behind doors; it 
really doesn’t matter what you say. Under the American system that’s not true. Under the American 
system budgets are delineated line by line in the legislature in the open, in front the press, so constituents 
know where each and every member stands on whether excessive amounts are being spent by 
government. And that’s why they’re coming to grips with it, Mr. Chairman. Our system doesn’t allow 
that to happen. The fact is we could meet every month and under the circumstances of this legislative 
Chamber, under the circumstances of this budget examination, not one change will occur. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have been a member of this legislature since 1975. In that time, and I have said this 
every single year before this legislature, not one single dime has been changed from the budget that was 
presented by the government. Now, Mr. Chairman, the member for Saskatoon Eastview is not an idiot. 
The member for Saskatoon Eastview was elected by the people of Saskatoon Eastview to represent their 
views. Yet, not one word have we heard from him about the impact of this budget on his constituents 
and the increase in the expenditure of government and the impact of that on inflation. 
 
Nor have we heard one suggestion from any single member opposite on how that budget could be pared. 
Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General asks me, how about those guys? Mr. Chairman, I am not going to 
attempt in any way to present anyone else’s views except my own. I am criticizing the preparers of the 
budget. I am criticizing the system that allows a budget of over $2 billion for less than a million people 
to be presented to this legislature without any hope of ever changing anything, without any 



 
April 24, 1980 
 

 
2242 

hope of changing one dime, even though we may say we could prove beyond any reasonable doubt. 
That’s the failing of this system. We could prove beyond a reasonable doubt the expenditures are too 
high. We could prove the government shouldn’t borrow in the United States for potash mines. We could 
prove beyond a reasonable doubt in anybody’s mind, even the mind of the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview, that it wasn’t reasonable to expend this kind of money, and not one dime would be changed. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s the fault of this system. That is the fault of this so-called budget examination. It’s 
all very well to ask the Government of Saskatchewan how they’re spending the money, but what we get 
elected to do, on behalf of our constituents, is to tell government they’re spending too much. That’s our 
job. 
 
We represent the people, the people are taxed, and it’s our job to see they’re taxed to a minimum. If this 
is a charade, say it’s a charade. But don’t, for heaven’s sake, as the minister tried to do, make light of the 
comparison between the state of Arizona and the province of Saskatchewan. Because I can tell you there 
are lessons to be learned from that system — important lessons, where individual members take their 
jobs seriously. It matters not whether they meet every month or every second month or every second 
year, but when they meet they take their jobs seriously and they represent their individual constituents 
seriously. They present the view that government expenditures can and must be cut and that the 
maximum benefit for every tax dollar . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t know why it stopped either. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:09 p.m. 


