






















































Hansard: March 19, 1980


783 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 19, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to this House, 22 members of the Wolseley Grades 4 and 5 class seated in the east gallery. 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Tourigny, parent chaperone, Mrs. Christine Rein, and their bus 
driver, Mr. Wes McBride. I hope that you enjoy the deliberations in the House this afternoon. I’ll be meeting 
you after the oral question period for some pictures and some refreshments. I am very happy because one of 
the members of this class is my youngest daughter, Susan. I’d like to welcome you here to the Legislative 
Assembly. Enjoy your visit and have a very safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Souris-Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, to you and to the rest of the Assembly I 
would like to introduce a group of 23 Grade 8 students from Redvers, Saskatchewan, in the Speaker’s 
gallery. They are accompanied today by their teacher, Mrs. Lorraine Madsen of Wauchope. I’m sure you all 
join me in wish them a very informative stay here this afternoon and a safe journey home. I will be meeting 
with them about 3 o’clock this afternoon for refreshment and pictures. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you some seven students in Grade 7 from the Lyndale School at Oungre, who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Oungre is located in the far southeast corner of my constituency so they’ve driven many 
miles to visit us today. I hope they find it very informative this afternoon. I will be meeting with them later 
for refreshments and pictures, approximately 3 o’clock. I think all members should join me in wishing them 
also a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce a delegation group of women from the Saskatchewan Coalition for Women’s Pensions. I 
understand there are about 10 of them and they are seated to my right in the Speaker’s gallery immediately 
above me. They will be meeting with me and a delegation of ministers later this afternoon with respect to 
pension questions. I hope every member of the House will welcome them here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. B.J. PONIATOWSKI (Saskatoon Eastview): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join my 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
784 

colleague from Saskatoon in welcoming the women’s group who will be making a presentation on pensions. 
In particular I wish to welcome and recognize Heather Leier who comes from the constituency of 
Saskatoon-Eastview. I wish her and her colleagues well in their deliberations this afternoon and I hope they 
find their activities and their visit rewarding. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you are now giving 
Ottawa about $500 million every year from our light to medium oil, a depleting non-renewable resource. 
You have proposed to Ottawa a new federal oil security fund, and you have offered to give away to central 
Canada 50 per cent of all oil increases for the future for Saskatchewan oil. This could amount to a possible 
$10 billion even on a depleting scale by 1990. How do we win with you on such a situation? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, may I first offer the hon. member one piece of advice. 
The one piece of advice would be to ascertain what our proposal is, and then one would know with more 
certainty what our particular proposition is. With respect to the alleged gift, the member well knows that this 
money is extracted from Saskatchewan oil over the objection of the Government of Saskatchewan, as it is 
extracted from Alberta oil over the objection of the Government of Alberta, and we have taken, from the 
outset, the view that the export tax ought not to be wholly arrogated to themselves by the federal 
government. We took it from the outset when it was applied in September of 1973 and have continued that 
position. We accordingly do not agree that we are ‘giving’ anything to the federal government although they 
may indeed be taking it. 
 
With respect to the other question about whether or not we are offering to give 50 per cent, etc., I invite the 
hon. member to read our presentation to the premiers’ conference that occurred at La Malbaie in the province 
of Quebec, and see what our proposition is. Our 1975 proposition involved a number of other trade-offs 
including the removal of non-deductibility, not only with respect to oil and natural gas, but with respect to 
potash, uranium and other minerals. This is no longer in the realm of practical politics because the system is 
now changed: we do not believe it can be effectively reintroduced and accordingly some of the trade-offs 
which were part of the 1975 package are no longer available. So we revised our package in 1979 and it no 
longer proposes what the 1975 package does. In effect it now proposes that we retain our regular royalties as 
the price moves up and that out of additional funds available from the windfall profits, money be set aside 
for a Canada Energy Security Fund, and with that proposition we intend to stand. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, we saw your bargaining — with the throwing 
of the crowrate on the bargaining table. Marc Lalonde has given the Minister of Mineral Resources tentative 
support to such a fund. Is it not true that what you’re really doing is cutting Premier Lougheed off at the 
knees and going with Ottawa instead of a strong western Canada on our renewable resources? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t know what renewable resources the hon. member refers to but with respect to 
oil and natural gas, we are not cutting off Premier Lougheed. First I 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
785 

doubt whether he needs very much support from us, but secondly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry I 
missed the comment from the hon. member for Moosomin. I’m sure it was penetrating, as usual. I do want to 
say this. We have since 1973 and 1974 worked closely with the Government of Alberta in attempting to get a 
better return for western Canadians from our non-renewable resources. We have continued to work closely 
with the Government of Alberta. Anyone who has observed the federal-provincial conferences will have 
observed that. Anyone who watched us in negotiations with the Trudeau government will know that, and to 
suggest that somehow we are undermining the position of the Government of Alberta is simply not in 
accordance with the facts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Premier, just recently you have made a proposal to this House that we now have a 
Saskatchewan Oil Security Fund along with our heritage fund — as part of the heritage fund. Do you not 
think that the people of Saskatchewan are capable of administering their own resource funds? Why would 
you not take it only into a Saskatchewan Security Fund and then if Ottawa needs money, loan it to them? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We will note, Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member is suggesting. We now take a 
regular royalty of approximately 55 per cent and we are proposing to continue that royalty. We have put 
forward the proposal that out of the remaining 45 per cent, some of it move into a Canada Energy Security 
Fund. The member for Estevan is suggesting that we take some of that 45 per cent and put it further into our 
heritage fund. He is calling for a higher royalty rate than 55 per cent, and that is precisely in opposition to 
what he has consistently called for in the past. I think this inconsistency is what is discrediting the 
Progressive Conservative Party and its resource policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Premier’s Position Paper 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — A new question, Mr. Premier. In reference to 
inconsistencies — my question is fairly brief, but on your position paper which was presented in Quebec last 
August 15, and if I may quote from your own position paper on page 4, talking about consistency, in your 
own words, ‘the federal government as a majority shareholder would have the major responsibility for 
directing the fund’s investments.’ As the member for Estevan indicated, Mr. Premier, my question to you is 
this: does that not in itself indicate that you are cutting Premier Lougheed right off at the knees in his 
dealings with the federal government? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will try again. Since our proposal is that all of the money that goes 
into that fund would come out of the funds which are left after we collect our royalty, i.e. money which 
would ordinarily have gone to the federal government or to the industry, it is surely not unreasonable that the 
federal government and the industry have the voice since they are putting up virtually all of the money. It 
was in order to acknowledge that fact that we made the practical proposition that the majority voice should 
be with the federal government. Incidentally, that was the proposal of the Progressive Conservative Party 
when they resurrected that proposal as an energy bank. And so far as I am aware, it was at all material times 
the Progressive Conservative policy that they should have a majority voice in that fund because, in fact, the 
money was coming from money which otherwise would have gone to the industry or the federal government. 
It seems therefore reasonable. Nor so far as I am aware does 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
786 

my proposal or Mr. Clark’s proposal cut Mr. Lougheed off at the knees. 
 

Drop in Price of Yellowcake 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I would like to direct a question to the Premier. Press reports yesterday 
indicate a significant drop in the price of yellowcake from a February 29, 1979 value of approximately 
$43.80 (U.S.) to $38 (U.S.) per pound. I’m wondering, Mr. Premier, in light of significant events of recent 
date — one of them being the international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation conference wherein 65 nations 
recommended the use of breeder reactors, including France, Britain, the Soviet Union and Japan (potential 
markets for Saskatchewan uranium), and the further cancellations of nuclear power plants in the United 
States — would the Premier now indicate . . . I’m sorry. One other point if I may, Mr. Speaker. The 
Robertson Research Canada study indicates that there would be a surplus on the international market and it 
would prevail into the late 1980s. That is a significant difference in time frame than what your government 
has been using. Would the Premier now indicate that in fact, all of these events indicate a significant 
softening of the potential for uranium markets in the province of Saskatchewan? Would the Premier now be 
prepared to table all studies and market evaluations that the government opposite has done as to uranium 
markets for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, so far as I am aware, all of the studies which the hon. member refers to 
have been done by or on behalf of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). I will ask the 
minister in charge of SMDC to reply. 
 
HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — He only quotes part of the article there. I think they go 
on in the article to indicate that while there are some short-term softings in the market, they have a 
reasonably optimistic outlook in the long run with respect to uranium. I remember the members opposite 
talking about potash, all these hols in the ground, that we’d never sell any. It’s surprising now how they 
never talk about potash markets. they don’t talk about the inability of the government to run potash mines. 
They don’t talk about the inability of the government to be able to forecast markets because all of these 
things have turned out. 
 
If the member want to get some idea of where the uranium industry is going in this world. I suggest that he 
watch the results of the referendum in Sweden which is going to take place this Sunday. I think there the 
member will see the direction in which part of the world is going with respect to uranium development. 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary to the Premier. In light of the obvious refusal of the minister responsible 
for the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation (SMDC) to table the information I have just 
requested, do you not feel that you as Premier of this province have an obligation to the people to table the 
information I have in fact requested? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is that the information requested clearly is information 
belonging to a Crown corporation which is marketing uranium in any international market. Whether or not 
that information should be made public and whether or not competitive sellers would make their information 
public is, I think appropriately debated in the Crown corporations committee. 
 

Studies of the Uranium Market 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
787 

MR. LANE: — A question to the Premier. Would the Premier not admit that the fact the study of the 
international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation recommends breeder reactors with an approximate lead time of 10 
to 12 years (taking us to the end of the century, or the end of the 1980s) and if the Robertson study is 
accurate which indicates there is going to be a softening of the market until the end of the 1980s, this 
combination of facts would indicate that the potential for Saskatchewan uranium markets is highly suspect to 
say the last? Don’t you believe that facts such as these make it incumbent upon yourself to lay the cards on 
the table as far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, and in fact table these studies because you are 
making a significant investment of taxpayers’ moneys into what is beginning to look like a highly 
speculative investment? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, it is the policy of the Progressive Conservative Party to continue the 
mining of uranium in this province under private auspices. It is the policy of the Progressive Conservative 
Party that all of the uranium industry in this country could be controlled by the private sector. It is the policy 
of the Progressive Conservative Party to attempt to extract from our Crown corporation information that 
their private enterprise friends would not give to the public. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — It is the policy of the Progressive Conservative Party to attempt to extract 
information which would be valuable to Denison and to Rio Algom, the people who they wish to control the 
uranium industry in this province. We are of the view that the public of Canada is better able to control the 
uranium industry than are Denison and Rio Algom. We have a very different view of the right way to operate 
a uranium industry than members opposite. We both agree that uranium should be mined. We believe that 
the public sector should have a significant role. Members opposite believe that it should be entirely in the 
hands of the private multinationals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Uranium Sales 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you refuse to provide to this 
House the studies requested, the market studies requested by the opposition. Yet in the March 8, 1980 issue 
of the Financial Post, your servants, Mr. Grant Mitchell, indicates that the people of Saskatchewan, over the 
decade of the 1980s, will receive at least $2 billion from uranium royalties. Now, if you are not prepared to 
provide those market studies, could you at least provide to this legislature the volumes of uranium that you 
propose to sell and the price you propose to receive for it to arrive at the $2 billion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the information requested by the hon. member and attributed to Mr. 
Mitchell, I am not familiar with. The general information on projections with respect to the mining of 
uranium in Saskatchewan and the projected price which has been presented by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to the Bayda inquiry, doubtless will, if requested, be presented to other . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated the information on the projected mining and sale of 
Saskatchewan uranium was put forward to the Bayda commission; it may well, if 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
788 

requested be put forward to the Mitchell commission and to other commissions. If hon. members wish to 
find the information they may well find it in the submissions to these commissions, which submissions if 
requested, we would be happy to table in this House. 
 

Conflict of Interest Legislation 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. I was going to ask the Premier, but 
seeing as he is getting a little sensitive, I’ll go to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, in light of 
some of the answers that have been emanating from the Premier this afternoon, such as refusal to disclose. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Does the member have a question? Okay, well let’s have it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — In the light of some of the Premier’s responses, namely, refusals to disclose 
information about Crown corporations, would the Attorney General deem it appropriate that we are now 
arriving, since the Crown corporations are operating more and more in a secretive manner, at the point in 
time where stringent conflict of interest legislation is necessary for the senior executives of Crown 
corporations, perhaps even going so far as to deputy ministers and the heads of some of our major 
departments? My question to the Attorney General is this — we have had debates on this subject in the past 
— is the government contemplating such legislation for this session of the legislature? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the hon. 
member that the Crown corporations committee in Saskatchewan’s legislature is probably the most open and 
effective Crown corporations committee of any province anywhere, together with the question. I’ve sat on 
enough of the committees both in opposition and in government to know how they have operated, so I don’t 
accept the premise upon which the question is founded. Secondly, as to the matter of conflict of interest 
legislation, I believe (I stand to be corrected) the public service commission does have a set of guidelines 
with respect to a general code of conduct for senior civil servants. With respect to the Crown corporation I 
am not rejecting out of hand the call for conflict of interest legislation. The general guideline here is one of 
acting within the normal standard business procedures and practices, revelation of interests and so forth, with 
management and the board of directors. I don’t perceive any major problem that exists in the Crown 
corporations unless the hon. members opposite have information to the opposite. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question. Mr. Attorney General, we had a situation a couple of days 
ago which you dismissed as hypothetical, where the possibility existed that employees from a Crown 
corporation might be applying for financial assistance from another Crown corporation. You dismissed this 
thing as hypothetical, Mr. Attorney General, as the size of our Crown corporations increases year after year 
(the number of them) and the volume of dollars which they may purchase in supplies increases year after 
year, if for no other reasons, the normal inflation. Would the Attorney General not concede that the time has 
now arrived that senior executives of Crown corporations should be placed under very stringent conflict of 
interest arrangements — the same sort of conflict which at one time and which you do propose for members 
of the Assembly? These people make far more basic decisions as far as 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
789 

government purchases than any member outside of the cabinet. Would the Attorney General agree that the 
time is now ripe that this area was thoroughly investigated? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, the question of investigation is kind of dodging the issue because it has 
been investigated fairly extensively, not only in Saskatchewan. We did it the time we tabled the white report, 
but it has been investigated by other provinces and even the Dominion of Canada and there has not been any 
legislation in this area. The fact of the matter is that in Crown corporations, where an individual employee is 
in a perceived or actual conflict of interest, well certainly an actual conflict of interest, the remedy is at hand 
— in the hands of the management and in the hands of the board of directors. Any employee who puts 
himself in a conflict of interest with his employer, the Crown corporation business, would obviously pay the 
consequences of that. The questions of a few days ago, in my judgment, don’t relate to conflict of interest in 
the legal term or the legal sense as I define it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take another question. 
 

Revenue by Export Tax 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — A question to the Premier. The Premier will recall the debate when 
the federal government levied the export tax on oil. He will also recall that during the debate on the mineral 
royalty tax issue in the courts in Saskatchewan, he stated unequivocally that the federal government was 
taking away revenues from the people of the province of Saskatchewan that were legitimately theirs. Because 
the federal government was under the control of the parliament in Ottawa and because parliament in Ottawa 
was controlled by the population centres of central Canada, that wasn’t fair to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Will the Premier now tell this Assembly his change in position with reference to that same revenue that is 
being collected by the export tax, that he is now prepared to put it under the control and domination of the 
federal government through his proposal that he has discussed today in question period? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m obviously having difficulty making myself understood. I have at no 
time suggested that the Government of Saskatchewan was agreeing that the federal government should be 
able to collect an export tax on oil exported from Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the proposal of the Canada 
Energy Security Fund at no time anchored itself on money coming from the export tax. This is obviously a 
relatively difficult area with many, many amounts of money being referred to. But the member opposite is 
quite wrong in suggesting that the Government of Saskatchewan now or previously, has agreed that it was 
appropriate for the federal government to arrogate to itself all of the money which it collects under the export 
tax. This is not the position of the Government of Saskatchewan. It was not the position when the tax was 
applied in the fall of 1973, at which time we got half of it. It was not the position when the federal 
government increased its take to 100 per cent. It is not the position now. We do not agree that is appropriate 
for the federal government to do. We wish to get a share or all of the money which is flowing to the federal 
government through the export tax. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, how then can the Premier suggest that this energy fund in Canada work 
since there’s only one number, that is the price of oil, out of which comes the export tax, the price that is 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
790 

paid to the oil companies and the price that is paid to the provincial government? There are only those three 
portions of those particular funds out of the total dollar value of a barrel of oil. Somewhere it’s got to come 
out of the people of Saskatchewan if the federal government is going to maintain that fund. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will try again. It is our proposal that Saskatchewan oil should bear a 
price which is closer to world price. It is our proposal that from that there should be paid the normal 
Saskatchewan royalties which are on conventional oil of the order of 55 per cent. 
 
It is our proposal that out of the remaining 45 per cent, an appropriate amount should go to the industry and 
an appropriate amount should go to the federal government, and an appropriate amount into the Canada 
Energy Security Fund. 
 
This is the proposal we have put forward latterly, as we have adjusted our proposal over time, as some of the 
1975 attributes of the proposal were no longer in the realm of practical politics. 
 
That illustrates I hope, why we believe there is money for the provincial government and an appropriate 
amount for the federal government in the industry, and still money to be put into a Canada Energy Fund. 
That is our proposal as to how Canada should amass funds in the future to fund the steps which we believe 
will need to be taken in order to ensure energy self-sufficiency for Canada, both by conservation measures 
and by finding new sources of energy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Will the members of the Assembly agree to move down the order paper, to special 
order, and return later this day for the balance of the agenda? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, may I bring a point of order before the orders of the day? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the member can raise points of order before orders of the day, which we will 
come to later in the day. Does the point of order have to do with the question period? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Yes. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Then it will be raised before orders of the day, which will come later today . . . Order, 
order! I have asked the Assembly if we can move down the order paper to special order and return later this 
day and complete the balance of the agenda we have passed over. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — No. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — All right, the next subject is ministerial statements. 
 

Point of Order on the Question Period 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order regarding the question period. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it is the common practice in this Assembly that a member when asking a question, is 
normally accorded his original question and generally, two 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
791 

supplementaries provided there is something of some substance to those supplementaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I was accorded one question and a supplementary and I think it was on a subject of some 
relevance, although that, of course, is a debatable point. Mr. Speaker, I was not allowed my second 
supplementary and I think that is a departure from the accepted principles in this Assembly. With all due 
respect, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you had any idea what my final supplementary was and, therefore, I don’t 
think you had an opportunity to assess it, in order to cut me off if you did not think it was worthy of 
continuing the debate. However, Mr. Speaker, I do question being cut off on an issue which has some 
relevance. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe I have the relevance of the member’s point of order, which is with regard to 
not receiving a second supplementary. 
 
I would say at the beginning, the member is wrong to assume that I presumed what his question would be. 
The member’s question was with regard to conflict of interest in Crown corporations. The member followed 
it with a supplementary. He did not get an answer which he wanted to get apparently. He followed it with a 
supplementary which was essentially the same question. Now the rules of the question period specify, and I 
quote you Beauchesne’s Fourth Edition, Rule 171(c): 
 

Members must not multiply with slight variation a similar question on the same point. 
 
So the member was out of order as far as I was concerned. I noticed the member for Nipawin rising to his 
feet and I asked him to take the next question. 
 

Clarification of Point of Order 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Why is the member on his feet? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — New point of order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is the point of order? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well I suppose point of order clarification. Can we now expect it to become 
common practice in this Assembly for members of the opposition to be cut off to facilitate separatist views 
of another portion of the opposition? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! That’s not a point of order. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski, 
(Minister of Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself into the committee of finance and the 
proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Rousseau (Regina South). 
 
MR. A.S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to speak in this 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
792 

debate. The debate gives a member the opportunity of voicing views on various issues of the day, but more 
particularly on the budget and its effect on us as citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one speaks of the budget, basically two points come to mind almost immediately. Firstly 
what good thing does it have for us? Secondly are there going to be any tax increases? 
 
All of us know and understand an increase in budget expenditures calls for an increase in budget revenues 
and the increase in revenues essentially can be obtained from two sources — new and added taxes and 
resource development. Further, Mr. Speaker, in order to prudently manage the financial affairs there must be 
a plan, preferably a long-term plan, to effect a balance between expenditures and revenues. It is only in this 
manner that a sound business and social base can be built for the proper management of the affairs of the 
province. It is on the basis of this theory that this New Democratic government has effectively presented 
budgets which result in an acceptable balance between providing services to people and imposing taxes to 
pay for the services. 
 
In spite of this period of restraint, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan citizens can be relieved of the thought of a 
tight budget and feel comfortable that services will continue in the normal fashion without having to be 
burdened with new and added taxes. As a matter of fact the budget puts forth a number of new initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance for the fine job of preparing the balanced budget 
as well as the very capable manner in which he presented his budget speech on Thursday last. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — The process of budgeting is an arduous job requiring the careful work of many and 
the understanding and tolerance of all. The success of this New Democratic government in the handling of 
the affairs of this province is primarily based on sound financial planning as well as the sensitivity to the 
economic growth and the social well-being of its citizens. Mr. Speaker, to view management in a narrow 
sense and in a short-sighted manner in order to get over the hump could be disastrous. The Liberals in 
Saskatchewan tried it during the 1964-1971 years. The province was in a financial crisis, and the people of 
Saskatchewan were saddled with taxes. The Liberals had no long-term plans for financial management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not any different at the federal level. The Conservatives, in their short stay in Ottawa, had 
no idea for a plan of what is best for Canada. They decided to sock it to Canadians in order to recover the 
economy, while at the same time providing incentives and tax breaks to large multinational corporations. 
Their policies, Mr. Speaker, were leading to further economic downfall. The Liberals in Ottawa are no 
different from the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. They know not from where they come nor do they know to 
where they go. Leadership with an on-the-spot economic short-sightedness leads to disaster. Saskatchewan 
and Canada have experienced this with the Liberals and Conservatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ‘they know not from where they come, nor do they know to where they go’ could well refer to 
the hon. member for Nipawin and the hon. member for Swift Current who in recent days broke ranks with 
the Conservative Party. Only a few months ago the Conservative Party was everything to them. Today the 
party has no meaning to them. 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
793 

Perhaps one of the main reasons for leaving the party is a lack of confidence and uncertainly in Conservative 
policies. The Conservative Party does not know where it stands, or where it should stand, on some very 
important issues. Three in particular that come to mind are uranium development, embassy move, and 
statutory crowrate. It is not prepared to take a firm stand on these issues. The Conservatives are a 
disillusioned group with no philosophy, no set of principles nor leadership. Mr. Speaker, I predict that before 
too long there will be other Conservative members of the legislature breaking ranks and leaving the sinking 
Conservative ship. 
 
You will recollect, Mr. Speaker, that when the New Democratic Party placed the New Deal for People before 
the people of Saskatchewan prior to the 1971 election, there were cries from the opposition stating that the 
New Democrats were dreamers, and that the new deal was impossible to carry out. They said it would break 
the province. But the people of Saskatchewan in the midst of Liberal mismanagement decided in 1971 that 
the New Democratic Party was their choice. By the time the 1975 election was held this New Democratic 
government not only fulfilled its promises in the New Deal for People, but had policies in place providing 
for long-term social and financial management for Saskatchewan. The New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, 
once again placed before the people of Saskatchewan another program document, New Deal ’75. The people 
accepted it overwhelmingly and once again placed their confidence in a New Democratic Party government. 
In 1978 the people of Saskatchewan repeated their support for the New Democrats in even greater numbers. 
Mr. Speaker, they know and recognize good management. They are confident that the affairs of the province 
are in good hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a brief history of the success story of the province of Saskatchewan under the capable 
and responsible leadership of the New Democratic Party government, and of course the generous support and 
the tremendous co-operation of the many understanding people throughout our province. It is evident that 
things in Saskatchewan did not just happen. They were planned and directed to happen so that the people of 
this province can be prime beneficiaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the 1980s this government is striving to maintain its objective with the hope that 
co-operatively we might achieve even higher economic and social goals, realizing greater benefits for the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said in this debate, and more will be said by my colleagues, about the progress 
made in our province in the last decade. I would like now in the short time allotted to me, to deal more 
specifically with the budget before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this New Democratic Party government is committed to building a strong agricultural industry. 
It is our number one industry and we must stand by it. This government believes that farming is 
Saskatchewan’s way of life. Family farms, along with the many small towns, are our rural heritage, a 
tradition that must be preserved. But, Mr. Speaker, there are forces at work exerting pressure to change all 
this. Big business, transportation and grain handling problems, and yes, Liberal and Conservative policies, 
are all a threat to Saskatchewan’s family farm life-style. They believe that in bigness there is efficiency. They 
believe that in order for agriculture to survive the economic pressure on the industry, farms must get bigger. 
The Leader of the Progressive Conservative in Saskatchewan, Grant Devine, in the winter 1977 issue of 
Business Review stated, and I quote: 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
794 

Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 per cent of the farmers, who tend to be 
good businessmen as well as producers, society may not wish to support higher food prices or 
producer security so that the non-productive 80 per cent of the farm population can live in the 
country at a profit. 

 
The Conservative leader goes on further to say there must be a less expensive way of maintaining these rural 
people than allowing them to farm. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative leader believes that four out of five 
farmers are poor businessmen and non-productive. And yes, the Conservative members opposite have this 
belief. None of them have denied it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not a question of being a poor businessman and inefficient. As a matter of fact, 
Saskatchewan farmers are so efficient they can produce more than the market will buy. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
question of orderly marketing and transportation and getting a fair price for the product. 
 
This New Democratic government since 1971 worked positively to formulate policies and programs to keep 
the family farm and preserve the small rural community. Mr. Speaker, the land bank and FarmStart programs 
provided opportunities to many young farmers to get started and established. Since the inception of the 
programs, some 1,700 land bank cases were taken up and some 3,700 participated in FarmStart programs. 
An increase of 24 per cent to $25 million for land bank funding, and an increase to more than double in 
FarmStart grants in the budget before us will allow continued opportunities to young people wanting to farm. 
 
The extension of the farm cost reduction program into this year will continue to give farmers relief in their 
high farm fuel costs. I would urge the Minister of agriculture and the government to give serious 
consideration to continuing this worthwhile program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that our government took the lead in the purchase of 1,000 hopper cars at the cost of 
$55 million to speed up the movement of grain to market. The true commitment of this government 
demonstrates our concern about the agriculture industry. The purchase had a positive effect on the reluctant 
Conservative governments of Alberta and Manitoba to get involved in car purchases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic strength of the agriculture sector has a direct relationship to the viability of rural 
communities and our local government agencies. If farming fares well, so does the local business, the local 
municipality, the school system, and related municipal agencies. 
 
This budget is designed to assist and strengthen the municipal sector of our society. A strong commitment 
had been made by the government in 1978 when revenue sharing was introduced. Municipalities were given 
recognition that they are part and parcel of the provincial economy and as such, will share in the revenues of 
the province. This meant a major increase in operating grants to urban and rural municipalities. The grants 
more than doubled since 1977, from $41 million to $83 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural) is making a change in policy 
to provide for reconstruction of existing worn-out grid roads, that are not designated under the super grid 
system. This is in response to the many concerns expressed by rural municipal councils. In their view a grid 
road reconstruction program is of greater necessity than the super grid program. I tend to agree with 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
795 

them. I am certain that the new policy will be very well accepted by the councils of rural municipalities. 
 
The grid road system has served rural Saskatchewan very well. But some of the first roads are now 25 years 
old and do need rebuilding. The new funding will be of great help to rural municipalities in planning their 
road rebuilding program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the budget provided for a second community capital fund of over $66 million. 
The $100 per capita over a five-year period in towns and villages in the Canora constituency means over 
$750,000 to assist in various capital projects from street improvement, to building a town office or a 
recreation and community centre. 
 
Further to the rural community development, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has placed a high priority 
on improving the highway system in the province. In spite of the comparatively high mileage, the 
government has in every budget provided for major highway improvement throughout the province. 
 
I want to commend the Minister of Highways for undertaking the project of resurfacing the No. 49 Highway 
from Preeceville to Hazel Dell in the Canora constituency in 1980 for a cost of over $1 million. 
 
On behalf of my constituents I want to express my appreciation and thanks to the minister, as well as to place 
a request for the continuation of the resurfacing project the following year, on to the communities of Okla 
and Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our education system is recognized as one of the best in Canada. Every efforts is being made to 
provide our children and adults every opportunity for obtaining as complete an education as one desires. This 
government through its support for community colleges, technical institutes, universities and basic schools, 
has been most responsive in meeting the changing needs of our society. 
 
The NDP moved ahead and did a tremendous job in assisting local school boards with operating and capital 
funds to maintain a level of high education standards. With a more diversified school program, the youth are 
able to equip themselves to benefit from greater employment opportunities. 
 
This year operating grants will be increased by an average of 9 per cent and capital grants will be increased 
by 20 per cent to $8.8 million. New schools will be constructed and major renovations and extensions will 
be provided for others. I am hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education will give careful 
consideration to providing funds to renovate and extend the school facilities in Theodore, in my 
constituency, to improve the present conditions of overcrowded classrooms and lack of storage and gym 
facilities. I know the minister is aware of the situation and I am certain that he will do all he can to allocate 
funding for the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget before us reflects the confidence this New Democratic government has in the 
performance of the economy of Saskatchewan. The diversified industrial development that is taking place in 
the province is our security for the future. The NDP policies are committed to ensure such a security. They 
have been tried and tested with success. The people of Saskatchewan know it and believe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I totally disagree with the amendment, but I will support the main motion. 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
796 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. N. LUSNEY (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity to make a few remarks in 
this debate. 
 
My first comments must be to congratulate our Minister of Finance, Mr. Tchorzewski, both on the content 
and his presentation of this government’s budget. 
 
The people of Pelly constituency, the people I am honored to represent, will welcome this budget, They will 
do so because as you go down the list of initiatives in this budget and in last year’s budget, and you check off 
the initiatives against the NDP program card from the 1978 election, one after another, Mr. Speaker, you will 
find that commitments made were commitments kept. There is something in the formula of government that 
the people of the Pelly constituency understand and appreciate. You might say that the secret formula is truth 
and honesty in politics and in government. 
 
It is a good formula and it explains why there are 44 NDP members and 15 opposition members. Judging 
from the activity on the opposite side of the House over the past few days . . . My colleague, the member for 
Canora said, in his interpretation of that activity, that the Conservatives were breaking ranks and deserting 
ship. I get more of an impression that they were more like rats deserting a sinking ship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina South, in his speech the other day, criticized the budget and made 
comparisons of our 1966 costs of borrowing to our 1944 budget. I would like to point out to that member 
that in 1944 and 1966 our interest rate was not at 17 per cent as it is today, and the member for Regina South 
would well know. Neither are the cars that he sells today the same price as they were in 1966 or 1944. A 
combine, which in 1966 the farmers paid $12,000 to $15,000 for, today would be in the area of $50,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina South also seemed somewhat shocked and disturbed about our $2 
billion budget. Once again I would like to inform the members opposite that in 1965, when the Liberals were 
in power, their education budget was $61.6 million. In this year’s estimates we will be spending over $295 
million, almost six times what was spent in 1965. In 1965 the health budget was about $51.3 million. This 
year we will be spending over $525 million on health programs, more than 10 times what was spent in 1965 
— more than 10 times, Mr. Speaker — because unlike the Tories we place a high priority on providing 
adequate health care for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the people of the Pelly constituency will welcome the nearly $3 million worth of 
capital works planned for our area. They will welcome the continued improvement of our provincial 
highway system planned for our area which this year will be at a cost of nearly $900,000. I know that rural 
municipal officials in my constituency will welcome the more than $1 million in funding which will be 
provided to them by this provincial government. 
 
I want members opposite to know, Mr. Speaker, that if we hear, as I expect we will, the usual stock speeches 
about how this government is spending too much, I fully intend to tell that to my constituents, and I will do 
so without fear of being contradicted. I will be telling my constituents and my rural municipality councillors 
that the Tories think we 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
797 

are spending too much on municipal grants. I will tell the councillors both rural and urban, that they can 
assume Tories would do less for them. Just how much less is anyone’s guess. But to spend less, the Tories 
would have to cut back somewhere. When we use Manitoba as an example and when we realize that more 
than two-thirds of our provincial budget goes to local authorities and to payments to individuals, you can be 
sure that the cutbacks of the Conservatives would be in the area of assistance provided to local governments. 
 
I just want members opposite to be aware that in my area the Conservatives’ usual loose talk will be 
translated into some pretty concrete examples of ways in which their proposed cutbacks might be achieved 
and at whose expense. I want the Tories to know the examples will be graphic enough and given in a manner 
that all the people will understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the people of Pelly constituency will welcome the commitment to improve and 
expand senior citizen housing and nursing home services in Kamsack and in Norquay, at a cost of more than 
$200,000. The increase of 22.5 per cent in funds allocated for allowances for certain residents of special-care 
homes and the fact that the increase provides for a start on major restructuring of our special-care system will 
also be welcome news to people of Pelly constituency and to people across Saskatchewan. 
 
People in my area in particular will be interested to know that nearly $1.25 million will be spent to improve 
recreation facilities in our district. A large portion of this will be spent improving facilities in the Duck 
Mountain Provincial Park. 
 
In the area of agriculture farmers in Saskatchewan will welcome the extension to the end of 1980 of the farm 
cost reduction program at an additional cost to the treasury of $15.6 million. This program has been 
extended beyond its earlier planned time frame and that assistance will help our farmers. I will make every 
effort to try to convince the government to continue that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more than 50 per cent increase in funding to the FarmStart program will also be welcomed 
by many young farmers in my constituency — farmers who may want to diversify their farming operation 
and keep it viable. 
 
The purchase of 1,000 hopper cars, I feel, will also get approval of farmers in my constituency and farmers 
throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, those 1,000 hopper cars will be capable of moving an additional 57 
million bushels of grain annually. If the price of wheat remains as it is at present, that would mean an 
injection of cash into our farm economy of some $242 million each year — $242 million each year for an 
investment of $50 million which could be spread out over the next 10 or 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers in my area will also be pleased with the amendments to The Education and Health Tax 
Act, which will extend and modernize the list of exemptions on farming equipment. But, Mr. Speaker, a 
quick glance at personal income statistics and farm income statistics for Saskatchewan appended to the 
budget speech make it clear that some action is needed to more fairly stabilize farm income. For our part, as 
New Democrats, we have asked for action at the federal level where such an objective can most properly be 
achieved. We have pressed for income stabilization that recognizes the increases in the costs of production 
farmers have been faced with. 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
798 

Mr. Speaker, the Ottawa Liberal government of a year ago showed no inclination to listen and the Tory 
government of more recent times just basked in the sun in Jasper for six months. Neither got much done — 
or much cared. Their only answer for farmers seemed to be increased productivity, even though neither 
demonstrated an ability to market existing production or demand that our railway systems move that 
production to market in a more efficient manner. 
 
Personally, I am beginning to wonder if farmers in Saskatchewan can afford to wait much longer for a decent 
income stabilization program, because it’s obvious that even more production and more sales are not an 
answer by themselves. Stabilized income at an acceptable level will only come about if we can have the 
farmers’ returns begin to bear some relationship to the cost of production. I would like to see our Minister of 
Agriculture study ways that such a program could be structured and the cost implications of such a program 
turn on a federal-provincial basis. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, we have already more or less accepted the idea of putting up provincial funds 
through the farm fuel rebate program, the beef industry assistance grants and similar programs of that type 
which have had limited objectives. I think that such a plan, if it were feasible financially, would receive 
public acceptance since it is reasonably well understood by the general public that it is our farming 
community, almost exclusively, which has had to live with an up and down net income picture. Such has 
been the case for our farmers in spite of the fact that realized gross farm income has risen steadily since 1970 
with the exception of the years 1976 and 1977. It wouldn’t cost a lot to study and consider such a plan and I 
hope our minister will consider the suggestion and give it some thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another group important to the economic well-being of our Premier is our small business 
community. It is this group that is vital to every small community in our province. This group is a major 
employer and when they, together with our farming community, are doing well, our province is doing well. 
 
I know that people engaged in family operated and small enterprises will welcome features in this budget 
pertaining to them. They will welcome the 100 per cent increase in funding for the Main Street program 
under which communities and businesses in those communities can obtain assistance with improving their 
business premises. They will welcome the 30 per cent increase in funding for the small business interest 
abatement program which can reduce their annual interest costs as much as $500, particularly since the Tory 
high interest rate policy coming out of Ottawa will have them with their backs up against the wall. Small 
business people will also welcome the 95 per cent increase in the Aid to Trade program which provides 
assistance to manufacturers and processors in introducing their products and in expanding their markets. 
 
They will welcome the near 13 per cent increase in funding for product development assistance and the 53 
per cent increase in the small industry development program which assists smaller manufacturing and 
processing companies to get established, to expand or to modernize through a scheme of forgivable loans 
covering a portion of the costs of expansions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the response to these programs of our Minister of Industry has been a good one. 
I’m sure he can quote statistics to prove that even the doubters and the pessimists sitting opposite would 
agree. What we deserve to hear from the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, is if these would be some of the 
programs that they would 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
799 

be using as a target for their cutbacks. We deserve to hear from them if these would be, and if they aren’t 
they should be telling us which programs they would be cutting back on. I know many small business people 
in my community and they are familiar with some of the programs that we have and they would welcome 
many of them. They have helped lots of the small businesses in my community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other areas in this budget that are equally as important as the ones I have chosen to 
comment on, but my time is limited. I have mentioned some of the progress which will be experienced 
directly by my constituents. I have indicated how the farming and small business people in my constituency 
will benefit as well as our senior citizens. 
 
Most groups and most people will, I think, feel that we have done a reasonable job in the way of assistance 
that the provincial government is called upon to provide. They will also think it reasonable that we have kept 
to our long-term plan of balancing the budget over a number of years, something we said we would do and 
something we have done in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because people in my area will receive this budget well, I will be pleased to support the main 
motion and I will be voting against the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.G. LONG (Cut Knife-Lloydminster): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to congratulate the 
Minister of Finance, the member for Humboldt, on his first budget — a balanced budget. Mr. Speaker, what 
a fine way to start his ministry, what a fine way to celebrate Saskatchewan on its 75th year, what a fine way 
to start the decade of the ’80s! 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a new member in this House, I have found the past few days to be somewhat of a traumatic 
experience. I have witnessed, Mr. Speaker, what I consider indeed to be a shocking incident, two members of 
the Conservative caucus opposite deserting the ranks of the official opposite to sit as independents. Mr. 
Speaker, that incident in itself is not an unusual act but the proposal they have made, I find to be absolutely 
unacceptable. To suggest that western Canada should leave our confederation, leave the British 
Commonwealth and join another country is to me and my constituents not worthy of consideration, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I believe that we witnessed in this House during the past few days what is indeed a dangerous act. We as 
Canadians currently are involved in a struggle against the anti-federalist forces in Quebec. Mr. Speaker, the 
Parti Quebecois would take their province out of confederation, an act I solemnly disagree with. But these 
people would go one step further and seek union for western Canada with another country. I am proud to be 
Canadian. I am proud of our province and I would fight such a movement until my last breath. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what a sharp contrast this budget speech is with the acts of the independent members opposite. 
This is a budget that shows confidence and optimism for our country and our province. I welcome this 
government’s balanced budget. People across Canada see this as a sign of fiscal responsibility. We have been 
able to balance this budget, give tax breaks, introduce new programs and expand others because this 
government’s resource policy and long-term economic planning has paid off. 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
800 

I was pleased to hear a corporate capital tax for large corporations with assets of over $10 million will be 
implemented by this government. when one considers the tax breaks Liberals and Tories have provided for 
their big corporate friends, somebody has to act. I would like to take a few minutes to examine one aspect of 
this problem. I would like to explain how the people of Canada are ripped off by the big corporations and 
their Liberal and Tory friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last federal election we had John Crosbie running around the country telling 
ordinary people like you and me that we must tighten our belts. After all, he said, the country has a deficit of 
over $11 billion and it is up to all of us to help Canada out of its economic problems. We need tough 
solutions for tough economic times, said the former minister of finance. So you tax the workers, you tax the 
farmers, you tax the small businessmen to pay off the deficit. But what Mr. Crosbie wasn’t telling us was 
that during the Trudeau years of government, time and time again the Conservative opposition sided with the 
Trudeau Liberals as the $11 billion deficit came about and the major corporations of this country were 
allowed to build up massive reserves of unpaid taxes. By 1976 the owed the Canadian government $11.6 
billion. Now it is estimated that the figure is close to $15 billion. They have not paid a cent of interest on this 
money nor have they been required to do so. Mr. Speaker, while farmers, workers and small businessmen 
have been asked to carry this burden of the federal deficit, the big corporations have a tax holiday. The $15 
billion they owe, and should be required to pay, would pay off the deficit and leave several billion for other 
important programs like medicare. 
 
Throughout the campaign the Tories kept saying they weren’t allowed enough time to tackle the country’s 
problems. But Tories are not going to tackle this one because you don’t bite the hand that feeds you. Mr. 
Speaker, they believe their corporate friends should enjoy tax breaks while ordinary people like you and me 
bear the load. In this country successive Liberal and Tory governments have set up a taxation system that 
dictates the bigger the corporation, the less they pay. In 1976, about 290,000 firms in the corporate sector of 
this country had assets of $1 million or less. They paid taxes at an effective rate of 30.4 percent. There were 
about 25,000 firms with assets of $1 million to $25 million paying an effective tax rate of 34.3 per cent. But 
the 1,500 corporations in Canada with assets of over $25 million pay taxes at an effective tax rate of 27.1 per 
cent. I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that this group was the chief beneficiary of the tax deferral policy I 
mentioned earlier. Mr. Speaker, of the $11.6 billion in unpaid reserves made available to the corporate sector 
up to 1976, this group was the chief beneficiary. By 1976 they had accumulated $9.4 billion in unpaid, 
non-interest bearing taxes. By now that figure will be close to $12 billion. Mr. Speaker, that’s $500 for every 
man, women and child in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan believes that corporations should pay their fair share of the 
tax load. The federal government obviously doesn’t. I say the federal government because there is really no 
difference in taxation policies, whether we have a Liberal or Conservative federal government. Taxation 
policies are not the only things which make this government different from Liberal and Conservative federal 
governments. This NDP budget proves once again that the Blakeney government honours its election 
commitments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost 18 months have passed since the Blakeney government was first re-elected for a third 
term of office. In the course of that election campaign we made 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
801 

promises to the people of Saskatchewan, promises that we would continue to provide good government and 
sound management for Saskatchewan’s economy. Mr. Speaker, if you look at the record of the past 18 
months, it indicates that the Blakeney government is the government that keeps its promises. Mr. Speaker, 
we promised a cut in personal income tax as resource revenues grew. Last year we acted by providing a child 
tax credit of $40 per child. This year it was increased to $50 per child, having the effect of taking 2,500 
people off the tax role. 
 
We promised tax relief for senior citizens. This year the income tax credit for senior citizens will be raised 
from $160, Mr. Speaker, to $210. The promised property tax relief for senior citizens was delivered last year, 
effectively wiping out the education portion of property tax for most senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, we 
promised to eliminate provincial capital gains tax on homes, farms, and small businesses. That promise was 
delivered last year and will affect the 1979 taxation year. The renters’ rebate program was implemented a 
year ago. This year it will be expanded to include senior citizens living in tax exempt properties who are not 
receiving subsidized nursing care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said we would reduce the cost of nursing home care. This has been a very special concern 
of mine. I am pleased that the Minister of Finance sees fit to allocate $10 million to ease this burden on our 
senior citizens. Mr. Speaker, in talking to young parents, one of the first things they mention is the 
Saskatchewan Dental Plan. This program is setting a new standard for dental care across the country. 
Saskatchewan parents everywhere will be pleased the government is keeping its promise to extend the 
program to age 18. Mr. Speaker, this year we will include 14-year-olds under the dental plan. Mr. Speaker, 
we said we would set up a health research fund. That was done in the budget of the first term of this 
government. We have promised to support family farms by reducing the cost of farm fuel. The farm cost 
reduction program has been extended again this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, concerns about the energy supply for our farms has prompted this government to set up an 
energy security division of the heritage fund. I am sure farmers everywhere will welcome this initiative to 
guarantee fuel supplies for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we promised revenue sharing for the municipal sector. We delivered on this promise and this 
year the grants will reach nearly $83 million. We are reinstating the community capital fund this year. 
Saskatchewan communities will welcome the $100 per capita to be paid out over the next five years. Mr. 
Speaker, a review of the list indicates that out of the 19 promises made by this party in October of ’78, 17 
have been acted upon. Mr. Speaker, we’ll be moving ahead in the coming years to fulfil our promises and 
expand and improve the programs we started. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few moments to comment on the NDP promises and what this budget 
will mean to the people of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. In the area of education, a field this government has 
placed a high priority on, foundation grants for the school divisions and school districts of our area will 
amount to $7,940,000, an increase of $574,000 over last year. 
 
This year will see considerable activity by the Department of Highways in our area. Highway 16 from 
Maidstone to Lashburn will be completed in 1980. The straightening of curves, widening, and paving of the 
shoulders, will make this portion of the Yellowhead a much safer route to take. The department will be 
proceeding with similar improvements on Highway 16 between Delmas and Paynton this year. The minister 
has also announced the grading of Highway 16, 11 kilometres west of Battleford for the 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
802 

’80-’81 program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Yellowhead Route has become a second Trans-Canada in the West. I would call upon the 
federal government to assist in the upgrading of this busy highway. Highway 21 from Maidstone to 16 
kilometres north is on the current program to be paved. Paving of Highway 40 from Wilbert to the Alberta 
border, a distance of 61 kilometres, will be completed in 1980-81. Highway 17 from the junction of Highway 
40 to the Lone Rock access is now on the program to be paved. This border highway is a joint project 
between the Alberta and Saskatchewan Departments of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important project the Alberta and Saskatchewan governments will be involved in is the 
construction of the meridian bridge across the North Saskatchewan River north of Lloydminster. This year a 
beginning will be made on the approaches to this important link to the area north of Lloydminster, an area 
rich in possibilities for oil development and tourist trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, revenue sharing to our urban governments this year will amount to $573,000, an increase of 
over $155,000 since last year. These increases will be welcomed in our fast-growing area. 
 
These are some of the important aspects of this budget to my constituents. I am sure they will join with me in 
expressing their gratitude to this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an age when there is increasing scepticism about governments and politicians who lead 
them, it is essential that campaign promises be made only after careful study of what the economy can bear. 
To make promises that fit into carefully planned programs, not mere election promises to buy votes, is being 
both fiscally and politically responsible. That is what Joe Clark found out this past February. His list of 
broken promises and flip-flopping on issues defeated his government. People expect politicians to keep their 
promises and lead the country. Joe Clark and his Tories didn’t meet the bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another item in this budget which invites comparison to the performance of the 
short-lived Tory federal government. Saskatchewan’s bold initiative in purchasing 1,000 hopper cars came at 
a time when the wheat board had made an urgent request for more cars and decisive action was required to 
find a solution to the grain handling and transportation mess. What was the federal government doing? 
Nothing! They limped into action only after Saskatchewan assumed leadership and had taken the first step. 
What kind of a deal did they make? The NDP Government of Saskatchewan has ordered 1,000 hopper cars. 
They will be delivered by the end of this year. This business-like transaction will see the people of 
Saskatchewan owning 1,000 hopper cars purchased for $55 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what of the federal Tory deal for hopper cars? How did these self-proclaimed businessmen 
make out? The former minister of transport announced a federal hopper car deal. It must have been a 
sweetheart deal with some of their corporate friends. This transaction will have cost the Canadian taxpayers 
$200 million for 2,000 box cars. That is nearly twice as much, and at the end of the lease period we won’t 
even own them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues the progressive taxation policy of the Blakeney government. It delivers 
on the few election promises that were not fulfilled in last year’s budget and it continues bold initiatives like 
the hopper car purchase which will be a  



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
803 

long-term benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am proud to be a member of this government that produced this budget and I will be giving it my 
whole-hearted support. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to represent the people of 
Regina Rosemont constituency in this legislature. I have always viewed it as an honour and a responsibility 
and I want to say to them and to the House that I take that responsibility seriously. I will certainly do 
everything I can to represent the people of Regina Rosemont well in this legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I also want to say that it is a real joy for me to address a few brief remarks about this 
budget and in support of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a sound budget. It faces up to the realities of the Saskatchewan economy. It meets the 
needs of our people in health, education, social services, job creation and economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget anticipates the problems of the future in the price and the availability of energy and 
addresses those problems boldly. The budget has a number of provisions for the elderly. One program I 
would like to make particular reference to is the extension of the rent rebate program to include senior 
citizens who are living in tax-exempt properties. On behalf of the many people who live in the cottages and 
bachelor apartments at Pioneer Village Mutchmor Lodge and Eastern Star Home, I bring sincere thanks. 
 
I want to thank you, Minister of Municipal affairs (Urban), for the work that you did. I want to thank the 
Minister of Finance for including this item in the budget. It is one that is sincerely appreciated by the 
pensioners who live in my constituency in these homes and it will be a big help in helping them deal with the 
rising cost of living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one area mentioned in the budget that I want to spend a little time talking about this 
afternoon and that is the whole question of Indian and native programming in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a member of the legislature but even more than that I am a parent raising a young family 
in the city of Regina. I have always taken the view that I couldn’t isolate myself, nor could I isolate my 
family, from the larger community in which we live. 
 
If the Indian and native people of the city of Regina have problems, then I think, my family and I are going to 
have problems. We should be looking — I as an individual member of this community, along with Indian 
and native people in this community — and trying to come up with some solutions to those problems. There 
are lots of problems. I could just relate a few of them to you. 
 
I think that the whole shift of our society, from a rural society to an urban one, is a phenomenon that has 
gone on for the last 40 years. If you go back 40 years, only 20 per cent of our population lived in cities, 60 
per cent of our population lives in cities today. Indian and Metis people have over the last decade, the last 10 
years, come to our cities 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
804 

in larger and larger numbers. Today, 73 per cent of the Indian and native people who live in urban centres 
live in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and North Battleford. 
 
Back in 1976 there were 49,000 people of Indian ancestry who lived in urban centres. Next year it will be 
58,000; in five years time it will be 82,000 people. I suppose we have to start addressing some of the 
concerns that people have about that. Why do people come to the city? You know, I was up in La Loche a 
few years ago and talked to a young native girl there who told me she was going to move to Saskatoon. I said 
to her — why would you want to go to Saskatoon? She said — well, there’s nothing in La Loche for me to 
do. There are jobs in Saskatoon. There are good houses for me to live in in Saskatoon. There are 
opportunities in Saskatoon. That’s why she came. But a lot of people who came got disillusioned very 
quickly because what they had done, Mr. Speaker, was to exchange the rural poverty they knew for urban 
poverty they had never dreamed of. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I could rattle off statistics to you, I suppose, all afternoon. I know I don’t have the time to 
do that. The one statistic I think important, and one we should all realize, is that 85 per cent of the native 
people who live in our cities are classified as being poor, people who live below the poverty line. Most of 
these people, or many of these people, are not working. I think we have to ask ourselves — why aren’t they 
working? What can we do to get them working? Education-wise, 60 per cent of Indian children are 1.7 
years-2.3 years behind other children in the province. Of every Indian child who starts schools in Grade 1, 
one out of 12 or 15 will complete high school That’s a problem — education. Health problems — health 
problems with Indian people are much higher than they are for us. Alcoholism problems are particularly bad; 
social participation, Mr. Speaker. In this regard I’d like to quote from a report that just came out about this 
and what it says: 
 

Indian and native people are severely underrepresented in the number of graduates from high school, 
technical schools, universities. Similarly in the legislature, the civil service, banks, construction 
firms, resource industries and farming, few persons of Indian ancestry can be found. They are also 
underrepresented in service organizations, recreational organizations, political parties, municipal 
government. When this evidence combined with the fact that people of Indian ancestry are often 
culturally different as well, two different social communities exist — Indian-native and other. 
Although these social communities live in physical proximity to each other, the relationship is 
characterized by emotional and cultural isolation. 

 
This statement I’ve just read I think is a condemnation of the kind of society we have, and something we as 
members of this legislature should try to improve. 
 
I want to talk a little bit in the few minutes I have left about some of the solutions I think we should be 
looking at to deal with these problems. This budget puts into play I think the fist tentative steps necessary to 
come to grips with some of these problems. It deals with education, and the Minister of Education 
announced some, I think, exciting new concepts in urban Indian-native education. It deals with economic 
development and promises to help people of native ancestry to get into business. It expands social 
programming, Mr. Speaker, for native groups delivering family counselling, for day care, for alcoholism 
treatment. It deals with jobs. Mr. Speaker, I think this is the most important part of the whole package — 
jobs. Why do children leave school? All the studies we have been able to look at show children stay in 
school when they’re young because their parents encourage them to stay in school. If they don’t have that 
support 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
805 

in the home, they’re not likely to stay. 
 
All of us, I think, were encouraged by our parents. I say, if people are working, they’re making a living and 
they see the opportunities that education will bring. They’ll want their children to remain in school. 
Economic development, while good, isn’t going to solve the problem. There’s no way that we can set up 
every poor Indian person who is not working in business. That isn’t going to be possible. I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that we can find a lot of them jobs. I think that we have to do some imaginative and innovative 
things to have them stay in those jobs and to make a success out of them. Our training programs, Mr. 
Speaker, have been a mistaken for many years because we’ve trained people to improve their general skills, 
but the skills haven’t been job related enough. I think we need programs right where the people are working, 
to give them the skills that they need to do the job. Once they’re on the job, if there are additional skills that 
they require so that they can advance in the job, then we have to provide the necessary training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the government has a great responsibility in this area. In my view the government’s 
responsibility is this: the government has to outline clearly where we as a society want to go. It has to set 
some targets for us as a group. I notice that we don’t want quotas in terms of job hiring. I’ll go along with 
that but, Mr. Speaker, I think we need targets. I think if we expect and we want to have Indian people 
participating in employment at the same rate as other people, we have to say we want to do it over a certain 
number of years. In order to get there we have to do such and such. I think we can do that for ourselves as a 
government, but the government isn’t going to be the answer to the problem. The government can’t hire 
everybody. It isn’t going to be possible. The vast majority of people will have to be hired in the private 
sector. I believe that the answer to solving the problem is in the private sector working with business people 
in this province. I think business people are ready to listen. 
 
If you look ahead, Mr. Speaker, as many business people do they don’t see a problem with unemployment in 
five or ten years — they see a problem of employment. Where are they going to get the people to run their 
factories? So they are willing to talk about these things. I think that we should be working with them to come 
up with an innovative, exciting program, and I think it can be done. Mr. Speaker, I think too, that we in this 
legislature have to make a commitment. There are going to be mistakes made. All of the targets aren’t going 
to be met that we seek for ourselves. But if we pick away at them, if we say oh you failed in this little area 
and lose sight of the larger thing, what does that do for the population? They lose the confidence they have 
that these problems can be solved. We need, in this legislature, support from you guys — support from your 
side of the House, not picking away at us in election campaigns. That kind of thing isn’t going to work 
because if you do that, we won’t solve the problems. I’m sincere and I’m appealing to you people for your 
support in this program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is a two-way street and I’m willing to work 
with you guys on this. Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me we can go to the moon. We can plumb the depths 
of the oceans. Surely in a population of a million people we can come to grips with this problem and build 
Saskatchewan into a more humane, an equal, a fair society. I am confident that this budget is taking the first 
step to do that, and I support the budget. I congratulate the minister on it and I’ll certainly be supporting the 
motion. Thank you. 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
806 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to rise in this debate, especially 
following the call for a unified effort in the Assembly of Saskatchewan by the preceding speaker. I sincerely 
hope that he believes the same thing applies to all members of the opposition in that he’s going to co-operate 
with them, and I’m sure he’ll find the co-operation forthcoming from this side if that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during my remarks today I intend to point out why Canada is failing as a country. I intend to 
provide evidence of western Canadian alienation. I intent to say why there is no hope for the future. I intend 
to suggest some positive aspects of a potential union with the United States of America. I would like to start 
with my conclusion first. 
 
The only way to live like an American is to be one. We, in Canada today, specifically in western Canada, are 
dominated by American industry dominated by American culture, dominated by American television, 
dominated by American radio, dominated by American music. Our people in western Canada have precisely 
the same multicultural heritage as have the people from the western United States, the same kinds of 
aspirations for the future, the same problems — the same kinds of problems except they’re being settled and 
solved better in the United States of American than we’re solving them here. 
 
the point is we live precisely the same way in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Calgary, 
Edmonton, as the people of Great Falls, Butte, Grand Forks, Phoenix Houston, and the other people of the 
western United States live. The only way to be an American and to live like an American is to be one. 
 
Why is Canada failing as a country? Well, for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go into some of 
them. 
 
First, the centralization of power and, as part of that centralization of power, the bankrupt issue, the bankrupt 
policy perpetrated on this country by Pierre Elliot Trudeau and his group. The policy of bilingualism cannot 
work. It makes us inefficient. It makes us incapable of providing the kind of government in our country, a 
partnership government, that every Canadian except those in the Toronto-Ottawa axis, want to have. The 
point is that the policy of bilingualism as perpetrated on this country is impossible. you cannot tell a postman 
in Maple Creek, Saskatchewan that if he is to grow with the postal union he must learn to speak French. If he 
is to grow in the postal service, become a supervisor, become a boss, get any kind of promotions, he must 
learn to speak French. That is a bankrupt policy and one that won’t work. 
 
Now, the Premier, in his remarks to me the other day, said he was in favour of the policy of bilingualism but 
was made at the way it was implemented. I sincerely hope the Premier of Saskatchewan will tell the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada how he intends to make the policy of 
bilingualism work in the province of Saskatchewan. I would be most happy to hear specifically how the 
Attorney General, for example, is going to make the court system in Saskatchewan totally bilingual as is 
recommended and requested by Mr. Trudeau and his group. I am going to be interested to hear how the 
Premier is going to provide documents, bilingually, in the province of Saskatchewan — meaningful 
documents, such as the budget. Who is going to pay for it? Why are the supposed to pay for such a bankrupt 
policy which will not work? It is only one example, Mr. Speaker, of the kind of policy put forward by Mr. 
Trudeau and his group for the last 12 or 14 years — centralizing power 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
807 

in Ottawa and centralizing power in central Canada — that is driving and splintering this country apart. 
 
I am not going to waste the time of this Assembly in recounting the number of times I have heard the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and the Attorney General say precisely the same words I have just 
spoken. I know they will recall them in my debates in this legislature. The policy of centralization of power 
in Ottawa cannot possibly hold together a country as diverse and multicultural as Canada and cannot 
possibly meet the aspirations and needs of western Canadians. 
 
That policy is a failure. But the people of central Canada, in February 1980, determined that they should 
re-elect a group of individuals who have stated that that is their primary aim. Mr. Trudeau, on every occasion 
when I have heard him speak on the subject, has stated that the only possible way to hold Canada together is 
from the centre out. The only possible way to get Canadians to work together is the centralization of power. 
That is what Mr. Trudeau has stated and that is directly opposite to the stated view of the four western 
Canadian premiers, in fact, the stated views of every Canadian premier. That policy is bankrupt as well. It 
cannot and will not function. 
 
Another reason why Canada is failing is that after 14 years of attempting to give definition to what a 
Canadian is, after 14 years of constitutional conferences, premiers’ conferences, meetings, debates, there is 
still no definition of what a Canadian is. The only one that has come forward is that we are not Americans. 
That’s the only one. That is not enough to hold a country together and that’s not enough when there are 
people in the country who believe that the correct aspirations of any country is first of all to define itself and 
to give itself a raison d’etre. 
 
I notice the Premier smiled when I used a French phrase. I am not opposed to French, Mr. Premier, as you 
well know. My daughter is fluently bilingual because she wanted to become so. She presently lives in France 
because she wants to live there and is planning to return to Canada because she wants to live here. She 
would live in the United States as well. What she wants is to be a free citizen of a free country that believes 
in democracy and that does not believe in treating the people of a region of Canada as colonists. That’s how 
we feel in western Canada. 
 
I notice a great many polls have come out recently. Some of them quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, leave a lot to 
be desired. One person walks up to another person on the street and says, do you want to give up Canada? I 
can’t think of anyone who would answer that question yes — at this point. There may be a few. No one 
wants to give up a free country but no one is prepared to live in a country when they are not free. No one is 
prepared to live in a country like Canada and believe they are colonists of the eastern Canadian 
establishment and stay there forever. They want to see a change. 
 
I will give you a poll suggestion. Go and ask the people of western Canada if they believe that significant, 
structural changes must occur in Canada or they are not going to be happy citizens of this country. And I 
would be prepared to bet anything that you’d get better than 75 per cent of the people of the West saying the 
structural changes must occur. Now the question is, are they going to occur? 
 
Another reason why Canada is failing as a country is that a significant percentage of the population of 
Canada, the French speaking people of the province of Quebec, are stating everyday that they believe a 
sovereign state is the only solution. Whether or not Mr. Levesque wins his referendum in the province of 
Quebec, I predict that because he 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
808 

has such a significant number of people behind him and such a significant number of people committed to a 
sovereign country in Quebec, that in no possible way can Canada, as we know it, survive. 
 
You will recall, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Trudeau first took office the Separatists in Quebec represented 2 per 
cent of the population. At that time we saw the bombing of mailboxes. We saw martial law declared in 
Canada — some of you may have forgotten. What in the world are we going to see when they represent 45 
per cent of the people of Quebec? Or 50 per cent of the people of Quebec? What are we going to see? A 
Canada as we know it? We are not. I further predict, Mr. Speaker, that when western Canadians examine the 
proposals of Mr. Claude Ryan, the Leader of the Liberal Party in the province of Quebec, they will reject him 
out of hand. So where is the choice? You have Mr. Levesque representing one group in Quebec. You have 
Mr. Ryan representing the rest who are committed to the kind of change that western Canadian will not 
accept and which will destroy the country. 
 
Another reason why Canada is failing as a country, Mr. Speaker, is the economic domination of Canada by 
American corporations. That’s a fact. No one disputes that American-controlled corporations dominate the 
industry of Canada but more importantly, the American economy dominates Canada. In this very Assembly I 
listened to the Premier answer questions about interest rates but the one answer he did not give, which was 
the truth, is that when rates of interest rise in the United States there is no way that Canada can hold her 
interest rates down. It is impossible. That is the truth. Those are the facts. And when the American rate of 
interest jumps to 19 per cent, Canadian interest rates must follow. When the American stock market jumps, 
the Canadian stock market jumps too. 
 
Prices, inflation — that killer of all that is good in a free society — inflation is the one enemy of a free 
country. Those who wish to destroy Canada as a free county will continue in the kind of excessive 
government spending that has occurred in this budget in Saskatchewan — that will exacerbate inflation. If it 
is the aim of members opposite to increase inflation and therefore destroy a free country, they will persist in 
the view they can spend themselves out of problems in an inflationary period. Mr. Speaker, we have no vote 
in the United States of America — none. We have no say over who shall be the government of the United 
States. We have no say over who shall be the President. American citizens do. We do not. If we are 
dominated by them, if we live like them, then why not be one and get the benefits of full citizenship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another reason why Canada is failing as a country. It is our policies of defence over the 
last number of years. Our armed forces have been decimated. We now have approximately 85,000 total 
armed forces stretching from sea to sea — army, navy, air force, coastguard, total. We cannot defend 
Canada. We are totally dependent upon the United States of America for our defence. Any country worth 
standing up for, any country worth living in, is worth working for and paying the price. Any country worth 
calling itself a country must say — we have an obligation to defend ourselves in a hostile world and if we do 
not, we do not deserve to be called a country. 
 
Another reason why Canada’s failing as a country is that over the last number of years a number of things 
have occurred taking the heart out of many Canadians. I look across at the members opposite with the flags 
and I think back to the flag debate. I think back to 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
809 

all those Canadian who fought and died for the red ensign in this country. When they were told some 
designer was going to produce a new flag, the heart went right out of them. The heart went out of them. 
 
I suppose the primary reason why western Canadians believe that Canada is failing as a country is what I said 
before. The people of western Canada believe, rightly or wrongly, that the Toronto-Ottawa axis (and it used 
to be Toronto-Montreal-Ottawa; it is no longer because they moved from Montreal to Toronto) treats the 
west like a colony. That is what the people believe. I ask you to ask your constituents if they don’t believe 
that. If they don’t then I want to know why are all the order paper items from the NDP members opposite 
designed to say just that? And why have each one of you, when you have been speaking in your own 
constituency said exactly that? You are reflective; politicians must be reflective. You reflect the view of your 
constituencies. You have won three straight elections in Saskatchewan, therefore you must represent the 
views of the people of Saskatchewan. I believe that; I believe in democracy. If you represent their views then 
you know the people there believe we are treated like a colony of central Canada. Think about it. Evidence of 
western Canadian alienation? On every order paper in every western Canadian legislature, the vast majority 
of items criticize the federal government for the same items year after year after year. When asked in his nine 
years as Premier of Saskatchewan (almost 10) what concrete steps, structural changes had occurred in 
Canada as a result of the many premiers’ conference? What concrete proposal had come forward which were 
acted upon to change the feelings of western Canadians from one of a colony to one of full partners and full 
citizens of the country? The Premier of Saskatchewan gave such minuscule items as, I can’t say whether the 
Olympics held in Montreal were for all Canadians or for the benefit of western Canadians or not. I don’t 
have Hansard in front of me, but I believe he mentioned rolling stock, the purchase of some rolling stock for 
the railroads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many polls have been mentioned on the feelings of western alienation. I might mention just a 
couple. Certainly, so far, I would say that the way they were written affects how they are answered. But a 
New Westminster paper, in February, put one ad in their newspaper asking would you support the concept of 
an independent western Canada? They received 1,200 replies with 71 per cent in favour. 
 
There have been other indicators. The Canada West Foundation announced a recent poll which said that 5 
per cent of the people of western Canada would support union with the United States. That same concept 
asked 25 years ago would have received less than 1 per cent. That is growth, and significant growth, and 5 
per cent of the population of western Canada at this point is 250,000 people, almost double the population of 
Regina. That’s how many would support the concept according to that poll. The federal election results — I 
don’t think anybody would suggest that the federal election results did not show an alienation in western 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say one more thing about what proves the kind of alienation we have in western 
Canada. Are you aware that the quotas for emigration from Canada to the United States are so jammed and 
so plugged with Canadians desirous of going to the United States that you may not even get on the list for 
four years? 
 
Why is there no hope for the future of this country, and why put forward a suggestion that perhaps we should 
join with the United States? I need only mention the federal election and the fact that the campaign in the 
province of Ontario said, vote Liberal and the wealth stays in the East, vote Conservative and the wealth 
moves to the West. And in great numbers they voted Liberal where they had not voted Liberal but nine 
months 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
810 

before, where they had rejected a government and a group that produced such wonders for Canada as the Sky 
Shops affair and the judges’ affair and the harbor dredging scandal. You name it; they produced it. They 
were rejected and nine months later they were reselected, retreaded. The people of Quebec overwhelmingly 
endorsed the fact that they wanted to run things in the country — let us run the country and we will stick 
around. That is no way to have a partnership. There is no common ground there. 
 
Why is there no hope for the future? Because after 100 years of discussion, after 14 years of concentrated 
effort on behalf of the governments of all the provinces, after 14 years of concentrated effort by the federal 
government, after the stated aim of the Prime Minister of Canada 14 years ago to produce concrete changes 
that would achieve consensus in Canada, there is none. And there is less consensus after 14 years than there 
was before. If you want evidence of that, look at the growth of the Parti Quebecois in the province of 
Quebec, and look at the growth of western Canadian alienation. 
 
Another reason why I think there is no hope for the future is that the one thing that western Canadians 
economically have been asking for, for decades, is a manufacturing or industrial base, so that jobs and 
opportunities could stay here no matter what the vagaries of the agricultural markets of the world, no matter 
what the vagaries of the resource sector of the world. What has been the response of central Canada to the 
request for a major industry — not a resource industry — the development of a petro-chemical in the 
province of Alberta on world standards? The response has been rejection so that Sarnia could keep its 
position. Measures that will create the manufacturing base, that will create the kinds of manufacturing jobs 
which western Canadians have been clamouring for, have been rejected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture and resources always go down, no one will suggest differently. Today western 
Canada is hauling in the dough. The Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Alberta are 
hauling in the dough, but it’s all resource based. Most of that dough is coming from non-renewable 
resources. The only way to protect the people for the future is to create the kind of manufacturing, industrial 
base which will create those jobs that will keep the kids here. They are not coming because central 
Canadians through their freight-rate policies, through their protectionist policies, and through outright 
regulation and control, have said they won’t develop here. We have yet to hear from the Premier or anyone 
of any concrete examples of a significant manufacturing base developing in western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned before there is no hope for the future because Quebec, I am sorry to say, in my 
judgement is gone. There is no hope. When you have only the choice between Mr. Levesque and Mr. Ryan 
and their policies, when such a significant number of the people of the province of Quebec are convinced 
that a sovereign state is the only solution, then I see no hope. One way or another the people of Quebec are 
determined to fulfil their own destiny. 
 
What is Canada without Quebec, may I ask? How will Canada survive without Quebec? I ask every member 
in this legislature who is supposedly representative of the view of his constituents, can you seriously present 
to your constituents the legitimate, straightforward view that Canada can survive without the province of 
Quebec, in any way? Now if it cannot, and if they are leaving, which would you rather do as member of the 
legislature: present to your constituents a legitimate option today that they could go with resources and 
strength to a country which will protect them, to a country which  



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
811 

will give them freedom, to a country in which the state governments are able to govern at the local level, to a 
country in which they can believe that they are governed at the local level. Which would you rather do? Wait 
till it’s collapsed, then go with your hat in your hand, or make the presentation in advance out of strength? 
Which would you rather do? I suggest we have no option if you assume the same things I have. 
 
I have mentioned before that there is no definition of a Canadian and none has been forthcoming after 14 
years, and that a negative reason is not enough for a country. I further predict, Mr. Speaker, as I have said 
before that it doesn’t matter what happens with reference to the referendum, it makes no difference. There 
are too many people in the province of Quebec committed to separation to allow Canada as we know it to 
survive. 
 
Why the United States of America? Let’s start by asking why not an independent Canada — an independent 
western Canada? An independent western Canada cannot possibly survive in a hostile world. Economically, 
we would be, even more so in the world situation, the hewers of wood and drawers of water that we are at 
the moment in Canada. If Canada, as it has been described, is the mouse on the American elephant, then 
western Canada would be the flea. We would be so dominated by the United States of America, without any 
of the rights as citizens of the country, without any of the benefits as citizens of the country, that we would 
be nothing more than a Puerto Rico or worse — a protectorate. 
 
I happen to believe that is what Canada is today, but western Canada would be a total protectorate without 
any of the rights and obligations of free men and women. 
 
Why the United States? Because the constitution of the United States is working. It is not perfect, as no 
document made by man is perfect; it is not working perfectly, but it is surely working a lot better than 
Canada is. The constitution of the United States protects states’ rights. The constitution granted to the federal 
government certain powers in the United States and the residual powers were granted to the states. The 
individual citizens over the years, over the 200 years or more of their history, have protected those states’ 
rights with great zealousness. The proof of the pudding is in the eating. 
 
Ask a citizen of Montana, or a citizen of North Dakota, or a citizen of Arizona, or Texas, or New York: does 
your state government truly reflect you? The answer is yes. Do you believe you are governed at home? The 
answer is yes. Sure, lots of them think Washington has too much power; lots of them fight for states’ rights 
down there. But ask the average citizen, is it working? The answer is yes. Ask the average citizen in western 
Canada, is it working? The answer is no. It is not working; we do not believe our governments are reflecting 
our views just because our premiers tell us so, and because our ministers tell us so, and because our members 
of the legislature tell us so, right across western Canada. 
 
The United States as a union, as a partnership of sovereign states, as a partnership of free peoples, is 
working; it does enable local governments to make decisions. For example, Saskatchewan would be free to 
adopt medicare if it is so desired under the United States’ system. It would be free to do so and have the right 
to do so under the United States’ system. If medicare is, as most people in Saskatchewan believe and as the 
government opposite has presented on so many occasions, of great benefit at low cost to the people, they will 
have no problem whatsoever in convincing the people of Saskatchewan, as a state in the United States of 
America, that medicare should be 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
812 

continued here. They are free to do that. Why the United States? Because one of the things they have adopted 
as their motto is ‘In God we trust.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, I happen to believe a country which adopts that kind of a motto cannot go wrong. They’ll 
makes mistakes. They’ll make bad mistakes. But a country which has adopted that as their motto cannot go 
wrong. 
 
Why the United States of America? The natural trade links exist north-south. We, in western Canada, have 
been dealing for decades — in our livestock industry, in our grain industry, in our agricultural implement 
industry — with the Americans. If there was total unprotected free trade with the United States, if we were a 
part of the United States, we could gain the benefits of the American productive system. We could develop 
our manufacturing industries here as has happened in other states of similar size and scope to that of the 
province of Saskatchewan. One state I do know something about is Arizona. Perhaps the Premier could 
explain to me how the state of Arizona, with 2.5 million people, with exactly the same percentage of their 
population native Indians as we have, with approximately the same percentage of their area as so-called 
wasteland, how the state of Arizona can get by with a total state budget, plus a total municipal budget, plus a 
total school budget, of $1.65 billion and the province of Saskatchewan, with 920,000 people can get by with 
over $2 billion plus the cost of municipal government, plus local school taxes. Perhaps he could explain, Mr. 
Speaker, what’s missing. 
 
The economics are proven, Mr. Speaker. The Economic Council of Canada said, on several occasions, that 
trade links are naturally north-south. Economic Council of Canada has done many studies of western Canada 
resources, and has indicated the natural trade links are north-south. 
 
We would be better off. The farmers in the United States in the grain producing areas are better off than the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. That’s not to say we’re not wealthy today. That’s not to say the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are not doing well today. But U.S. farmers are able to buy their products from that huge 
American market unprotected where we have to protect our inefficient eastern Canadian industries. The 
standard of living of individual farmers in the grain producing areas of the United States is higher. Sure they 
have problems. Sure they’re concerned about the domination of agriculture by big cities. That’s to be 
expected, for goodness sakes, in any society including our own which has seen what Mr. Allen just talked 
about. The member for Regina Rosemont, I believe, just talked about the tremendous change between the 
urban-rural balance in the province of Saskatchewan and in Canada and in the United States. 
 
Farmers have seen their numbers dwindle. They’ve seen their power dwindle and naturally, they’re going to 
be concerned. But relatively the American farmer is better off than the Canadian farmer. 
 
Now, we’ve heard a great deal in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, about multinational companies. As a matter 
of fact, I have listened to many hours of debates from the other side of the House about the evils of 
multinational corporations, primarily American ones — how they dominate our economy; how we don’t 
have control of them; how beneficial it would be to have control of them. Mr. Speaker, the NDP in many 
ways in that area have been absolutely correct. Canada has no control over multinational companies. 
Saskatchewan has no control over multinational companies, although they did, in my opinion, go against the 
principles of freedom and nationalized some of them. Now they say they have control over them. I doubt 
that, Mr. Speaker. I think 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
813 

they’re in bed with them in a great many areas. They are partners of theirs in the northern part of 
Saskatchewan in a great many ventures. I don’t think they have any more control over the multinational 
companies than they had before. We, as a society, do not control multinational companies — that’s a fact — 
but the American government does. They have monopoly laws that work. They have trust busting legislation 
that works. They send the directors of GE to jail. They charged the Ford Motor Company with criminal 
negligence. They keep their companies under control because they have sufficient power and sufficient 
resources to do so. We do not, so we are at the mercy . . . Why the United States? Because, Mr. Speaker, as 
full citizens of the United States of America we would be able to have control over the multinationals far 
more than we have today. Now you notice I did not say totally, but far more than we have today because in 
the United States it works. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, the United States? Because it is able to change itself. When they get a president that 
commits the kind of sin that Mr. Nixon committed, and they have a Watergate, they eliminate their 
president. When we have a prime minister that produces Sky Shops and dredging scandals we re-elect him. It 
is able to change. It is able to meet changing social conditions perhaps better than we are. 
 
Many people in this Assembly have mentioned, and are going to mention, the problems of the native Indians 
in the province of Saskatchewan. They are going to mention the problems existing in northern Saskatchewan 
where some of the poorest people in the world live, where people are living on $200 or $300 a year. Many 
people are going to attempt to address the problems and I want to commend this government again for at 
least attempting to tackle the problems head on with our native brothers and sisters. But we have almost the 
highest crime rate in North America in the city of Regina — or close to it. We have problems with our native 
Indians that are not going away and that have to be addressed. 
 
But so, too, did the American people have problems in the central city cores — and still have with racial 
unbalance — but they have tried to change that and are changing it. They are changing attitudes throughout 
the United States of America today as it relates to blacks, as it relates to native Indians. 
 
Again I can say that one state that I do know something about is Arizona. I want you to come to Arizona 
anytime, any of you. You are all invited. Come down and see what kinds of problems exist in Arizona 
between the white community and the native community, and then compare them to the kinds of problems 
that exist in Saskatchewan between the white community and the native community. Perhaps you might 
learn something. Perhaps in that area they have found some answers that we don’t have. Check it out 
because they don’t seem to have the kinds of problems that we have developed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the United States of America? Because it has proven itself over 200 years as the bastion of 
freedom. It is the only country in the world that has ever rewarded its enemies. It is the only country in the 
world that has ever provided such things as the Marshall Plan and the Truman Doctrine. The Monroe 
Doctrine wasn’t a bad one either quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, at the time. If the member for Regina Rosemont 
studies his history he’ll find out that Canada may exist only because of the Monroe Doctrine because a great 
many countries in Europe had their eye on every single small unprotected country in North and South 
America. That’s exactly what the Monroe Doctrine was designed to prevent — it told Europeans to keep 
their cotton pickin’ fingers off North and South America. That’s what it said. It was the only way 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
814 

probably we survived because of the desires of those countries to expand their imperialist power. They have 
been a great country and I, for one, am proud they have been our neighbour; I am proud of them as a people. 
They look forward to the same kind of future I believe western Canadians do. As full citizens of the United 
States of America we would be able to control our defence because we would have direct input. We would 
be able to control our economy because we would have direct input. We would have localized government 
because the constitution guaranteed it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We would have conscription. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Ah! The member mentions conscription. Mr. Speaker, any individual citizen of any 
country in the world who is not prepared to stand up for that country in time of need is not worthy of being 
called a citizen of that country. I tell you there are individuals in this very Assembly, some of whom 
distribute flags, who when the time came for Canada to be defended weren’t there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that those of us who believe in freedom have to be prepared to fight for it. If you don’t 
believe that the Russians are imperialistic in nature, if you don’t believe, as a result of Afghanistan or 
Angola or any of the other conquests the Russians have made in the last number of years in the world . . . I 
am not talking red scare; I am not talking Communist scare; I am talking flat out Russian imperialism. If you 
don’t believe they are imperialistic toward their own group, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, then you just 
haven’t taken a look at world events and what has been going on. The point is, if you are not prepared to 
sand up for freedom you are not going to have it very long. 
 
Perhaps that is one of the reasons why Canada, at the moment, is going through the throes of re-examination, 
because the people and the young people have not been called upon — not to die but at least to stand up for 
what the country is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live like Americans; we talk like Americans; we are Americans. The only way to be a full 
American is to be an American citizen. I believe western Canadians should opt for that option. 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, hopefully we can get back to the level of debate which 
should be carried on in this Chamber today. 
 
It is an honour every time I rise in this Assembly to address the Chamber on behalf of my constituents, the 
very fine people of the Wilkie constituency. Since this is 1980 and we are celebrating 75 years as a province 
in confederation, it is time to look back at the past and learn from the great pioneers, the people who came to 
this Canada of ours. Through their hard work, suffering and sacrifices they made our Canada a very proud 
nation all over the world. In 1980 we are also looking to the future. We have so much, whether it be grain, 
livestock, renewable resources or non-renewable resources, it is here in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
have one large drawback in Saskatchewan. That is this socialist NDP government, run and controlled by the 
man known to me as the backdoor Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at what we have in Saskatchewan for resources and then look at almost a $3 billion 
debt, there is something wrong with a government which is telling us on the one hand that it is boom time 
ahead for Saskatchewan and the just society we have — the only boom the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to have is a bust of our whole economy. 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
815 

Last year each and every taxpayer in this province paid over $900 in interest alone on the provincial debt. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a legacy of debt I do not want to leave my children or grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn to the heritage fund, which this socialist government claims is worth 
$915 million. But in reality it has only a little over $50 million in cash and marketable securities. The 
government also claims that equity in potash and uranium mines and loans without repayment schedules, 
non-interest bearing loans to Crown corporations, and the consolidated fund make up the difference. Mr. 
Speaker, these socialists are masters at manipulating the books to make dollars appear when need, and when 
convenient, make them disappear. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, this is a nothing of a heritage fund, when you compare it to Alberta with 
over $6 billion. I say to the Premier and the Attorney General, shame! A $6 billion heritage fund, that’s the 
kind of legacy I want to leave my children and grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have uranium developments . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All of it doesn’t come out of the 
whip’s mouth either! Mr. Speaker, $300 million in exploration and development . . . We have examples of 
where this money could maybe have been put better. A widow with a small child receiving $263 a month 
from this socialist Government of Saskatchewan . . . she was very kind, she gave me her complete list of 
groceries for one month. I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t a heck of a lot of meat on that 
budget. Well I hear members opposite laughing about this widow and child, thinking it’s a big joke . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I notice he lost some weight. It hasn’t all come off his stomach, a lot of it came 
out of his head! 
 
Mr. Speaker, when she gets $263 a month and her grocery bill is $259 a month, what’s left to pay the power, 
the water, the phone? How about some clothes for those kids? Now, we’re going to develop uranium, put 
millions into uranium, but to heck with the widows and children in this society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another example — handicapped people. It’s too bad there is one minister who is not in the 
House today, because I would sure like to touch him up on handicapped people. I have a 48-year-old single 
man who gets, which is quite a bit compared to that widow, $262.89 a month. Boy that’s a big salary. He is 
handicapped (now this is a socialist government we are dealing with); I don’t think they believe in 
handicapped people. It is quite easy for the Premier to go on television, give them $10,000. Fine, but what 
about the fellow out there who is living in his own home trying to take care of himself, getting a lousy 
$262.89 a month. The figures for groceries $100 a month. How anyone can even exist on $100 a month for 
groceries is way beyond my comprehension. Mr. Speaker, the government wants to get into uranium mining 
and development and not take care of the widows and kids. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They want to be power brokers! 
 
MR. GARNER: — My colleague says they want to be power brokers. I have to agree with 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
816 

him — the handicapped people who aren’t being taken care of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, socialist isn’t a dirty enough word for this government. But, I’ll refrain myself, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I would like to discuss how the socialist tax collectors operate in this province. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — They rob the piggy banks. 
 
MR. GARNER: — I wouldn’t doubt that they’ve done a lot worse than robbing piggy banks. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Tax on babies’ clothes . . . 
 
MR. GARNER: — Yes, well taxing babies’ clothes, yes that’s true . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and Cody 
on the telephones. O.K. We have an unbelievable 53 per cent in personal income tax. This is 18 per cent 
higher than Tory Alberta which the socialists like to compare us to so much. We’ve got a 5 per cent E&H tax 
in red Saskatchewan. Not so in Tory Alberta, Mr. Speaker, this 5 per cent sales tax is destroying small 
business all over Saskatchewan and especially on the west side of the province where my constituency is 
located. What do the people do instead of staying in the small town to invest their dollars whether they are 
buying groceries or clothing — they go to Alberta. Mr. Speaker, they go to Alberta to buy their groceries. 
They get their gas cheaper. So what’s happening to the small businessmen? They are starting to advertise; 
they’ve got to sell because they can’t make it in red Saskatchewan. It just doesn’t work here for our free 
enterpriser. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I would like to discuss another broken promise of this socialist government. Last year they 
promised, and I quote: 
 

Natural gas rates were not increased last year despite increases totalling more than 16 per cent in the 
cost of Alberta gas. An increase held to a maximum of 7.5 per cent has been announced for 
residential rates this year effective on June 1, 1979. 
 

Was that the Minster of Finance? Well, I guess that’s why he’s the ex-minister of finance. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they lived up to their promise. They did increase it 7.5 per cent on June 1, 1979. But they 
went on in August to increase it some more. That wasn’t enough — in February of this year they increased it 
again. Now we go back to that widow and that child and that handicapped individual. They have to be 
penalized by this government. So in the fiscal year that we talk about from last year’s budget, we received in 
this province three increases in the price of natural gas. You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m just ashamed to talk 
about this. Those increases, Mr. Speaker, amounted to a total of 15.5 per cent. Yes, the double or nothing 
government, double or nothing promises. They break them twice, not just once. Those increases, Mr. 
Speaker, are just hanging the people of Saskatchewan out to dry. It’s too bad the Minister of Highways isn’t 
here because he’s hung one young guy out to dry already in Saskatchewan. We’ll discuss that at another 
time. It is very clear to me, Mr. Speaker, that this government speaks with a forked tongue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this socialist government came to power in 1971, their claim to fame was voters’ support 
from rural Saskatchewan. They said the future was going to 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
817 

be bright for all the farmers in Saskatchewan and they would turn the tables around on the economic 
recession that had taken over rural Saskatchewan. Now 1980 is here. Let’s just take a look at what they’ve 
done to this economic recession that has taken place in rural Saskatchewan and which they were going to fix. 
Well, we have land bank — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t mean to swear. It’s called state farms and the 
former minister of agriculture should know what I am talking about in state farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this little dictatorship we’ve got running in Saskatchewan right now owns over one million 
acres of Saskatchewan farm lands. Mr. Speaker, with one million acres of farmland now, we have lost 8,000 
family farms. Where are they now? Owned and controlled by the socialist government in Saskatchewan. Our 
hog industry, Mr. Speaker, well, that is another sorry state of affairs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now just 
a minute. Let’s not be dirty here now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we export over 150,00 hogs annually to Alberta. That’s terrible! Mind you, we haven’t 
exported them all yet. I still notice some of them around. Why, Mr. Speaker, do we export these hogs? 
Because we have only one processing plant left in Saskatchewan. This is the great hog board; this is what the 
Government of Saskatchewan has done for the hog producers. Along these same lines, we raise a fair 
number of livestock in Saskatchewan. I am a cattle operator myself. Mr. Speaker, we have to import 
hamburger from Alberta. Now, even with the number of cattle we raise in Saskatchewan we still have to 
import hamburger to sell in our restaurants. Shame on the government again, Mr. Speaker. This is how they 
have helped out rural Saskatchewan — export the hogs, the cattle. Mind you, I guess they have to do that 
because most of the kids are in Alberta and they want to feed the kids in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we raise cattle and hogs in Saskatchewan. We have to ship them to Alberta. Then we have to 
buy them back. This is just like trying to sell refrigerators to the Eskimo people in the North. Mr. Speaker, 
costs to farmers in Saskatchewan have been going up; taxes are going up; yet the deflated net income since 
1975 has been going down. Now if this is how this socialist government was going to turn the table on the 
economic recession happening to the people of rural Saskatchewan, they turned the table around and they 
turned it up and they put the farmers underneath the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this radical government likes to compare us with Alberta. Well let’s compare some of the 
services the farmers of Alberta have compared with the farmers of Saskatchewan. Of our farmers in 
Saskatchewan, 80 per cent don’t have rural gas, don’t have natural gas piped to their farmsteads — 80 per 
cent . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What about the towns? 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, they’re not concerned about the towns, they just want to hang the farmer out to 
dry first. But, Mr. Speaker, 85 per cent of Alberta farmers are using and have natural gas on their farms 
today. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How many? 
 
MR. GARNER: — The figure is 85 per cent. It’s just like flipping a coin, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers of 
Saskatchewan always end up tails down. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where do you get your statistics? 
 
MR. GARNER: — Oh well, you haven’t learned to read yet but you will get on to it. 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
818 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with our adequate reserves of natural gas, we should use more distribution of natural gas 
and save the diesel fuel to run our farm tractors, because we are in a time of oil shortages in the world but 
this present NDP government couldn’t care less about the farmers of rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to bring your attention to problems farmers of Saskatchewan face with regard to the 
education and health tax of this socialist government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They wouldn’t know 
what a grain dryer was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a farmer is building fence or repairing fence on his farm in Saskatchewan, he can go out and 
buy fence posts and it’s exempt from the E&H tax. Good — that’s right; it’s real; that’s good stuff. He can 
also go and buy the wire. That’s real good stuff too. He doesn’t have to pay education tax on it. But he has to 
pay tax on the staples to hold the wire on the posts. I’ve never heard of anything so stupid in all my life. 
What do they expect him to hold the wire on the posts with? Binder twine? Because it’s exempt from the 
education tax of Saskatchewan. I ask you — is this fair? No. 
 
I’d just like to quote a statement by the Minister of Agriculture that I read the other day that disturbs me very 
much, and I quote: 
 

If Saskatchewan farmers hope to cash in on a profitable world grain market, the change-over to 
straight grain production is necessary. 

 
I don’t know what to say. When we have a Minister of Agriculture . . . I thought he was a pretty fair guy — I 
mean there’s a lot of dead weight sitting over there in the cabinet but I thought he had some potential. A 
statement like that was made by the Minister of Agriculture of this province of Saskatchewan of ours. Now 
what about the few remaining family farms we have in Saskatchewan that the socialist sickle hasn’t cut 
down? Is he advising them now? Some of them are even making a go of it — I know my own operation is. 
Mr. Speaker, is he telling those people to sell of their cattle, their hog operations? Sheep too? Yes, the sheep 
farmers too, are a very important part of our agriculture industry. What about the rancher, Mr. Speaker? Is 
the rancher who doesn’t have any cultivated land supposed to sell his cattle herd, break up his pasture? He 
wants to be a rancher. This is just another step that this socialist government is taking hoping they will do 
this. Then they can buy it up into their state farm program and take over all of Saskatchewan. This is not for 
me, and I don’t think it’s for very many farmers and ranchers in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know the minister is trying to help the farmers of rural Saskatchewan but his government’s track record of 
the past year is destroying the family farms of Saskatchewan. With this helpful advice I am very confident 
the people will listen no more to the little NDP dictatorship we have in Saskatchewan. I have no choice but 
to vote against the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to enter this debate. I do wish to 
take the opportunity to congratulate the Minister of Finance on the delivery of the budget, a budget which in 
my somewhat biased judgment was a very good budget, well prepared and well delivered — a very excellent 
start for a Minister of Finance who is likely to be holding that portfolio for many, many years to come. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
819 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I entered the debate, Mr. Speaker, because in the past few days the members of the 
Legislative Assembly have heard two astonishing and, I say, deplorable announcements. First, the 
twice-elected member of the Legislative Assembly for Nipawin, the previous leader of Her Majesty’s loyal 
opposition, announced his intention to sit as an Independent member of this House. Then the twice-elected 
MLA for Swift Current made the same announcement. What was their reason? 
 
So far as I can understand it, it was to free themselves from the restrictions of their party caucus in order to 
promote, first, the separation of western Canada from the Canadian confederation, and second, the 
annexation of the western provinces to the United States of America. And if there were any doubt about what 
their intentions were, it was made clear (at least so far as the member for Nipawin was concerned) today 
when he made it as clear as words can make it that he wishes, first, to dismember Canada, and second, to 
have the western provinces of Canada annexed to the United States. Now these are remarkable statements by 
two men of recognized stature in this province of Saskatchewan and I would like to take a little bit of this 
Assembly’s time to address myself to the new situation they have created. 
 
First of all, I would like to go on record once again by saying the Government of Saskatchewan and the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan are firmly opposed to any action which would weaken or destroy our 
country of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, to use the matter of Canadian unity is not negotiable. We oppose 
separation whether its origins are in Quebec or in our own province. We oppose annexation by the United 
States of America whether those ideas originate in Montreal, or in Calgary, or in Washington, D.C. or in 
Regina. We reject the attempt to break up Canada whether the impetus comes from the universities or from 
the board rooms of multinationals, to which we have hard reference today or through labor unions or from 
politicians. Our stance is clear and I want it irrevocably marked on the record. 
 
Having said that, I would like to say to those who promote western separation that I understand our 
impatience with confederation as it is now constituted and I share that impatience. The member for Nipawin 
referred to comments in this legislature by me and by my colleagues, expressing our impatience with 
confederation as it is now constituted. So, I share their impatience but I do not share, nor can I accept the 
conclusion to which their impatience has led them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not here to question the sincerity of any of the members opposite and more 
particularly of the two members opposite to whom I have referred. But I certainly question the wisdom of 
anyone who advocates that western Canada become part of the United States on the grounds this will provide 
expedient solutions to our longstanding grievances. Expediency is always attractive. It is always easier to 
say, look at all these problems we have had; if we were only part of the United States, they would somehow 
all go away. Expediency is attractive but I suggest it is not fruitful. Don’t misunderstand me, Mr. Speaker; I 
don’t downplay the very grave problems which have faced this country. Nor do I for a moment suggest that 
western Canada and  



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
820 

particularly Saskatchewan has always been fairly treated in the Canadian confederation. More of my life than 
I care to admit has been spent in attempting to get a better deal for Saskatchewan within confederation. 
 
Our progress has been slow, often painfully, painfully slow. I would be foolish not to acknowledge that often 
our arguments for a better deal for Saskatchewan and western Canada have fallen on deaf ears. Our 
grievances are real and they are long-standing and in that regard I agree with some of the statements made by 
the member of Nipawin. Some of these grievances date back for many years, indeed, many decades. 
Saskatchewan governments of all political stripes have fought for a better deal in freight rates, in resource 
ownership and in diversification. And, merely to state those words, freight rates, resource ownership, 
diversification, is to encapsule much of the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
How many political battles have been fought under those banners? The problems are still not solved to our 
satisfaction. There are problems with confederation as it now stands, yes, but is the ultimate solution national 
divorce, as suggested by the member for Nipawin? Is that the right answer? I say with all the conviction that 
I can muster, no. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I ask another question. I heard the member for Nipawin say, go out and ask the 
people whether confederation is working and they will say, no. And, of course, they will say it is not working 
perfectly. Of course, people in western Canada are aware of the grievances so they will mention that if you 
ask them that quickly. But ask them the fundamental question, do the people of Saskatchewan or, indeed, the 
people of western Canada want to separate from Canada? The answer, again, will be most emphatically no. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Not long ago an extensive poll was conducted by the Canada West Foundation and it 
gives evidence of what we already know: that western Canadian recognize the problems of Canada, but that 
western Canadians are proud to be Canadians and want to stay Canadians. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We recognize that those things which united this country are much stronger than the 
things which divide this country, and that the economic development and advancement of western Canada, 
in the past few years, has been remarkable. We are now being heard and heard much more forcefully in the 
councils of the nation. 
 
We are rapidly gaining a position of greater strength in confederation. No one can deny that! In the nine 
years or so that I have occupied this office I can say, with conviction, that the voice of Saskatchewan is being 
heard, and heard much more convincingly today in the councils of the nation than was previously the case. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — This is not because of any particular or peculiar talents of mine. It is, rather, that the 
economic position of Saskatchewan, the economic position of western 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
821 

Canada, is such that our voice can no longer be denied. We, here in the West, are being heard — not as fully 
as we would like, but much more fully than a short 10 years ago. 
 
I say that now of all times is not the time to dismantle our country; now of all times is not the time for 
western Canadians to suggest that they wish to pull out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I ask hon. members to think about their constituencies and to think about this 
province. We have to admit that to a very great extent the history of western Canada is a direct rebuttal of the 
proposals put forward in this House by the member for Nipawin. 
 
The West was settled in order to prevent incursions from the South. That was the reason why the West was 
settled. Many of the pioneers came to this western land because they did not want to be part of the United 
States; they wanted to be part of a different country; they wanted to be part of a different kind of society, and 
they resisted any attempts to assimilate with our neighbours to the south. I want to make it very clear that I 
am not critical of the way of life of our neighbors to the south. They may live as they wish. We wish a 
different kind of life — not necessarily better, not necessarily worse, but different. This is not the first time 
that we in Canada have heard the call of continentalism, nor do I expect it will be the last. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that we in this House and we in this province should resist the call of continentalism now as we 
have done in the past. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Decades ago there were Americans who said, let us move into the North. Their 
slogan was 54, 40 or fight. Their slogan was that the border should not be the 49th parallel but the 54th 
parallel — 54 and 40 minutes. Their proposal was that the boundary should be far to the north, much of what 
we now know as Canada should be part of the United States. And people in this land of Canada said, no, and 
they were successful. I think we should be true to their success and once again say no. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — In, I believe it was, 1848 (now I’m speaking from memory) there were strong calls 
for annexation by business groups, primarily in the Montreal area, who believed that they could do better in 
business in the larger context of a united North America. That call too, that siren call, was resisted, and so 
any call based upon the argument should today be resisted. The member for Swift Current, a few days ago, 
asked about his children and grandchildren. I, for my part, would not seek to honour my children and my 
grandchildren by turning my back on the values and loyalties of my father and my grandfather. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I was born a Canadian and my parents taught me to be a proud 
Canadian; I hope I can teach my children to be equally proud of Canada and the values it represents. 
Incidentally, I want to make clear that one of those values is freedom of speech. I abhor and deplore the ideas 
advanced by the two members, particularly the ideas advanced by the member for Nipawin this afternoon. I 
would pride myself as being the last person in this House to agree with those ideas. I would 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
822 

hope that I would be among the first to defend his right to express those ideas; the right to be wrong, dead 
wrong, and to express his wrong-headed ideas is a right which Canadians should enjoy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — My appeal to the two members is this: reconsider the position; make your stand for 
Saskatchewan and the West. I understand the motives which call forth from these two members their desire 
to state their conviction that Saskatchewan and the West needs a better deal. Make their stand for 
Saskatchewan and the West — yes; but stand too for Canada — one Canada. That’s my appeal to those two 
members. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to delay for long and if I may have the indulgence of the 
House I will conclude rapidly. I want to make a couple more points. 
 
In the recent federal election I don’t believe that the people of western Canada rejected Canada. They 
rejected the Liberal party of Canada by voting for Conservatives and New Democrats. Conversely, the 
people of eastern Canada did not reject Canada. They rejected to a considerable extent the Conservative 
Party and to an even greater extent the New Democratic Party. This regional split will cause difficulties 
certainly, but to suggest that one group of Canadians is consciously ganging up on another group of 
Canadians because each Canadian voted for the party of his choice, is to suggest a conspiracy more suited to 
late night television than to the realities of Canadian political life. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — And to suggest the new federal Government of Canada will ignore the needs of 
western Canada because the people rejected their party, is to provide the Separatists of Quebec with one 
more argument that confederation will not work. We’re beginning to see, by accident or by design, a very 
strange alliance indeed. I say people who want to break up Canada are separatists. I have opposed separatists. 
I do oppose separatists whether they’re in Quebec or Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Furthermore, I believe the people of Saskatchewan oppose the idea and the people 
who espouse it. 
 
My second point is a brief one. We’ve heard much about the supposed advantages of joining the United 
States. We’ve heard our natural cultural and economic ties are north-south rather than east-west. I don’t 
agree with much that was said. However, without getting into a long debate at this time, let me just make a 
couple of points. 
 
If Saskatchewan became North Montana, what would it mean? Effectively, it would mean good-bye to the 
hospital plan and medicare. It is simply not possible to contend that that is true. Some members of this 
House believe it is possible for a province to maintain programs like those without assistance from their 
federal government. I do not believe that to be possible. The Government of Canada provides that support to 
provincial governments. The Government of the United States does not provide that support to state 
governments. We cannot expect that we, as one of 51 states, would be 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
823 

sufficiently influential to get the United States government to provide that support. Accordingly, in my 
judgment, those programs are threatened. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, would be saying good-bye to the Canadian Wheat Board. No one can suggest that if we 
were Montana North, we would have an orderly marketing of wheat. Maybe it is a good idea. Maybe it is a 
bad idea. But it would go if we became part of the United States. 
 
No one will deny or contradict this. We would be saying goodbye to all our ties with the British 
parliamentary system and all the traditions our forefathers had fought to maintain. It would mean, in short, 
trading a confederation which is known for a union full of imponderables. It would mean the Canada we 
have today, though not perfect by any means, would cease to exist — cease to exist at a time when it shows 
more promise, I suggest, than ever before in its brief history. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The problems and challenges which face this country are great. And we may fail. We 
may fail to keep it together as the member for Nipawin suggests. Maybe we will be unsuccessful. But I for 
one do not propose to abandon this great ship of Canada just because the going is getting a little rough. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — One of the main arguments put forward by the member for Nipawin was that our 
economy and our society are dominated by the United States; that this trend is irrevocable and accordingly, if 
we want to have a voice in the economy which governs our lives we must become part of the United States. 
Now that argument is logical if you accept all the premises. I believe, as does he, that the United States’ 
economy has a very large part in governing our lives. I believe, as does he, that if that is to continue we in 
Canada will have little voice as Canadians. Where I disagree with him is on whether that situation is 
irrevocable and must continue; I, for my part, believe that Canadians can stand on their own feet, and with 
proper leadership and direction, will stand on their own feet. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — His choice is to say that trend is irrevocable and, accordingly, we should get at least a 
finger on the wheel by becoming U.S. citizens. I choose, rather, to remove, or at least lessen, that U.S. 
domination of our economy so that we can have not a little finger on the wheel, but a couple of hands on the 
wheel, of the economy that governs our land. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The member suggested that Canadians cannot define their own identity. And of 
course, the citizens of any country have a bit of difficulty defining their own identity. It’s not the sort of thing 
one does before breakfast each morning. Nonetheless, I don’t think that John A. MacDonald would have had 
any difficulty defining the vision of what he wanted to create. I don’t think that R.L. Borden would have had 
too 



 
March 19, 1980 
 

 
824 

much difficulty defining what he felt Canada was becoming in its formative years. And I don’t think that 
John George Diefenbaker would have had too much difficulty defining what he believed it was to be a 
Canadian in this latter half of the 20th century. 
 
I believe that we must act to bring about the Canada which these people saw in vision and which we can see 
much closer to reality. I believe, for example, that we must take steps to get a greater control over our own 
economy. The member for Nipawin suggested that we had no manufacturing in the West and he is partly 
right, but I see considerable change as we get a steel industry, as we now move into a fibre-optics industry — 
not a large measure of manufacturing, but some. I see our wheat farms by-and-large assured as Canadian 
through legislation which is not widely supported, notwithstanding the fact that it was vigorously attacked at 
one time. I see us moving in areas like oil to become much more self-sufficient, to see a much greater 
proportion of our oil industry owned and controlled by Canadians. I see the Petro-Canadas but I also see the 
Alberta Gas Trunks, and I see other Canadian companies emerging — Dome is an excellent example. Mr. 
Richards and Mr. Gallagher are giving leadership to that company. I see potash, and members opposite may 
object to my reference to potash, but when we came to office 15 per cent of that industry was Canadian 
controlled and now 60 per cent of that industry is Canadian controlled. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I believe we can similarly get a major voice in the control of the developing uranium 
industry. Members opposite may feel that this is inimical to their view of what Canada should be. I believe 
Canadians must get a very considerable voice in that industry as well. I believe if we provide the sort of 
leadership which can come, not from one side of this House or one party in Canada, but from all Canadians 
who believe we can make this country not only politically independent, but economically independent, then 
we indeed can have a strong Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to appeal to Saskatchewan people to give their 
allegiance to Canada, to what it is and to what, working together, we can make it in the years ahead. Two 
hundred years ago my forefathers came to Canada from that new country, the United States. They came up to 
Nova Scotia which is now part of Canada because they didn’t want to be Americans. They chose what we 
now call Canada. Since that day they have done their part to build this country. I’m proud to be part of that 
tradition. I know many others are equally proud even though their roots may be somewhat different. People 
have chosen Canada, chosen to make it their homeland and have believed their work would be able to be 
passed on to their children — a homeland providing benefits for those children that the early pioneers did not 
have. We are here in this legislature, I suggest, to represent all those people who went before us, as well as 
the people who are out there. They are our fellow Canadians. There are no more fortunate people on the face 
of the globe than people who live in Canada today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I say let’s join together to take that good fortune into being an even better country, a 
land which our children and grandchildren can be as proud of as we are, a land which will offer an even 
better life to the next generation of Canadians, a land which we can truly call the true North strong and free. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 19, 1980 

 

 
825 

MR. D. LINGENFELTER (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, it is both a pleasure and an easy task to discuss 
the merits of the budget announced by Mr. Tchorzewski in the legislature last Thursday. Because I have 
many other things to say on the topic I would beg leave now to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:14 p.m. 


