






















































Hansard: June 04, 1980


4033 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
Wednesday, June 4, 1980 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Public Meetings re Emma Lake Development 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Minister of Rural Affairs. Yesterday, Mr. 
Minister, you tried to leave the impression that the Emma Lake development was not, in fact, a very 
serious matter. It has now come to light that your department has called for public meetings next week in 
the city of Prince Albert and the city of Saskatoon. The cottage owners I talked to indicated they are 
going to be very stormy meetings. Would you now admit, Mr. Minister, this is a serious question, and 
could you also advise the Assembly as to which cabinet ministers will be in attendance at those public 
meetings? 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Municipal Affairs(Rural)): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, First I want to 
indicate that the meetings were not called by the department. The cottage owners requested a meeting 
which we would attend, and we agreed to meet with them. So those meetings were not called by us, but 
by them. I will be at the meeting, and my deputy minister will be there. As far as I am aware, we are the 
only ones who will be there.  
 
MR. ANDREW: — I take it Mr. Bowerman is not going to be at the meeting. Mr. Minister, Given . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I would ask the hon. member to refer to members by their title, or 
their constituency. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, given the fact that there are public meetings being called both in the 
city of Saskatoon and Prince Albert, I think this is an acknowledgement that it is a serious issue and 
concerned citizens should have this opportunity. I understand, Mr. Minister, in the joint meetings 
between your department and the two R.M.s involved, the message was very clear – the whole question 
of the Karasiuk development was not negotiable. Would the minister not agree, and not admit that this 
leaves a distinct impression with the public (and I think, a clear impression with the public) that there is 
going to be influence peddling in this particular case? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Mr. Speaker, there will be no influence peddling in this case. 
 
The situation with regard to the Karasiuk development is that the R.M. of Paddockwood, in its 
discussion with Mr. Karasiuk, had made some commitments. We were attempting to get from the R.M. 
of Paddockwood, an agreement to come into a complementary zoning by-law situation. They were 
agreeable to that but they suggested they felt they had some outstanding commitments to the Karasiuk 
development, and they were wanting to have at least some commitment with regard to Mr. Karasiuk to 
agree to sign a complementary zoning by-law. 
 
At the meeting, we put forward that proposition. Instead of the massive, or large  



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4034 

development which Mr. Karasiuk proposed, there will be a somewhat restricted development on that 
side of the border, in the Paddockwood area, which really amounts to nine residential developments. As 
I indicated yesterday, nine residential developments in the R.M. of Paddockwood are certainly not going 
to upset the development patterns in that area. 
 

Letter to Premier’s Office from Reeve Kelly 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — A question to the Premier. Yesterday in question 
period, Mr. Premier, it was brought to your attention that the answer to a letter addressed to our office 
from Reeve Kelly was supplied by Karasiuk Holdings. In the discussion you said you passed the letter to 
the member for Prince Albert, who was associated with Karasiuk Holdings. Today I notice in the 
Leader-Post that the member denies ever seeing the letter, or any copies of it. My question is: which one 
of you is telling the truth? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (PREMIER): — Mr. Speaker, I can only give you my idea of how the letter 
may have gone to Karasiuk Holdings. I simply do not know how it got to Karasiuk Holdings. All I know 
is what I believe happened to the . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m having difficulty since I’m getting three or four questions. The 
answer is that I obviously am in no position to say where Karasiuk got the letter. I can only say what we 
have done in our office. I have told the House what we have done in our office and I have no further 
light to shed on where a citizen may have obtained a particular document. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — In your letter of apology to the reeve, you indicated that you were going to conduct 
an investigation. Yesterday it was evident you were hanging out the member for Prince Albert to dry; he 
denies it. If the member for Prince Albert did not leak the letter, who did leak that letter to Karasiuk 
Holdings? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — The answer is that I do not know. It may well have been, for all I know, 
somebody in the R.M. office, who obviously had copies of the material. But I am not saying that 
happened. I am saying that I cannot speculate. I tell you what I did. I cannot speculate to explain things 
that I have no additional information to offer. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Premier, this is a very serious matter when an individual citizen or an elected 
reeve of a municipality writes to the Premier of this province in a confidential manner and these matters 
are let out. Will you continue your investigation as to the leak of this letter to Karasiuk and report to this 
Chamber who leaked that letter from your side of the government? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I know of no evidence to suggest that anything was leaked from 
‘our side of the government’. The fact we have in hand is that Mr. Karasiuk obtained, apparently, a copy 
of material which I had sent to the R.M. and wrote to the reeve. He may have obtained it from some 
source in the government; he may have obtained it from source in the R.M. I cannot say with conviction 
that he obtained it from any source in the government, although obviously that is quite possible. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — The Premier indicated yesterday that he caused an investigation. 
Would you now table the results in this Assembly of your investigation 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4035 

into the leaked letter? 
 
MR. A.E. BLAKENEY: — I don’t know how the hon. member conducts his investigations but I didn’t 
have the police in. I don’t have a police report, so I don’t have a document that I can table. I can advise 
the House that I found no evidence that, let us say, the Department of Municipal Affairs was in touch 
with Karasiuk. We could not find any evidence that the material moved from municipal affairs to 
Karasiuk. I have no evidence that anything moved from my office to Karasiuk. Therefore I am only left 
to speculate that the material moved from my office to the Department of Municipal Affairs, to Mr. 
Feschuk and to the R.M. Presumably from one of those sources Mr. Karasiuk obtained the letter. There 
is nothing very difficult about that but that is the only presumption I can make. If there is another 
presumption to be made I would be delighted if all hon. members would enlighten me further. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR: — Are you telling me, Mr. Premier, that if a citizen of this province writes to you 
that the letter will go down to other members, to R.M. offices and that you may not keep this 
correspondence confidential? Is that what you’re telling me? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That’s what I’m telling you. A great number of citizens write to me and far from 
my keeping them confidential, it is my regular practice to refer them on to some other employee of the 
Government of Saskatchewan for action. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR: — Mr. Premier, that referral can end up in the hands of private companies that 
have vested interest. Is that what you’re telling me also? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am saying that is clearly not impossible. Mr. Speaker, I have said 
it is clearly not impossible. The hon. member has asked, how did it get there? Well, it got there 
presumably by some method which was ‘not impossible’. I have advised the House what I did with that 
material. I do not know how it got into the hands of Karasiuk. 
 
Mr. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, you failed 
to answer one of the questions posed to you by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, and I would refer 
you to your answer yesterday in which you said, ‘and I supplied him (referring to the member for Prince 
Albert) with a copy of the letter which referred to him and a copy of my reply to that letter.’ Now these 
are your words Mr. Premier. The member for Prince Albert says he did not receive the letter from you. 
Now who is telling the truth, is the question that was asked you. Did you in fact supply the letter that we 
referred to here. And, if so, why is the member for Prince Albert denying having received that letter? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m obviously going to have to be a little more careful in my 
answer. I will report precisely what the situation is and you may make your own judgment. That letter 
arrived in my office during my absence in Europe. It was answered from my office. So when I say that I 
supplied it that’s not strictly accurate. It was signed by the deputy minister, Mr. Wallace, who sent a 
copy of the material which was received, together with my reply . . . Or let me put it this way. The 
material in my office indicates that a copy of the letter received from the R.M. together with a copy of 
my reply was sent to Mr. Feschuk. Now that is what my material indicates. 
 
I am unable to say further whether or not the material went forth, although I suspect it did. I am not able 
to say whether or not it proceeded through the mails, and I’m not able to say whether Mr. Feschuk 
received it. I tell you with precision what was done in my 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4036 

office, and why I said, perhaps carelessly yesterday, that I had sent a copy. What had happened is that my 
office sent a copy during my absence in Europe and that is precisely the situation. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — Question to the Premier. In your letter to the reeve of the R.M. of 
Lakeland you indicated that you were investigating the means by which Mr. Karasiuk came to possess a 
copy of the letter, and that is dated November 13, 1979. When I asked you about your investigation you 
very pointedly indicated that it was limited to the department, I believe, of rural municipal affairs and 
your own department. It would look like your limiting of the investigation to those two areas, and not 
asking the member for Prince Albert what happened to the letter, indicates that the Premier himself is 
covering up the political patronage or misuse . . .  
 
Mr. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — I have indicated what I have done and I should add one other point because it 
will probably come up. The department of the Provincial Secretary was contacted as well, because the 
letter suggested that there might have been a technical violation of the real estate agents’ licensing act, or 
The Land Titles Act or whatever – some legislation at any rate. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that 
an advertisement was placed . . . My information is that no lots were sold, no money was collected, etc., 
but in any case it may well have been that the advertisement should not have been placed, never mind 
whether any lots were sold. Because there might have been an irregularity, they were consulted. I 
therefore consulted the department of the Provincial Secretary, the Department of Urban Affairs which 
was then dealing with it, and my own office, to see whether or not they had had any contact with 
Karasiuk. I could find none. 
 
MR. LANE: — You didn’t contact the member for Prince Albert? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — No, I did not contact the member for Prince Albert. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Why? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Because I reached the conclusion that he had probably contacted his employer, 
Landmark, and I reached the conclusion that Landmark had probably contacted Mr. Karasiuk. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’ll be back on this tomorrow, so be around. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: Fine. I am attempting to advise the House as fully as I can what I have done and 
what assumptions I have drawn. 
 

Operating of Earth Stations in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in charge of Sask Tel. 
Mr. Minister, you are no doubt aware that the British Columbia government has set up an earth station 
on the legislative lawn in B.C. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is, if individuals in Saskatchewan want 
to purchase and operate their own earth stations to receive messages or signals from the telesat satellite, 
will our government allow them to do this? 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t now what we 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4037 

 could do to disallow it. We couldn’t certainly disallow it for an individual on a farm, or I guess if 
someone wanted to set one up on the legislative grounds we couldn’t disallow it. We don’t have that 
opportunity. The licensing of earth stations comes to the Department of Communications in Ottawa. 
You’d have to ask the question of the Minister of Communications in Ottawa to see if they would in fact 
license this. We have no opportunity to say yes or no to an individual such as this. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, then with the court procedures taking place right now, and if 
Telecable Saskatoon loses and you win, are you telling me that all the telecable operators in 
Saskatchewan will have to go out of business and the people will have to purchase their earth stations in 
order to receive cable television or television from the Telesat satellite? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the situation with regard to people who take signals from Sask Tel 
is completely different. We have agreements with people such as Saskatoon Telecable, Regina 
Telecable, Prairie-Coax and Battleford’s Cable Vision. We have specific agreements with those people 
that they must receive their signals from Sask Tel. They saw fit not to take the signal from Sask Tel. As 
a result there was a scrambling of the signal, just because we felt they were in violation of our 
agreement. That’s exactly why it was done. It had nothing to do with the ownership of an earth station by 
some individual. That simply has nothing to do with it. The fact of the matter is that we scrambled their 
signal because they did not take the signal from us, which they had agreed to do. 
 
MR. LANE: — Question to the Minister. Are you giving the assurance that if an individual in 
Saskatchewan sets up a receiving disk, Sask Tel will not jam the signal? 
 
MR. CODY: — No, Mr. Speaker. If the hon. member for Qu’Appelle can tell me how we could jam the 
signal, maybe we will have a look at it. But I just don’t know how you’d jam the signals going into an 
individual’s television set. We don’t have the opportunity. Not every individual has a headend in his 
own home. It’s only the cable operators who have headends. I don’t know how else you would jam a 
signal unless you maybe took a four-ton truck and drove it in front of the dish. 
 

Work Slow Down by Interns 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Premier. The intern work slow down is 
continuing, and the Minister of Health has adopted a hands-off stance in this dispute. And as the interns 
have expressed a desire to enter into arbitration, will you as Premier intervene in this dispute before 
serious consequences result? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the answer to that, shortly put, is that I have no intention of 
intervening at this point. This is a dispute between PAIRS (Professional Association of Interns & 
Residents of Saskatchewan) and the postgraduate committee. The spokesman for the postgraduate 
committee is in no sense an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan. The PAIRS people are not 
employees of the Government of Saskatchewan. They are negotiating and sorting out their arrangements 
and I think it would be inappropriate at this time for the Premier of Saskatchewan to interject himself 
into those negotiations.  
 
MR. SWAN: — I would like to go with a supplementary to the Minister of Health. It has been brought 
to my attention that medical students are now filling in for the interns and are working 27 hours to 36 
hours without sleep. Would you not agree that a dangerous 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4038 

precedent is being set by having medical students substitute for interns? 
  
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware that the information the 
member is putting forth is the accurate situation as it now exists. I would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You are suffering from a very serious disease, member. No, you didn’t catch that from me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I think it should be drawn to the member’s attention that in the 
province of Quebec, it is my understanding that the interns and residents have been on strike for a 
number of weeks and that they are carrying on at this particular time. I indicated to the press the other 
day, when I was asked a question, that I encouraged the two groups to get together as quickly as possible 
to resolve the situation . It is not wise at this time for the government to get involved. I will check the 
facts to make sure that the member is correct in what he is saying, and if it is true then it does concern 
me if people are working 27 hours to 36 hours without any sleep. I am told by my officials that the 
doctors and nurses could carry on for some time without any serious consequences, and also that the 
interns and residents have given us the assurance that they will come to work in emergency cases. 
 
MR. SWAN: — A supplementary to the Minister of Health. Would you not admit that because of your 
government’s hands-off attitude, you are forcing medical students to make medical decisions that they 
are not qualified to make, and because of this you are placing the health of patients in jeopardy? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — The member should have thrown away his written supplementary question. I 
indicated to him already that the interns and residents have given us assurance that in emergency cases 
and urgent cases they will go to work and make absolutely certain nobody is put in jeopardy. Secondly, 
we do have professional nurses and doctors who will have some extra workload put on them. But I can 
give this House the full assurance that no one will be put in any jeopardy whatsoever in either urgent or 
emergency cases because of the impasse that we presently have. 
 
MR. SWAN: — A supplementary to the Minister of Health. The information I have is correct and it was 
phoned to me by a medical student who is working in the hospital here in Regina. He is concerned that if 
the circumstances continue the way they are, and any med student makes a wrong decision that you as a 
government, and the hospital in particular, can be sued because the medical practices that are being 
practised now are not legal. What are you prepared to do to bring this into line? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I simply do not accept that at all, because those are not the facts. The 
fact is that medical decisions are made by licensed medical doctors. Even interns and residents are 
supervised by medical doctors who are licensed and the ultimate decision and responsibility for a 
medical decision must be borne by a medical doctor. So the assumption that you are making is simply a 
false premise and therefore I cannot accept the accusations made by the member. 
 

Rural Bus Service 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would have liked to have directed 
my question to the minister responsible for rural transportation but apparently he left in a tantrum 
because of the questions from this side of the House. Therefore I will 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4039 

direct my question to the minister responsible for STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company). The 
people of the Radville and Ceylon area are continually concerned about a bus service to and from 
Regina. You have indicated on previous occasions that such a service will not be available from STC. In 
light of the recent announcement of a rural transportation service between Wishart and Wynyard, the 
fourth such service in the province under the rural transportation program, would the minister consider 
such a service to the Radville-Ceylon area? 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t fall under the purview of STC to recommend or deny the 
services with regard to the particular service he speaks of; it comes under the Department of Highways 
and Transportation. I can’t answer whether or not we can consider that particular type of service. The 
service, however, that we do from time to time consider, is new bus services for STC. We have in fact 
considered the one he speaks of but the economics are just simply light on the end, and we cannot see 
our way clear. However, I can certainly take the question under advisement and ask the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation if he will have a look at the service under the department’s program. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, in way of a supplementary, I contacted a Mr. Bishop, the manager 
of Moose Mountain Lines, this morning. He said it could easily be tied in with their 
Bengough-Ogema-Pangman run. Would you indicate to the minister responsible for rural transportation 
that he could, in fact try to implement such a program under the rural assistance program to that 
community? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take it under advisement. I simply can’t say one way or another. 
I will ask the Minister of Highways and Transportation if it is a possibility and we can also check the 
validity of the statements from Moose Mountain because we work very closely with all the bus people in 
Saskatchewan, whether it be Greyhound, Moose Mountain, Trailways or whoever it is. If they can serve 
better than we can at a more economic rate, we see no reason why they shouldn’t. We certainly will have 
a look at it and I will bring it to the attention of the minister. 
 

Premier’s Presence in House during Debate on Bill No. 105 
 
Mr. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the Premier 
realizes the serious ramifications of Bill No. 105. Since this morning the member from Nipawin will be 
making references to speeches in the past from you as the Premier, I wonder if you might spend some 
time in the House today and listen to these discussions? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the words of the hon. member for Nipawin would be 
well worth listening to. I think they have been well worth listening to for 12, 14, 16, 18 or 20 hours. I do, 
however, have some other commitments. I’m sure the member for Nipawin’s words would be 
constructive in dealing with the problems of Canada. But I have another commitment to meet with 
former premier Robarts shortly after the question period and I think he might be even more helpful in 
deciding what we ought to do to preserve and strengthen Canada. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4040 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley 
(Provincial Secretary) that Bill No. 105 – An act to amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Mr. Speaker, before I commence today I 
would like to draw attention to the tremendous amount of money that we are now saving the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Today I received from the Attorney General the order of business for 
today, and Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough it is nothing more than a copy of yesterday’s order of 
business with the date scratched out and today’s date placed on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know most members last evening were extremely desirous of getting into this debate. I 
explained to them how they could do so. They are also terribly, terribly desirous of getting on with the 
people’s business, of doing these important matters, and for that reason I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105 negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS – 2 
 
Collver Ham  
 

NAYS – 39 
 
Pepper  Allen Bowerman 
Smishek Romanow Kramer 
Robbins Skoberg McArthur 
Gross  Shillington Mostoway 
Kaeding Hammersmith Kowalchuk 
MacAuley Byers Rolfes 
Cowley Tchorzewski Cody  
Lusney Nelson Engel 
Poniatowski White Solomon 
Berntson Larter Lane 
Taylor  Rousseau Swan 
Pickering Garner Muirhead 
Katzman Duncan Andrew 
 

Point of order 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you would be kind enough to clarify for me and other 
members of the House, what the practice and the rulings of the House are pertaining to motions to 
adjourn debates. My understanding of the rules is – I cite for Mr. Speaker’s consideration, March 6, 1973 
– that the rule is summed up as follows in a motion made by Mr. Steuart: 
 

The debate continuing on the motion and the amendment it was moved by 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4041 

Mr. Steuart, ‘that this debate be now adjourned.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker ruled the motion out of order on the grounds that the member had already moved a 
motion to adjourn the same debate. 
 

There is another precedent April 2, 1973. 
 

Mr. Wiebe moved this debate be now adjourned. Mr. Speaker ruled the motion out of order on 
the grounds that the member had already moved a motion to adjourn the same debate. 
 

The Journals Summary, Speaker’s Rulings and Statements, I think put it succinctly: 
 

Motion to adjourn debate cannot be moved twice in same debate by same member – 216, 284, 
290. 

 
I think the facts are clear; in this case, the member has moved at least three or four adjournment motions 
in this debate and I would like to know, is he in order to do so? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I believe that the circumstances described by the Attorney General are different. 
First of all, the motion to move adjourned debate, as I recall the incident, occurred as a result of the 
member having already received an adjourned debate. I believe that is against the rules and that once a 
member receives an adjourned debate he is not entitled to move another one. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would say that since the House adjourns at the conclusion of each day, moving 
a motion of adjournment the next day is not the same circumstance as described in the Attorney 
General’s citing from the Journals. It seems to me that a member has a right, when he does not receive 
an adjourned debate, to request another adjournment from the members because the members may have 
changed their minds in the intervening period, from the time the House adjourns until the next time it 
meets again the following day. So I would say that the circumstances the Attorney General has brought 
to the attention of the House are not precedents in fact but are merely suggestions that have happened 
before. In the circumstances that that the Attorney General has described, in terms of my request and Mr. 
Speaker’s ruling to allow a request for adjourned debate each day for the last three or four days, Mr. 
Speaker is right in these circumstances to have done so because the House in fact adjourns and the next 
day allowing one member . . . 
 
I agree with the Attorney General that were the member to request an adjourned debate two or three 
times between House adjournments that he would definitely be out of order and would not be allowed to 
do so under the rules. So I suggest with that you discount what the Attorney General has suggested and 
that Mr. Speaker has been correct in his decision to allow the member to attempt to adjourn debate after 
the House has adjourned each time. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — On the point of order raised by the Attorney General and the comments made by 
the member for Nipawin with regard to the point of order, I find that essentially the comments made by 
the member of Nipawin are correct. The member can seek an adjournment of the debate; it if is 
negatived the member may continue to speak. If he doesn’t continue to speak at that point, he looses his 
right to speak. If a member attempts adjournment of debate and it is negatived, he cannot attempt to 
adjourn the debate until an intervening matter has been entered in the journals. This 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4042 

means the member could seek leave again tomorrow if in fact we were debating the same bill. 
Essentially I find that the member for Nipawin is correct in his observation of the rule. He has the 
opportunity to continue with the debate at this time. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — A further point of order? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is the March 6, 1973 ruling, where on the 
motion involved, there had been an adjourned debate. It was private members’ day. One week or two 
weeks in advance, the opposition was asking for Return No. 109. Then when it came up on March 6, 
1973, the debate continued on the motion and then they put another motion for adjournment. It’s argued 
that this debate had now been adjourned. Perhaps I don’t understand, but . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’d like to respond to the citation the Attorney General made – April 2, 1973? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. The second one was April 2. I don’t know about the facts on 
that one. Just to refer to it here: 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Messer 
that Bill No. 50, The Natural Products Marketing Act, 1972, be now read a second time. 
 

The debate continued and then Mr. Wiebe moved that this debate be now adjourned, implying a second 
adjournment. Mr. Speaker ruled the motion out of order on the grounds the member had already moved 
the motion to adjourn the same debate. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Without an intervening . . . 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Oh no, clearly days had passed in-between. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That ruling was wrong. The Speaker is right. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I just want to now what the rule is because . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you questioning the Speaker’s ruling? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Never! I’m asking for clarification. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I have had some quick research done on the matter. I found the two 
citations the Attorney General brought forward which I neglected to comment on before because I was 
appalled by the amount of research that would be necessary to discover the facts of the matter. I have 
now had that research done. 
 
I find that on April 2, 1973, I believe it was the member for Morse, Mr. Wiebe moved adjournment, and 
it was ruled out of order because he had successfully moved the adjournment on March 5 preceding that. 
 
On March, 6, 1973, on page 216 of the journals, the member for, I believe it was, Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake, D.G. Steuart, moved two adjournment motions in a row, back to back, so therefore there was no 
opportunity for an intervening entry in the journal. 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4043 

Therefore, his second motion of adjournment was out of order. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll wait for the 
Attorney General to overcome his chagrin at having lost another one. It’s a pity, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Attorney General’s researchers, with all of the vast resources at the command of the New Democratic 
Party in this legislature, and also the resources held by the Attorney General, can’t dig up enough 
background material to be able to be reasonably convincing when opposed to, as the member for 
Souris-Cannington said, a self-professed, uneducated jerk. So it is a pity when the Attorney General 
can’t win one or two on that basis. 
 
Now I know he is going to have his researchers just absolutely eagerly and enthusiastically attempting to 
find some other ploy by which he can prevent the actual rules of the House from becoming apparent to 
all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, last evening before we retired, I brought forward a point which I think is relatively 
key to perhaps the decisions the individual members might be making in terms of this bill. I think some 
of the NDP members, and certainly some of the Conservative members, may have it on their minds. 
Now I don’t say that lightly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t say the Conservatives necessarily discount what their 
leader has said, and that is that he would support this bill because it removes the money for some people 
who are attempting to break up Canada. Those were his words publicly, and perhaps that is what the 
Conservative members seem to think. Now that may not be true, so these remarks are designed 
primarily, if you like, for the NDP members. An attempt may have been made to fool them about the real 
meaning of the bill, because you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that when the member for Biggar brought 
forward the resolution, he stated that the bill, in prior times, was deficient. 
 
That means, Mr. Speaker, the bill somehow didn’t think about the situation which might happen if a 
member crossed from one party to another (in other words, if a particular member crossed from one 
party to another, hadn’t run in the election prior under that same banner and thus had changed his total 
view by going to a new party). The bill hadn’t contemplated the fact that the research grants, the money 
for the leader’s office, and the money for the leader of the third party would be affected. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say to the NDP members opposite, that is not true. Right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan that very same occurrence happened within the lifetime of most of the members of this 
legislature. It happened, as a matter of fact, not four years ago. When I say, not four years ago, it was less 
than four years ago that it happened in this very same legislature. I want to just draw this to the 
members’ attention again, and to emphasize this point for those NDPers who may have listened to some 
others in their caucus say, the reason you should support this bill is because the bill was deficient. It 
didn’t make clear the fact that if a member changed from one party to another, didn’t run under that 
party’s banner in the previous election, the research moneys and the grants to the leader should be 
discounted. It didn’t make clear that it’s wrong for a member to do that. 
 
Now the fact is that less than four years ago, the Conservatives in this House, as you will remember, 
were third party, and the Conservatives in this House as third party received the moneys that had already 
been passed back in 1976. And, Mr. Speaker, in a few moments I’m going to get to the remarks of Mr. 
Allan Blakeney when he rejuvenated the bill or reassessed the situation in 1978. I’m also going to get to 
some additional remarks by the Attorney General in 1979 when he rejuvenated that act, when he 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4044 

rejuvenated that bill. 
 
But this was subsequent to the creation of third party legislation in this very Assembly. The 
Conservatives in the House had 11 members; the Liberals in the House had 13 members; and the 
Liberals received the benefits of being the party in opposition. They received the moneys that were 
granted to the opposition party in this Chamber. They received the grants and research help that the 
opposition party got, and the Conservatives received the grants for third party status. Less than four years 
ago, when this was in existence, there were 13 members for the Liberals, 11 members for the 
Conservatives. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek, who was elected as a Liberal, crossed to the Conservatives, and it gave 
the Liberals 12 in the Assembly and the Conservatives 12 in the Assembly. What happened as a result of 
that move? Well, what happened was this: the grants to the Liberal Party were reduced and the grants to 
the Conservative Party were increased. And the decision made by the legislators in this very Chamber 
was that the only fair way to deal with the two parties – as a result of a member changing, crossing from 
one party to another – was to lower the opposition and raise the third party so that they were even. So 
they added together the amount of grants granted to the Liberals, or the opposition, and the amounts 
granted to the third party (at that time the Conservatives) and divided in two. Those were the grants 
made to each party. Now I want you to keep in mind that this happened as a direct result of the member 
for Thunder Creek crossing from the Liberals to the Conservatives. 
 
Nothing could be closer to the existing circumstances. The member for Thunder Creek did not seek 
office in a by-election. He sought office in the election in 1978. 
 
The members in this very Assembly at that time made a specific decision to alter the grants and research 
moneys for those parties, as a result of that member’s going from one party to another even though he 
had not been elected under the new party’s banner. And I’m going to quote for you now the remarks of 
Mr. Allan Blakeney at the time he brought forward the changes to The Legislative Assembly Act on 
April 10, 1978. 
 
Now, you will recall Mr. Speaker, that last evening and yesterday afternoon, I went through the remarks 
of the member for Biggar who introduced the changes in 1976. I went through some of the remarks of 
the Attorney General, who introduced the changes to The Legislative Assembly and The Executive 
Council Acts in 1979. And now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce the remarks of the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan when he introduced changes to The Legislative Assembly Act and The 
Executive Council Act on April 10, 1978. He said as follows ( I refer all members to page 1280, April 
10, 1978, Saskatchewan Hansard): 
 

Hon. A.E. Blakeney (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 30 – An Act to amend The 
Legislative Assembly Act. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, on February 5, 1976 the Lieutenant-Governor in Council issued an Order 
No. 17776 authorizing the Executive Council to appoint a committee to review the service 
facilities of perquisites and allowances and salaries of the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
the Speaker of the House, the Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the leader of the 
third party. Members will recall the agreement that we 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4045 

proceed on this basis. The committee was in due course appointed and comprised a chairman, 
Mr. Justice E.M. Hughes and other members. Judge Raynell Andreychuk and Mr. Charles S. 
Mitchell. Under the chairmanship of Judge Hughes the committee was directed to devise 
methods of adjusting allowances and salaries and to submit recommendations to the cabinet. 
 
The committee recommended the need for expansion and increases in the role of remuneration of 
members of the Legislative Assembly for a number or reasons. It perceived an increase in the 
MLA’s workload, a trend toward membership as a full time vocation, constituency work as a 
year round undertaking, it conceived that members supplementing present remunerations with 
personal funds, that remuneration to cabinet ministers, MLAs, the Opposition Leader and the 
third party leader would be third lowest in Canada and that remuneration to the Premier was the 
lowest. 

Now Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasis here that these were the recommendations of the committee 
chaired by Justice E.M. Hughes. These were the recommendations submitted to cabinet by Justice E.M. 
Hughes. 
 

The committee submitted its first interim report on August 14, 1976 and its second interim report 
on August 18, 1976 and you will recall that we have acted on a number of those. We considered 
(said the Premier) the bulk of the recommendations of the first report in the 1976 amendments to 
The Legislative Assembly Act. 

 
Now Mr. Speaker, I want to interject here. The Premier of the province of Saskatchewan stated that the 
initial reports of the Hughes committee to investigate this entire matter of MLA’s salaries, perquisites, 
responsibilities, payment to the Premier, payment to the cabinet and to the third party leader, were first 
implemented in the 1976 amendment which as introduced by the member for Biggar. 
 

The present bill, Bill 30, represents the government’s further action to ask this Assembly to 
follow through on the remaining recommendations . . . 

Now keep in mind, we have first a committee chaired by Justice E.M. Hughes. Then we have the present 
chancellor of the University of Regina. Then we have a former president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Municipalities. These were three of the most respected individuals in the province, who 
were undoubtedly outside of the political arena and who were recommended as such by every single 
member of this legislative Chamber at the time. This committee studied the problem for well over two 
years. This legislature examined the problem in 1976, in 1978, and again in 1979. Yet the member for 
Biggar, in 1980, has the gall to say the Hughes committee, the legislature in 1976 and he himself, the 
legislature in 1978 and the Premier of Saskatchewan, the legislature in 1979 and the Attorney General, 
that all of these, Mr. Speaker, could have committed an oversight and that the bill was deficient – and 
not only these things on the record, Mr. Speaker, but the actual practice of the Assembly paid to the 
leader’s office, to the leader, to the caucus, and for research and secretarial help, were in fact adjusted as 
a direct result of that member’s crossing. Yet the member for Biggar has the gall to stand up in this 
House and say the bill was deficient. That, Mr. Speaker, is why no one, no independent observer of this 
legislature, is buying that act. There are some in Saskatchewan who say, as the Conservative leader said, 
stop the Unionests from getting public grants. Now they are wrong, Mr. Speaker. Those who say that are 
wrong. But at least they are being honest and straightforward. At least they are saying what they feel 
about the situation. They are wrong because that is an attack on 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4046 

the rights of members of the legislature to be equal in their abilities to present their case. 
 
The member for Shellbrook, from his chair last evening stated that the believed that this bill was the 
equivalent of requiring any member who does not run under one party banner to go back to the people 
and seek re-election in a by-election. Nothing could be further from the truth. If that bill were brought 
before the people of Saskatchewan, if that bill were brought forward in this House and was not 
retroactive, the government members might receive some support for it. If they make it retroactive then 
it is merely an attempt to attack existing members who have chosen to do what members have been 
doing in Saskatchewan, in Canada and in Britain for many, many decades.   
 
But that is not what this bill is about. If the members on the NDP side of this House want to bring 
forward such a bill to ensure that no member may cross the floor of the House, at any time, unless he 
resigns and seeks office again in a by-election, they may do so. As I say, that bill might receive some 
support. If that is the principle you are trying to attack, then bring forward a bill that attacks that 
principle. Don’t bring forward a bill that attacks minorities. Don’t bring forward a bill that attacks 
existing members for doing what has been done in Saskatchewan, Canada and in Britain for decades. 
Don’t bring forward a bill that attacks two members of the House for exactly the reasons that you 
rewarded the Conservative group in this House when the member for Thunder Creek crossed and created 
an equivalence between the Liberals and the Conservatives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be interested to hear what the members opposite and the members at my 
right think about those precedents and that principle. But they have refused, Mr. Speaker, on three or 
four separate occasions to allow me the privilege which is existent and the courtesy which is existent in 
every law of debate ever put forward in a fair manner and that is the ability to rebut whatever arguments 
they bring forward. 
 
I have attempted for four straight days to enable others to get in to make comments on what they think of 
the example of Mr. Thatcher, the member for Thunder Creek, crossing to the Conservatives and the 
allowances for research, secretarial help, leader’s office and leader’s remuneration being adjusted. I am 
going to get to the remarks in a few moments, Mr. Speaker, of Mr. Blakeney on that very subject, that 
very topic on April 10, 1978 when he introduced Bill No. 30 – An Act to amend The Legislative 
Assembly Act. 
 
The member for Regina South, from his chair, continues to say, let us have our say. I’ve said fine, allow 
me the courtesy to be able to rebut arguments. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I didn’t say that. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — You see, Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to hear their say. If you won’t let me have 
the opportunity to rebut in this legislature, then for goodness sake go outside the legislature and explain 
away these facts that I am presenting to you today. Explain them away to the people. Explain them away 
to me. Convince me at any time, Mr. Speaker, that this bill is not an attack on minorities. Convince me 
that retroactive legislation designed to remove the rights of two members of this legislature who have 
been recognized in this legislature before is not what you intend with this bill and I would be more than 
happy to take my chair and vote with you. 
 
But if you can’t convince any independent observer of that, if you can’t convince the 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4047 

people of that, then bring forward a bill which you mean. Don’t try and slip in the back door what you 
mean at the front door. Because then, Mr. Speaker, you attack only yourselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker will know, because I have made it public before, that unless Allan Blakeney resigns his seat 
in Regina Elphinstone and actually seeks office in a by-election . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’m sure the member made a slip; but it’s common in this Assembly and 
others to refer to the member by his title or his constituency. That is especially true when it’s across the 
floor. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — My sincere apologies for that, Mr. Speaker. It was entirely a slip. I was looking at 
Hansard and seeing the Hon. Allan Blakeney and that is why. I should have said the Premier. 
 
Unless the Premier accepts the challenge to resign his seat in Regina Elphinstone and run in a 
by-election in Nipawin, I am not going to seek re-election in Nipawin in the next provincial general 
election. I have announced that. That’s pretty straightforward. 
 
Therefore, it’s not for me that I wish you to stop making this mistake and stop bringing forward this kind 
of legislation that attacks minorities. You may not believe this, Mr. Speaker, and the members may not 
believe this, but it is for them that I am fighting this bill. If, Mr. Speaker, I had not already made a 
commitment in this House to donate all personal moneys to the United Way in Nipawin, then the 
members could accuse me, perhaps, of wanting to put forward this bill for personal reasons. But that 
having been said, and that commitment having been made, and the moneys already in the hands of 
Donor’s Choice, and the instructions already given to the Clerk to deposit on a continuing basis that 
money, as long as it remains in effect, to Donor’s Choice, I see no other reason, and the members can see 
no other possible reason, than that they are making a serious error. 
 
Let me, Mr. Speaker, go on with the sterling words of the Hon. Allan E. Blakeney, Premier of 
Saskatchewan, member for Regina Elphinstone, the Leader of the NDP for 10 or 11 years – the leader all 
members opposite have followed for 10 or 11 years. Let me read to them his words on April 10, 1978 
pertaining to the amendments he was bringing forward at that time, and pertaining to the committee of 
independent, outside observers who studied the situation in Saskatchewan for two years or more and all 
of their recommendations were then brought into line in 1978. And he goes on in that same statement: 
 

The present bill, Bill 30, represents the government’s further action to ask the Assembly to 
follow through on the remaining recommendations of the first report and the further 
recommendations outlined in the second report. Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the bill do not strictly refer 
to matters considered by the committee. I will touch on those in a moment. 
 
Section 2 of the bill attempts to allow rural members the convenience of individual telephones. 

I’m not going to go on to read the Premier’s comments on section 2 of the bill because it pertains to rural 
telephones. Suffice it to say that the committee made recommendations on rural telephones. 
 
Section 3 is a direction implementation of a recommendation of the first report of 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4048 

the Hughes committee. The committee recommended that the Speaker of this House receive a $35 
allowance for each day he attends to the duties of his office between sessions. 
 
Mr. Speaker I know, was thankful for that provision in the bill. And I won’t go on to bore the members 
with the Premier’s further comments. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, sections 4 and 5 are not dealt with by the committee, the Premier says. Otherwise, 
quite frankly, I would have brought forward the committees’ recommendations. Even though they 
studied it, even though they presented it to the members of this House, even though they looked at it, 
they did not specifically make recommendations with reference to the Leader of the Opposition and the 
leader of the third party. Otherwise I would be in here with both feet leaping on the words of the Hughes 
committee. This is the Premier of Saskatchewan on sections 4 and 5: 
 

They represent a clarification of the payment of allowances and grants to the Leader of the 
Opposition and the leader of the third party and to the Premier in the event of a change of 
government. There is a curious anomaly in the statute as it now stands. The statute now provides, 
curiously enough, that the Leader of the Opposition shall be paid as the Leader of the Opposition 
up until polling day and thereafter. If there is a change of government, the person who then 
becomes Leader of the Opposition, shall be paid in that office. However, The Executive Council 
Act provides that the person shall be paid as Premier while he occupies that office. You see a 
little anomaly there because . . . 
 

And Mr. McMillan, one of the demised Liberals in the House interjects, ‘Your demise.’ Mr. Blakeney 
goes on. 
 

Well not particularly. If I were preparing for my demise, I would leave it quite as it is. In 1971, 
when there was a change of government, the act, because of the anomaly, provided that the 
Leader of the Opposition, soon to become Premier, stopped getting paid on polling day and 
didn’t start getting paid as Premier until he was sworn in seven or eight days later, whereas the 
person who had been Premier was paid as Premier during this period and also as Leader of the 
Opposition during this period. This was a matter which was adjusted by agreement. I don’t know 
what was the degree of legality by paying the Leader of the Opposition that salary until he was 
sworn in as Premier and the Premier until he ceased being Premier, which is the sensible 
arrangement and which is being enacted here in this legislation. This is correcting a mere 
anomaly in the current legislation. 
 

No, Mr. Speaker, I brought the words of the Premier in that section to the attention of the House to show 
the detail in which the then Premier of Saskatchewan, his office, his vast research staff, the cabinet, the 
Executive Council at the time, and the government caucus examined this bill. They examined this 
situation with such detail and such precision that they found there was an anomaly in the law as between 
the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition such that there was the potential for double payment to 
both offices. By agreement they had before eliminated that double payment, but now they were bringing 
it forward in their legislation. That, Mr. Speaker, is how clear-cut, how precise, how concise the 
examination of this act was on April 10, 1978 after the Hughes committee report. 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4049 

Now, I want you to listen to this, Mr. Speaker. Here’s another example of the same thing from the words 
of the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 

Section 6 was also not dealt with by the committee but the government felt that the equal 
distribution of the allowance to opposition whips should be provided for in the act in the event of 
a tie in the opposition. 
 

This was in April 10, 1978. The government members themselves and the Premier of Saskatchewan 
looked forward to the day when there would be a tie in the opposition. And after April 10, 1978 but 
before the provincial election in October, 1978, the member for Thunder Creek crossed to the 
Conservatives from the Liberals and that very tie that the government had decided could happen, in fact, 
happened, and the allowances were adjusted accordingly for that period of time. 
 
Now listen to this: 
 

The matter of a tie in the opposition was dealt with in so far as the Leader of the Opposition’s 
salary was concerned, and the leader of the third party’s salary was dealt with with respect to the 
grants for their offices but through some oversight, the matter of the whips was not dealt with. In 
order that the two salaries for whips might be pooled and divided, this sections provides that to 
be done. 

 
You see, Mr. Speaker, in 1976 legislation was introduced in this House creating third party status for the 
Progressive Conservatives who were then the first third party to occupy this House. Through some 
oversight in 1976, the Premier says, although they dealt with salaries, they dealt with the moneys 
provided for in terms of the leader’s office (you understand that indicates that they dealt with it directly), 
in the event of a tie the matter wasn’t dealt with.  
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just made a mistake in my own presentation, because the member for Thunder 
Creek crossed before April, 1978 and the tie actually existed. So the Premier of Saskatchewan and his 
Executive Council actually foresaw the event of a tie, actually foresaw that eventuality because it was 
already in existence. And what created the tie? The member for Thunder Creek crossed from the Liberals 
to the Conservatives. That’s what the Premier said in 1978. The matter of a tie in the opposition was 
dealt with; but in 1978 they didn’t bother or had forgotten to bother with the eventuality of a tie in so far 
as the whips’ offices were concerned. They corrected the legislation when the tie already existed, 
brought about by one member crossing to another side. 
 
Section 7 provides a 2 cent per voter increase in members’ communication allowance; I don’t think that 
refers to third parties. Section 8 implements two recommendations of the Hughes committee for a per 
diem allowance; I don’t think that is dealt with in there. Section 8(b) allows for a constant rate per mile; 
that is not dealt with. This was recommended in the first report as a means of eliminating discrimination 
against members who live a considerable distance; I won’t bother with that. Section 9 determines when 
the various provisions of the act will come into force. Now, I want to read what the Premier said in 1978 
with respect to the act coming into force: 
 

Section 9 determines when the various provisions of the act will come into force. The act comes 
into force on the day of assent with the section dealing with whips’ allowances being retroactive 
to November 15, 1977 . . . 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4050 

Why? Because November 15, 1977 was subsequent to the point in time when the member for Thunder 
Creek crossed to the Conservatives and in fact the tie existed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to go on and read into the record a few remarks by others on this bill. This is 
one example where retroactivity was not an attack. This is one example where retroactivity was a 
recognition of a fact. The tie existed. It was brought about by the member crossing the floor, brought 
about by his changing his mind about his own party, under which he was elected. The Executive Council 
reviewed it, looked at what happened, examined the situation and retroactively changed the legislation to 
recognize the tie. 
 
I am going to be interested to hear how the members opposite and their Premier answer the questions in 
that regard, with reference to the changes that are being made in Bill No. 105. And I look forward with 
enthusiasm to hearing those comments. He goes on to say: 
 

 . . . in order to apply to the 1977-78 session, and I believe that that is in order. 
 

Do you hear that, Mr. Speaker? ‘I believe that that is in order.’ 
 

We will need to check the records to see what was done with respect to the session last fall. The 
proposal was prepared before we terminated last fall’s session and there may be a necessity of 
checking that very small point. The section dealing with communications is retroactive to April 
1, 1978, a few days ago, since that simplifies the calculation to make it effective for the fiscal 
year. 
 

No one objected to that kind of retroactive legislation in this Assembly – in order to help with fiscal 
accounting measures. 
 

In other respects the matter would come into effect on the day of assent. 
 

That is the normal course of events in a bill. Now, keep this in mind, Mr. Speaker. In order to recognize 
the tie which existed as a result of a member crossing the floor, the Premier of Saskatchewan made the 
whip section retroactive. It made one other small matter retroactive, in order to help with fiscal matters. 
All other matters in that bill, the final recommendation of the Hughes committee report, were made 
effective on the day of assent. Now, Mr. Speaker, on April 10, 1978 a member crossing from the 
Conservatives to the Liberals did not upset the government. As a matter of fact it not only didn’t upset 
them, they said they were changes which the government felt were desirable to recognize that crossing of 
the floor. They are desirable! 
 

If hon. members feel there is a reason for varying any particular provisions (now he calls for all 
hon. members to come forward), we are more than willing to consider proposals which honorable 
members might put forward. 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4051 

Now remember, the Premier’s research staff, the entire Executive Council, and the NDP caucus have 
already reviewed this bill in April of 1978. They know that the tie exists between the Liberals and 
Conservatives because it has existed since 1977. They know that tie was the result of the member’s 
crossing from the Liberals to the Conservatives. They know that the money that went to the opposition 
and to the third party was then divided and halved in order to provide equal amounts to the equal 
opposition members. They know that. They have all reviewed it and now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan invites all hon. members in this Chamber, having gone through all that procedure in the 
Hughes committee, to review the act and to consider proposals which hon. members might put forward. 
He said: 
 

Very clearly, this is not something which the government takes a firm position on. 
 

What do you think of that, Mr. Speaker? This is not something the government takes a firm position on – 
April 10, 1978. But on June 4, 1980 the government is sure as heck taking a firm position on one of 
those matters, even though there is a precedent in this very same Assembly with reference to caucus 
grants, research grants, leader’s accounts and with reference to the leader’s pay. There is a precedent in 
this very same Assembly when a member crosses the floor it changes everything, but the government 
doesn’t take a very firm position on it. But today, two years after the event has occurred, when two 
members of this Assembly cross the floor to another political party the government says, we don’t like 
that other political party and therefore we’re going to take a firm position. 
 

It is something (the Premier goes on to say) which all honorable members will wish to consider 
since it deals with our own remuneration, always a difficult area for us in this legislature. We 
welcome any contributions or suggestions that honorable members may wish to make in 
committee. With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 30, An Act to 
amend The Legislative Assembly Act. 
 

Now wait until you hear this. What is the very first question that comes on the paper? Is it about the tie 
in the opposition? No. Is it about third party status? No. Is it about the fact that a member crossed the 
floor, and suddenly the members were no longer the opposition but were now only one-half of the 
opposition, and their grants went down and the third party’s went up, and their leader’s pay went down 
and the third party leader’s went up? Was that the question? Oh no. Here’s the question from the 
member for Rosthern: 
 

Before the Premier takes his chair, will he answer two questions for me? The first question is, is 
there consideration of a formula rather than two cents each time the – was that considered on the 
mailing? (The Premier answers the question.) The second question is on the telephone. The date 
effective, I assume is the date the bill is passed? Are you not going back to your original 
suggestion that Mr. Speaker sent letters to all the MLAs about originally? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: Yes, the act doesn’t fully cover the policy. The policy will be that SaskTel, if we 
agree, will install these phones, and where somebody has already installed the phone, will be 
reimbursed. 

 
And he goes on to talk about the reimbursement pertaining to telephones. Those, Mr. 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4052 

Speaker, were the comments of the member for Rosthern at the time. That’s it. Those were the 
questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to present to you what Mr. Cy MacDonald, the member at the time for 
. . . I don’t think the seat is any longer in existence. I forget what his seat was now to be quite frank. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Indian Head-Wolseley. I’m sorry, it is still in existence. Mr. Cy MacDonald rose 
on behalf of the then Liberal party. Now keep this in mind; the Liberal Party was now no longer the 
opposition party in full. They were now exactly equal to the Conservatives in the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, you would think that under the circumstances of that tie, as a result of one of their very own 
members crossing the floor from the Liberals to the Conservatives, that the Liberals whose grants and 
allowances were reduced, whose leader’s salary was reduced, whose leader’s office expenses were 
reduced, would focus on that section of the bill because it was so unfair and unreasonable. You would 
think, wouldn’t you, Mr. Speaker, that they would have far more reason than anyone in this Chamber to 
question third party status in the House, wouldn’t you? Well, I think the comments of the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley are most interesting. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on behalf of the Liberal opposition. First of 
all, I have no area of disagreement with Bill No. 30. 
 

Do you hear that, Mr. Speaker? Here are the Liberals. Their money’s gone away. They are not equal in 
the House. They are now equally paid. They were formerly the opposition, but a member crossed from 
them to us and suddenly they were even, and here’s what he says: 
 

I have no area of disagreement with Bill No. 30. In fact I have found that in most cases when 
legislation which affects individual members is introduced in this Assembly, all governments of 
all political stripes are normally overly cautious and in most cases are never out of line with what 
is really the public interest or the good of the members of this Assembly. 
 

Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? He says most of the time when amendments to The Legislative 
Assembly Act and The Executive Council Act are concerned, governments are overly cautious, members 
are overly cautious, and they have the best interests of everyone at heart. Why then does the Government 
of Saskatchewan find it necessary now to pick that particular bill to attack the member for Nipawin and 
the member for Swift Current? Why? I asked this question yesterday; I’ve asked this question every day 
I have stood on my feet. Why do the Progressive Conservatives want to attack members in this 
Assembly who happen to represent a minority in this Assembly when in the past no such attacks have 
occurred? Because governments have been overcautious and members have been cautious (in the words 
of Mr. MacDonald and I’m not citing to you some member of the House who was not respected.) 
Everyone who ever sat in this Assembly respected Cy MacDonald, respected his views and his 
understanding of the operation of this Assembly, and his feeling for this Assembly. 
 
We may not have agreed with him politically, and we may not have agreed with his tactics, but we 
certainly respected him for his respect of this Chamber and of the rights of individual members. 



 
June 4, 1980 

 

 
4053 

Now remember, these amendments represent the possibility of a tie. 
 
In the Premier’s own words (with reference to the whip) if the Liberals in the House at the time this 
happened had any thought, reason, or any upset with the principles of that bill, they would have 
immediately jumped on that section of what the Premier said, and said, it is unfair; it is unreasonable; 
it’s unrealistic; we are the only opposition in this legislature because we were the only ones who had 
sufficient members elected. They would have stood on their feet, given the principles of Bill No. 105 and 
said, of our 12 members, all 12 have been elected here as Liberals. And over there, of the Conservatives 
12 members, only 10 were elected as Conservatives; 2 were elected as Liberals and therefore we are the 
opposition. That’s what they would have said if they had the principles of Bill No. 105. That’s what they 
would have said, but they didn’t. 
 
Mr. MacDonald goes on to say: 
 

 . . . even though most of them are housekeeping in nature, some have a bit of variance, and are 
certainly of that nature and I’m sure that all members will endorse them and I think the general 
public of Saskatchewan will also endorse them. However, I do have one feeling that is contained 
in the general attitude of the Assembly in Saskatchewan in relation to changes affecting 
individual members and I honestly believe that it is time that this Assembly matured to the 
degree that it has matured in Ottawa. 
 
Things that affect individual members of the Assembly, irrespective of political party or 
government or opposition, that there should be a degree of consultation, or a mechanism whereby 
all parties would have an opportunity to discuss and have an input into these changes. In saying 
that I refer to . . .  
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here is the main thrust of what the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, Cy 
MacDonald, said in this Chamber on April 10, 1978, in response to the Premier. The main thrust of his 
remarks was: 
 

 . . . I refer to election expenses; I refer to boundary changes; I refer to any financial matters 
affecting individual members, and, of course, I think that the theory in Ottawa and the theory in 
most Houses is that this is not a government matter. 
 

Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? A most respected member of the House said, it wasn’t a government 
matter. The Premier of Saskatchewan said, we welcome any contributions or suggestions. He said (the 
Premier, I want to recall) ‘ . . . this is not something which the government takes a firm position on. It is 
something which all hon. members will wish to consider, since it deals with our own remuneration.’ 
 
No firm position is taken in 1978. The Liberals have just been euchred out of being the opposition. They 
elected all 12 of their members to the legislature. The Conservatives only elected 10 as Conservatives. 
Two of them crossed the floor and suddenly, Mr. Speaker, the main thing the Liberal Party had to put 
forward at the time pertained to an independent organization. That’s why they said, it pertained to an 
independent organization. 
 
Did any government member listen to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley? The answer is no . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hope the member for Kelsey-Tisdale has 



 
June 4, 1980 
 

 
4054 

an opportunity (I wouldn’t want to repeat the remarks I made this morning, but perhaps he may not wish 
to concern himself about remarks made previously in this debate), for his own information and 
edification, in order to be able to explain it not only to himself but to others of his ilk, to read the 
Hansard of this morning and then answer that to any serious person in Saskatchewan. That’s all I ask the 
member to do, read it and then explain how you can recognize it at one time, but the next time, because 
someone else has different views, you don’t recognize it. Then try to get away with the position you have 
taken, that it is merely an adjustment of a previous oversight in this bill. This entire matter has been 
well-considered. I go on with the remarks of Mr. Cy MacDonald, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, 
in 1978. He goes on to say: 
 

I would like to see, and as I said honestly . . .  
 

Now we all remember the member at the time, Mr. MacDonald, had a tendency to do that. In his remarks 
he kept implying that the remarks he had made before were not very honest. He said, now I want you to 
listen to my remarks, honestly. 
 

 . . . that I think the Premier and the government would be very, very wise in developing an 
all-party device of input and consultation in regard to all matters which affect us as individual 
members of the Assembly, and of course, affect the work we do and method and manner by 
which we get elected, how we get paid, and what are our pensions. Of course we attempt to do 
that in some ways by the appointment of independent committees, such as the Hughes 
committee, where we all get inputs. This is not intended as a criticism of the present government 
because I think you could go back to our government and all governments, and I think we have 
had a progression of a little more maturity in the handling of these kinds of problems as the years 
progress. 
 

You see, Mr. Speaker, suddenly the member for Indian Head-Wolseley at the time, Cy MacDonald, 
gives the government some kudos and gives the government some praise, says the Government of 
Saskatchewan has progressed in this matter. With every precedent in Saskatchewan, in Canada and in 
Britain against them; with the precedent in this very House less than four years ago against them; with 
the words of the Premier of Saskatchewan two years ago against them, the only question you can ask is, 
why now is the government taking such a firm position on Bill No. 105? The reason they are taking such 
a firm position on Bill No. 105 is that they don’t like what two members think and that’s all; nothing 
else! They don’t like what two members think and they want to eliminate them, to make them less than 
full members of this Assembly. That is what they want to do. That is what they are trying to do and 
that’s why I’m fighting it. It’s not for these two members but for any two members of any assembly, 
anywhere, to give them the right to stand up and say what they believe, to say what they think and stand 
for what they believe, not for what the government tells them to believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it is 12 noon. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 


