






















































Hansard: May 29, 1980


 
3777 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 29, 1980 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act 

 
Section 1 (continued) 

 
MR. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Minister, do you have that information for me now on the acoustic 
coupler? 
 
MR. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I gave the hon. member the 
information just when the House rose at 5 o’clock. I indicated to him at that time we do not rent or lease 
couplers. They are attached to the piece of equipment which the subscriber owns. So there is no 
difference in leasing fees or anything like that. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, you had stated about SED Systems working on this panel. Well, SED 
Systems is developing a piece of equipment for Sask Tel, is that correct? 
 
MR. CODY: — They are developing a new technology to reduce the line load of multiparty lines. That 
is the piece of equipment they are presently working on. It has nothing to do with anything else, just 
multiparty lines. 
 
MR. GARNER: — And that’s all? 
 
MR. CODY: — That’s all, nothing else. I gather that’s all. We don’t know of anything else. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we can prepare to vote on item 1. 
 
Section 1, Bill No. 13 agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 19 
 

Bowerman Banda Long 
Smishek Kaeding Johnson 
Romanow Hammersmith Thompson 
Messer Byers Poniatowski 
McArthur Vickar Collver 
MacMurchy Cody  
Mostoway Matsalla  
 

NAYS — 14 
 

Bernston Rousseau Katzman 
Birkbeck Swan Duncan 
 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3778 

 
Larter Pickering Andrew 
Lane Garner McLeod 
Taylor Muirhead  
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Sections 3 to 5 agreed on division. 
 

Section 6 
 
Sections 44.2, 44.3 and 44.4 as amended agreed on division. 
 

Section 44.5 
 
MR. GARNER: — This original motion of the governments goes a very small way, just part of the 
way. It doesn’t address a problem that’s at hand here. It waters the bill down, but in a very small way. It 
still leaves the government with far outreaching powers in its complete control of telecommunications in 
Saskatchewan. The monopoly system that it wants just confirms this. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I’ll be moving a subamendment, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. 
Muirhead). That subamendment is: 
 
That the amendment be amended by striking out all the words after ‘prevent’ in the first line and 
substituting the following therefor: 
 

(a) competition in the manufacturing, distribution, leasing, sale, maintenance, or use of 
computers or related equipment, or (b) the connection of any attachment to a 
telecommunications line of the corporation. 

 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to briefly comment on this amendment and then allow it 
to go to a vote. Really, I see very little wrong with (a) of the amendment. But I certainly do see a lot 
wrong with (b) of the amendment — (b) simply negates exactly what we were trying to do, and that was 
disallow connections to be made unless we had specific regulations to allow then. This amendment 
simply would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, the (b) portion of 44.5 of the amendment 
says: 
 

The connection of any attachment to a telecommunication line of the corporation. (And it says 
prior to that): No regulation may be made to prevent . . . 
 

That means you could not make a regulation to prevent the connection of any attachment to a 
telecommunication line of the corporation. Well, that’s exactly what we are trying to get at in this bill. 
We do want to disallow the connection of certain kinds of things. Only those things can be connected 
which are in our regulation or have our explicit permission to be connected. 
 
I think I don’t have to rehash the debate here tonight on the reasons Sask Tel needs to have this 
particular amendment, because I believe everyone clearly understands exactly what we are trying to do 
and that is simply to disallow certain items to be hung on to our lines unless they are in our regulation. If 
they are in the regulation, they are 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3779 

quite permitted and we will allow them to go forward. Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would urge the 
committee to vote against this particular amendment. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, you stated that section (a) was O.K. I mean, we asked for, ‘or related 
equipment.’ Now you addressed us in this Chamber that there were going to be some other House 
amendments. Why does this amendment bother you so much? Is it because it comes from this side of the 
Chamber? Is that why? That’s exactly why. 
 
That’s why it makes it very difficult to bring amendments in to any bill in this House, because it is 
almost a waste of time. Now that’s a heck of a thing to say but you know, this is why they hollered, and 
I’ve heard them hollering for two weeks. Where are the amendments? We have to try to manipulate this 
government over here, to let them think that it’s their idea to bring in the amendments because they 
won’t accept a good amendment from this side of the Chamber. It has to come out of those little minds. 
That’s just the way this system works. 
 
We can bring in a good amendment from this side. But no, we have to manipulate it to let them come up 
with the brain wave, let them come up with the bright ideas. They won’t accept a good amendment from 
this side, Mr. Chairman. 
 
This is another demonstration of this government flipping and flopping around. Mark my words, the 
people of Saskatchewan will suffer from the moves this government makes here tonight. Mr. Chairman, 
we have brought forth this amendment; we have other amendments. But it seems very clear to me (and 
we have another couple of good amendments, even though I’m afraid to say it) that it’s going to be a 
waste of time. Because unless it comes out of one of the backroom offices over there, from one of the 
technocrats, it won’t be accepted. If it comes from this side of the House it won’t be accepted. 
 
So all we can do in opposition, Mr. Chairman, is try to present the people’s case. We can present 
amendments for their benefit. We have presented them to the government. It is the government opposite 
that will not accept them. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to prolong the debate. However, I think it is worthy of 
making a bit of an explanation as to what the member indicates to me, and he indicates that we will not 
take a good amendment from the opposition. That’s simply not the case. The amendment in this 
particular instance is an amendment which completely negates exactly what we were trying to do with 
this bill. Let me just read . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It has zero to do with what your second one 
means. Well, let me read from the original amendment 44.2, and basically what it says is that no person 
shall attach or connect to, or use in conjunction with, and part of a telecommunication line of the 
corporation, any attachments unless it’s in the regulations or specifically permitted. 
 
That’s what the bill really wants to do, O.K.? Reading your amendment, it says: 
 

No regulation may be made to prevent the connection of any attachment to a telecommunication 
line of the corporation. 
 

It completely takes away exactly what we wanted to have in the bill, so it’s pretty obvious that we 
cannot allow the amendment to pass. As I said, (a) of the amendment doesn’t 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3780 

look that bad. But certainly (b) completely does away with the principle of this bill and the principle 
simply is that we do not want anything connected to our lines unless they have either written permission 
from us or the attachment will be in the regulations. That’s all we are asking here; so we don’t want it 
watered down by now saying you will prevent this kind of thing. So it’s pretty obvious that I don’t think 
the committee can possibly vote for this amendment. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I would just like to say to the hon. minister, that of course it can’t 
negate because then it would be out of order so your initial statement is not accurate. Secondly, we have 
had the commitment that the government was not intending to do away with competition. That was the 
assurance although the interpretation of the bill by anybody else indicates that’s not what the bill says. 
 
So the government then brought in an amendment to give the assurance that they wouldn’t do away with 
competition in computers. But the opposition amendment merely extends the fact that the government 
should not do away with competition. Your statement very simply is that you are prepared to give some 
assurance that you won’t do away with competition in computers. We are trying to extend it to the other 
areas. You won’t give that assurance. That’s all that amendment does. You can’t say that it negates 
everything you have done when it has been ruled in order. You can’t have an amendment that negates 
the motion. That’s a long standing rule of this House. You have been around occasionally, (on and off) 
for some time. 
 
The difficulty you are going to have is that if, by mentioning computers, you set up a monopoly on 
automatic diallers or telephone answering receivers or whatever, and someone challenges that in the 
courts, the courts are going to say — well, the legislature had the opportunity to add to the list of items 
and because it refused to do so, by implication the legislature was allowing Sask Tel to have a monopoly 
on these other items. That’s what your amendment does. That’s why I criticized the amendment of the 
Leader of the Unionest Party this afternoon, because it did the same thing; and that’s a matter of 
statutory interpretation. I say to you that all this amendment does is put in the act a guarantee of all the 
assurances the government opposite has given for the last few months. 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Chairman, it’s obvious I won’t be agreeing with the hon. member. As much as I 
would like to agree, I just can’t agree because it simply does not then allow us to do the job which has to 
be done. We don’t agree with you. We have indicated we will allow the computer amendment to go in 
— not that I’m wildly crazy about it either — so the members opposite could in fact vote for this bill. I 
decided O.K., let’s allow it. So we allowed the thing which they were saying was giving them the most 
problem, and that is the computer industry. 
 
The computer industry, I understood, was giving you the most problem. Well now they’re indicating, oh, 
it’s not the computer industry that’s giving us the problem. It’s not the people from CIPS (Canadian 
Information Processing Society) and the rest of these folks. No it’s not. It’s all the other attachments. It 
has something to do with diallers and what have you. I don’t agree with you, I just don’t agree with the 
hon. member. It is simply going to take away the powers, which I think we need, in this bill and which I 
believe we should have in this bill for the protection and the integrity of our system and for the 
protection of the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, it is quite obvious you’re not going to accept our amendment the way 
it is right now. Would you not put on your own amendment, ‘or any 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3781 

related equipment’. Now, come on. Meet us halfway. ‘Or any related equipment’ — I’m not trying to be 
tough about this. I’m asking for four words — ‘or any related equipment’. That’s not going to take much 
away from you, Mr. Minister, would you respond if you could just put that in? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again no, I cannot put that in. What the member is trying to 
do is make me change this bill so it has no relevance any more. What he’s really saying is that we want 
you to have competition. We want no competition with regard to telephones. I don’t want competition in 
telephones. That’s a monopoly system and we’re proud of it, and we’re keeping it that way. There’s no 
question about that. I believe we should have that right. They have the right in Alberta; they have the 
right in Manitoba; and I think we should have the same right here. 
 
If I were to now say, oh yes, fine, the amendment’s great, let’s get out of this committee and pass the bill 
with that amendment, then we would have sat here for days and days and days and done absolutely zero 
for the people of this province. I think it is just not acceptable to even change the amendment to what the 
hon. member now says. 
 
Subamendment negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 14 
 

Berntson Taylor Muirhead 
Birkbeck Rousseau Katzman 
Larter Swan Duncan 
Lane Pickering Andrew 
 Garner McLeod 
 

NAYS — 24 
 

Bowerman Kaeding Johnson 
Smishek Hammersmith Thompson 
Romanow Byers Poniatowski 
Messer Vickar Lingenfelter 
McArthur Cody White 
MacMurchy Matsalla Solomon 
Mostoway Lusney Collver 
Banda Long Ham 
 
Section 44.5 agreed on division. 
 
Section 6 as amended agreed on division. 
 

Section 7 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — For two days now we have been trying to point out to the 
government the question of the validity of this particular bill. For some reason they have refused to 
listen. For some reason they have quickly and irresponsibly, in our opinion, moved an amendment to 
their bill that in my opinion makes it even worse than 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3782 

what we had before. The government opposite is renowned for passing legislation in this Assembly that 
at some point becomes questionable in the courts of the land. It has happened to you before, Mr. 
Attorney General. You have been embarrassed by the kind of legislation you brought in. The Supreme 
Court of Canada has ruled against your particular legislation of the time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we, on this side of the Assembly, still consider this a very repulsive bill. The government 
should certainly give serious consideration to having this bill tested in a court of appeal in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by my seatmate, the member for Rosetown-Elrose 
(Mr. Swan), that section 7 be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

That the Lieutenant-Governor in Council be and is hereby directed pursuant to the provisions of 
the Constitutional Questions Act to refer to the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan for hearing and 
consideration the matter of the constitutional validity of Bill No. 13. 
 

And in that section it is not out of order, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. We’re dealing with section 7 of the bill to which an amendment has been 
offered by the hon. member for Regina South. I refer hon. members to my ruling yesterday dealing with 
substantially the same motion. I said then that this type of motion was out of order. The reasons I 
outlined yesterday, I think in some instances, still apply. I should say to the hon. member (as I said 
yesterday) that this type of motion would be more properly dealt with in second or third reading of the 
bill. I, therefore, rule the motion out of order. The hon. member for Wilkie. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it look as though we’re down to the home stretch. Looks like 
this is the last one. We tried before. Here’s one more amendment, Mr. Chairman, for the people of 
Saskatchewan to retain a little bit of freedom, a little bit of individual rights, and stop a socialist 
government from steamrolling over them and controlling their telecommunications in the province. Mr. 
Attorney General, you’ll live to regret this bill, so help me. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve said it all before; there’s not much point in repeating it again. This government is 
not going to listen. They won’t accept this amendment, because it doesn’t fit in with their little socialist 
plan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I move seconded by the member for Bengough-Milestone (Mr. Pickering), to strike out 
section 7 of the printed bill and substitute the following: 
 

5.1 — Subject to subsection (2) this act comes into force on a day to be fixed by proclamation of 
the Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
5.2 — No proclamation may be issued under subsection (1) until after the conclusion of public 
hearings by a special committee of the Assembly. 
 

Mr. Chairman, there it is. I’ve already sent a copy to the Clerk. That’s it, Mr. Chairman. It’s up to the 
government now to tell the people of Saskatchewan that they don’t have a 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3783 

right to have input into legislation being brought about in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, again I think it shows us that the Conservative opposition simply 
does not want to have the protection the subscribers of Sask Tel and the people of Saskatchewan need. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Chairman, the member for Wilkie just went on to say to the Attorney General, you 
will live to regret this bill. Well I can tell you if this amendment passes, all of the people in 
Saskatchewan will live to regret this bill. That’s what will happen. There’s little question about that. 
 
The hon. member asked, is there anything wrong with having hearings? Well, I’ll tell you what’s wrong. 
We need this legislation now; we can’t wait. You people have had six months to stir up the public, 
which you tried to do. That’s exactly what you did. There’s no question about that, and Mr. Chairman, 
there’s no question but that the members did stir up the public. But they’ve had the bill in this House 
since December. Are you telling me we need to wait even longer to have public input? Certainly we 
don’t need more than four or five months to have public input? Certainly we don’t need more than four 
or five months to have public input. We’ve had all the public input that’s necessary, I think. We have 
listened to the public. I’ve had meetings with people — that’s what prompted the amendment. I had 
meetings with the credit union and with Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, with the Co-operators, with 
Federated Co-operatives, and I can tell you that those people asked us for an amendment and we adhered 
to their wishes. That’s what we did. 
 
They asked us to take out of tariff and put into regulation those attachments which were allowed, and we 
did just that. I think, Mr. Chairman, that shows we were listening to what the public was saying. We did 
listen to them and we did put some amendments in. Today, we heard the member for Nipawin ask for an 
amendment. Again we heard. Because he was looking for something, we allowed an amendment to go 
in. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in Crown corporations the members had their opportunity. There’s no question about 
that. They grilled me on a bill which had nothing to do with the annual report whatsoever; but I 
answered as many questions as I was able to. I can tell you, at no time did they come forward with a 
concrete amendment. It is just today that they brought in their first amendment; and Mr. Chairman, I, at 
least, in second reading gave the hon. member for Wilkie a couple of amendments indicating what we 
were going to do. I really believe we have bent over backwards to help the opposition make this bill, and 
if they thought it wasn’t palatable to make it palatable for them. That is exactly what we have tried to do. 
 
I don’t believe it’s necessary to have another full-blown type of investigation or hearing or you name it, 
because I think the legislation is good as amended. I don’t think there’s any need to have further 
hearings, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3784 

YEAS — 14 
 

Berntson Rousseau Katzman 
Birkbeck Swan Duncan 
Larter Pickering Andrew 
Lane Garner McLeod 
Taylor Muirhead  
 

NAYS — 27 
 

Bowerman Banda Long 
Smishek Kaeding Johnson 
Romanow Hammersmith Thompson 
Messer MacAuley Poniatowski 
Baker Byers Lingenfelter 
McArthur Vickar White 
Shillington Cody Solomon 
MacMurchy Matsalla Collver 
Mostoway Lusney Ham 
 
Section 7 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended on division. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley (Provincial 
Secretary) that Bill No. 105 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to get under 
way when the members have concluded their discussions in the Chamber. 
 
I was most interested today, Mr. Speaker, to hear the comments in the speech given by the member for 
Estevan and also the words issued by the member for Wilkie about being freedom fighters for personal 
freedom and personal liberty. Well for what it’s worth, for the member for Estevan and the member for 
Wilkie and other members in the caucus to my right and members opposite, Bill No. 105 is an attack on 
personal freedom. Bill No. 105 is an attack on the right of people to associate and the right of people to 
have ideas, whatever those ideas may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the point I have been trying to make in the past, and I will attempt to elucidate for 
the members some of the reasons why I believe that bill is an attack on the right of association, is an 
attack on the right of the free speech, and is an attack on personal liberty. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment a little bit about money. The members to my right, especially the 
member for Qu’Appelle who has yet to sit through one moment of the 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3785 

debate on Bill No. 105, (extremely concerned the member for Qu’Appelle has been in front of the press, 
extremely concerned) to hear the reasons why we believe this is a repressive piece of legislation, have 
talked about money a great deal. They’ve said the reason they’re bringing in this bill is in order not to 
provide money to the Unionest Party because they didn’t run in the last election, which is absolute and 
utter nonsense. 
 
It’s nonsense, Mr. Speaker, and I’d tell them even after they passed this bill how nonsensical it is. If the 
member for Swift Current and I, instead of saying we were becoming members of the Unionest Party, 
had said we were going to become members of the Liberal Party, and even if the Liberal Party rejected 
us we still, in so far as this House is concerned, would be members of the Liberal Party because we’ve 
said we are. What is the government or the members to my right going to do when, after this bill is 
passed, the member for Swift Current and I decide to show what a sham this act is all about, and 
announce to the press that we’ll become members of the Liberal Party for purposes of this legislature? 
That’s how silly this bill is; that’s how stupid it is. 
 
But even beyond that, they talk about money. I’m going to tell them today, tell the people in this 
Chamber and tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan, money is not the issue and here’s why. 
 
I, today, have instructed the Clerk of the legislature to place into a special bank account every dime that 
the Clerk of the legislature pays to me personally. The said trust account is to be turned over to the 
United Community Fund of Nipawin, every dime. 
 
And I’m further instructing this legislature tonight that I am going to commit that account. I give my 
word as a member of this legislature and I will write it in whatever trust agreement is requested from 
any member of this Assembly. I commit that as long as I am a member of this Legislative Assembly that 
money will be transferred to the United Community Fund of Nipawin — the united fund, the United 
Way — to serve charity. 
 
The issue in this bill is not now money. The issue in this bill is whether individuals in this legislature 
have the right of association, have the right to associate as they see fit. That’s the issue in this bill — 
whether a member of this legislature, as a free citizen of Canada, can stand up and say, I believe our 
country is breaking up. I believe it would be in the best interests of our citizens to look elsewhere for a 
union, because our union is falling. 
 
Now it might interest the members of this legislature to know that those very same statements, those 
identical statements, were made by John A. MacDonald to the people in Britain. The union is failing, he 
said. The colony is failing. Our people are unhappy; they’re dissatisfied. They want a different deal, a 
new deal. That’s what John A. MacDonald said. That s what Cartier said in legislatures in this very 
country at the start. 
 
Did the people in Britain brand those people traitors? Did the people in Britain attempt to use the power 
of the throne and the power of the monarchy to step on those legitimate aspirations of those men? No, 
they said if that’s what the people want, then you have a go at it. You put the people together and they’ll 
decide. That’s what the legislature in Britain said and that’s what legislatures all over the British 
Commonwealth have been saying for hundreds and hundreds of years. 
 
Is this legislature going to make a change? Are they going to change that? Are they 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3786 

 going to say, or attempt to make political hay, because we are presenting a cause or an issue with which 
most of the members of this legislature do not agree? Is that what they are going to do? Are they going 
to say that the legislation written by them, themselves, not one year ago, is somehow deficient? One year 
ago it was acceptable that two members of this Chamber, if they belonged to a legitimate party 
recognized by the electoral officer of this province, could form a caucus, and grants for research, 
secretarial help and other grants would be made. Are the members saying we do not make a contribution 
to this Assembly? Are they saying we don’t need secretaries to do our work here? Every other member 
of this Chamber gets a secretary but we do not as a party — is that what they are saying? Are they 
saying that the people who brought forward priority of debate on the dairy strike are not doing their job 
as legislators and are not acting for the people? Are they saying that the people who brought in an 
amendment today, which you have been fighting about for five months, are not doing their job on behalf 
of the people? No, they are not saying that. 
 
They are not saying, Mr. Speaker, that the legislators aren’t doing their job. They are not saying that 
party is not entitled to have some research and some secretaries. Oh, no. They wouldn’t dare say that. 
They wouldn’t dare say they should have some office supplies provided. Why? Because they people in 
this province know that is false and that what it boils down to is a legislature which will bring forward 
legislation because of the way people think, because of the ideas they present that are repulsive to their 
constituents. If I have had one member of this legislature, from both the Conservative Party and the 
NDP, I have had 10 say to me, I can justify my actions on this bill. My constituents would accept it. My 
constituents would be proud of me. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there are area sin the province of Saskatchewan where native people are held 
in disrepute. I say to you, there are constituencies in this province which would like nothing better than a 
government to come along and take away grants to native people because they’re natives — so they 
couldn’t drink, so they won’t get into trouble, they would say. Would any responsible legislator suggest 
that rights should be removed from natives because they are unpopular in your constituency? Not one. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, they would be accused of racism. They don’t like that word; nobody likes that 
word. So somebody says, you are a racist. 
 
What is the word when you do exactly the same thing to someone because of the way he thinks? What is 
the word defiling those people, which makes them feel bad? There isn’t one; everybody in this country 
and in North America thought this battle had been fought and won centuries ago. Your constituency 
association says, we don’t want him any more. We don’t like the way he thinks. 
 
I will give you another one; this is terrific; we don’t want to give any money or use our tax dollars to 
support a group who wants to break up Canada. Now, Mr. Speaker, at no time has the member for Swift 
Current or I or anyone who supports the Unionest Party said we supported the break-up of Canada. What 
we said was, Canada is breaking up. That’s what we said. Mr. Speaker and others might be interested to 
know why I don’t comment on Mr. Lalonde’s faux pas or why I don’t comment on Mr. Trudeau’s faux 
pas. Because I think it’s worth a try. I don’t want to be a contributing factor; the member for Swift 
current doesn’t want to be a contributing factor to the break up. We merely say it’s going to happen, and 
is happening. Before our very eyes it’s happening. And we say we want to present an alternative. The 
people decide the alternative, not this legislature, not the Executive Council, and certainly not the 
members to my right. The people decide. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3787 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that kind of thinking is unacceptable in a free society. There is no way you can 
remain free to think as you wish, to associate with those who think as you do, if a government, if a 
legislature, can use the power of the majority to prevent you from doing so. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
passage of this bill won’t prevent us from presenting our ideas. It won’t. It won’t prevent us from 
presenting our ideas in any way. It interferes with our ability to act as members of the legislature. 
 
The Premier himself, both in this House and outside, has said it is logical for people to associate into a 
party because our system lends itself better to those who are in a party than to those who are not in a 
party. He said he wasn’t surprised. And he’s right. If we, as members of this legislature, are to do the job 
for which we are elected, and that is to represent our constituents’ views on as many issues as we can, 
why is the legislature saying to us that you can’t have the secretaries and research people that other 
members of the legislature can have, even though we have complied with the rules, even though we 
have complied with the laws, even though every single law that exists in Saskatchewan we have not 
broken? 
 
The member for Qu’Appelle who is always noticeably absent during this particular discussion suggested 
yesterday and today that somehow because of his own shortcomings, because of his own inability to 
present his case on one issue, that we’ll have to muddy the water, stir it up a bit. Mr. Speaker, I am 
afraid it made me very sad to see what happened yesterday between hon. members of this legislature. No 
organization, business, corporation, association, union or any other group of people can survive only 
with the written word. There comes a point in time in every organization when it is necessary to give 
your word and keep it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to describe an event which happened about 10 days ago pertaining to this bill 
and others. I’m going to describe it in detail, knowing I commit perjury if I tell a falsehood in this 
House. 
 
The Attorney General of the province approached me and said, I want leave to introduce a bill for two 
morning sittings. I said to him, no, I won’t give it and I’ll fight you because all you’re trying to do is to 
have me put in more hours on Bill No. 105, so I will tie that bill right into Bill No. 105, and I will say 
the reason I’m objecting is the same reason I’m objecting to this, because that’s the only reason you’re 
bringing in these extra morning sittings. He said to me, that’s not true. We want them to get through the 
business of the House. He then left; he came across the floor of this Chamber, and he and I and the 
Leader of the Opposition, (the member for Souris-Cannington) went outside that door, where he said, we 
want to have these morning sittings. I said, I told you what my word was on that. I will not give leave 
because all you’re trying to do is make me have to talk too much on Bill No. 105. The Attorney General 
said, I give my word that bill will not be brought in before 3 o’clock. 
 
Mr. Berntson was there; the Attorney General was there, and I was there. The Leader of 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3788 

the Opposition said, I’m going to discuss it with my caucus and let you know. The next day, or that day, 
the Attorney General asked for leave. I gave it; the members to my right gave it; leave was granted, and 
morning sittings were added. Mr. Speaker, the members to my right knew that. Why then, yesterday, did 
the member for Qu’Appelle rise in this legislature knowing that agreement had been reached by men of 
their word, (nothing in writing, no great agreement that led to the House, just an agreement between 
honorable men) and try to embarrass the Attorney General for not bringing in Bill No. 105 when in fact, 
he gave his word outside this Chamber that he would not do so before 3 o’clock in order to get morning 
sittings? Why, when they agreed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, is that what the world is coming to? Is that what we have to come to — that 
everything which has to be done has to be done by contract? Or is it something else, Mr. Speaker? Is one 
member of my former party attempting to use his position to drag out the proceedings of this House, to 
emphasize that the new leader who is the leader, is not here? Is he trying to drag it out to embarrass the 
new leader? I ask that question. I ask that question myself, Mr. Speaker, because I could not believe, 
yesterday, the words of the member for Qu’Appelle in this House when the solemn word of the Attorney 
General was given; my word was given, and the word of the member for Souris-Cannington was given 
that he would not block that leave. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Do you remember a written deal I had with you? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, we won’t go into past history, Mr. Speaker, because I’m sure you would 
rule me out of order, but I would dearly love to go into that one. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — So would I. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, the point is that this legislature works and operates on a modicum of 
trust. It works and operates on people’s word. If they give it and back down from it, then it collapses. It 
must collapse. I couldn’t believe it myself. I quite simply couldn’t believe it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the members of this Assembly to a couple of other 
items before I start supporting some of my arguments with things that other people have said. 
 
First of all, I want to ask this Assembly, how do you explain (and I mostly ask the government members 
this) Mr. Larry Brown, the president of the SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Association), running all over the province saying government will pass retroactive legislation to get to 
Collver (these are his words, not mine), but they won’t pass retroactive legislation to help the labor 
movement? 
 
Now, I don’t happen to believe those are the same issues at all. But how do you answer that? What do 
you say when that comes up? Do you say it’s not the same issue? He continues saying it. He runs all 
around the province saying you can pass it to get to Collver, but you can’t pass it to help us. 
 
I don’t know how you answer it. Perhaps the best answer would be, since money is no longer the issue, 
(surely it can’t be), withdrawing the bill from the floor of this House. I suggest you answer the members 
to my right, who say they can justify it to their constituents, by saying, you’d better not have to justify it 
to your constituents. I know people, a few, in the province of Saskatchewan. I certainly know some of 
them who helped to build the Progressive Conservative Party. Mr. Speaker, although they do not 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3789 

support the Unionest cause and do not wish to become involved in the Unionest cause, they do not 
support a party that would stand for the withdrawal of human rights. 
 
I’m sure you have heard from some of them because I’ve heard from some of them and told them to go 
back, get to work, become the Government of Saskatchewan, and stop worrying about what people in 
that party wouldn’t do. 
 
Yesterday I was a little shocked at the display of the member for Qu’Appelle. I must tell you. I’m afraid 
that if that attitude is allowed to remain and allowed to prevail, there are some whom you’re going to 
lose whom you can’t afford to lose. You’re not going to gain anyone from it. If you think there are 
people out there whom you’re going to gain by supporting an attack on your fellow legislators, which is 
what this bill is all about (not supporting an attack on your fellow legislators, which is what this bill is 
all about (not money any longer because that’s going to the community fund in Nipawin as of tomorrow, 
so that the member for Qu’Appelle knows what’s happening to the dough) . . . 
 
As far as anything for secretarial and research staff is concerned, I can assure you I am prepared to fight 
that here, out there and anywhere, because I think I make a contribution as a legislator and I think the 
member for Swift Current makes a contribution as a legislator. We are a legitimate party in 
Saskatchewan because you’re not changing the electoral act. We are a legitimate party. You can’t 
remove that. By definition in your own act, we are a caucus and therefore entitled, the same as every 
other caucus member in this Chamber, to appropriate research and secretarial help to do our jobs in this 
Chamber. 
 
Now, nobody can say out in the boonies or in your constituency or anywhere else that you are providing 
money to help divide Canada, because we are not entitled to use the moneys provided for research and 
secretarial help to help promote a party interest outside this Chamber. You know that. We all know that. 
 
So that’s not the issue any longer. What is the issue on this bill? Is it as stated by the member for Biggar 
that the bill was somehow deficient before? I wonder how many members remember the debate on that 
bill in the last session, and the negotiations that went on in the last session in 1978-79. 
 
Surely you’re not all so forgetful you don’t remember the weeks and months of backroom and front 
room participation by the member for Rosthern and the member for Regina and the member for 
everywhere. Do you remember, Mr. Speaker? I am sure every member of this Assembly remembers. 
 
It took weeks and months to create that bill. It took weeks and months to negotiate sufficient research 
funds for the caucus, sufficient secretarial help for the caucus, sufficient moneys (according to the 
members which I listened to) to make sure that MLAs could be well paid. I didn’t support the increase. 
You will recall that, I am sure, as will every other member of this House. 
 
I say to the Attorney General who wants desperately to get into this debate that I’m looking forward to 
his entrance, whenever that may occur, with enthusiasm. 
 
But I say to you that during those wonderful negotiations over weeks and months, (it was after the last 
election) the very same members since 1978 passed a law. They said there’s the law — The Legislative 
Assembly Act and The Executive Council Act. After weeks and months of negotiations, discussions and 
debate in this Assembly, there’s 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3790 

the law. 
 
Now they say, we were deficient. Who’s going to believe that? That’s not the reason. So get up front 
with the reason. Say the reason you want to pass this bill on the part of the NDP and the part of whatever 
Conservatives are backing it. It’s hard to say at this point whether it’s the whole caucus which gets 
behind the member for Qu’Appelle or whether there are a few of them who think for themselves in the 
terms of freedom and free issues. 
 
I ask you, who is going to believe that these very same legislators who passed it last year didn’t think 
that two members of this Assembly would join a party and become the third party in the legislature. 
That’s precisely what they thought. That’s exactly what’s in the bill, after weeks and months of 
discussions. 
 
I want to draw your attention to one other thing because I want to use it a san analogy for the benefit of a 
writer for the Leader-post, who unfortunately isn’t here. Now, in no way, Mr. Speaker,, am I calling 
attention to, discussing, getting made at or drawing nay inferences about your decision. The reason I 
want to bring this matter up is because I want to show what the rule of law means to me. 
 
The rule of law means to me that you abide by the law whether or not it helps you. If the law hinders 
you, you work to change the law. The analogy I want to draw is one I drew to Mr. Speaker’s attention 
some time ago. As I say, I’m not questioning his decision or questioning the Chair, but it was pertaining 
to question period. The rule was in the book. I believed that the rule is the law, like the law written in 
this bill or in the previous legislative assembly act. That’s the law. If you don’t like the law, change the 
law. But you don’t take a position that . . . We should have gone to the rules committee and got it 
straightened out, but I’m going to make this interpretation. I’m not questioning, I’m talking about the 
way I believe the law should be interpreted. I believe the law is the law and if it doesn’t help you, you 
must still call attention to the law. And the reporter from the Leader-Post (because I did want to mention 
it) mentioned that he couldn’t understand why anyone would call attention to this question period 
situation because, in fact, question period is on behalf of the opposition. And why would you call 
attention to a rule which does the opposition in. 
 
The reason, Mr. Speaker, is because I was trying to emphasize that I believe in the rule of the law. And I 
believe in the law of the rules. We chose the law. Ah, now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Moosomin 
thinks I’ve been hoisted on my own petard here. He thinks that I led into this with my chin and that I 
wasn’t ready to say, if you don’t like the law, change the law. Well, if you’re anxious to get to a 
conclusion of Bill No. 105, Mr. Member for Moosomin, in keeping with the feelings of the member for 
Qu’Appelle and whoever else is advising your group at this particular juncture, I only say to you, if 
you’re happy to get along with it you better be prepared for a fairly lengthy wait. Mr. Speaker, of course 
the law is the law and if you don’t like the law, you change the law. And that’s why this legislature sits. 
 
With reference to Bill No. 105, the NDP has said it didn’t like the law. But the question is, when you go 
to change the law, you have to say why you don’t like the law. Why don’t we like the existing law? Has 
that been answered yet? No. The answer given was, the bill was deficient; the bill the same group in this 
Assembly made not a year ago — that bill was deficient. Why don’t you like the law? The only reason 
that any reasonable human being could put forward, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s not the law in this case they 
don’t like, it’s the thoughts and ideas of the member for Nipawin and the member for Swift Current. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3791 

I’ve heard it said by some, oh, we’re just reflecting our constituency, that’s the way they feel. You only 
have 4 per cent or 6 per cent or 10 per cent of the people, whatever the number is (you may listen to one 
radio station or another and the various polls), you only have that much out there. The Indians of 
Saskatchewan are only 15 per cent and they’re very unpopular in some areas, not by the way of their 
own making, but very unpopular. Would any responsible legislature attack that? I could name other 
minority groups that are horribly unpopular — horribly! Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that for a number 
of years — thank God it’s changed lately — people with cerebral palsy were looked upon as mentally 
deficient and were put into institutions by society. Have we not come past that? There are people in this 
world, Mr. Speaker, who believe that cerebral palsy victims are so repulsive that they’d do away with 
them. They would push them out of the way because they don’t want to look at them. 
 
Now in that case it’s their physical attribute but in this case it’s what you think. And that’s even more 
dangerous. Every member of this legislature, if he’s living up to his conscience, at one time or another, 
will have to stand up for a minority opinion. Every human is like that. There are times, if you have any 
courage and any guts and the courage of your own convictions, when you have to stand up and be 
counted. You have to stand up and say, I believe in this. 
 
Is that what we’re attacking here? Because members of this legislative Chamber, in their very own 
Chamber, have said that I believe this is true; I believe this is happening and therefore we should look to 
this alternative. If it’s the wrong alternative, Mr. Speaker, the people will reject it. 
 
If events unfold in Canada and Canada can solve its problems, the people will certainly reject the 
concept. But we believe that you don’t wait until the ship has sunk. When the ship hits the iceberg and 
you know or you believe it’s going to sink, you abandon ship, especially the women and children. 
 
But we’re not even abandoning ship, Mr. Speaker. We’re staying here to present those ideas to the 
people to say, if the ship sinks, we believe that this is an alternative you should examine now. We are 
not waiting for it to sink. 
 
If all the rest of the members of this legislature are so desirous, so enthusiastic about keeping Canada 
together, may I ask you this question? Why would an opposition member want to call attention to 
divisions before they even sit down to talk? 
 
I say to you that will continue. The member for Swift Current and I both believe it. That kind of process 
will continue. We believe that oppositions will still call attention (before they even sit down to talk) to 
the deficiencies of one side or another. By the time they get there, they’re so far apart that they’ll never 
get together. And if they don’t get together, people will split. We believe that; we believe it’s come too 
far and it’s gone too far. We don’t believe that it’s salvageable. But are we any less free citizens of 
Canada because we believe that? 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, are we merely passing along the ideas and views of a great many people out there who 
say, yes, but why can’t we give it a try? Shouldn’t we try? Well, to those people who believe they 
should try, let them try. We’re not going to stop them; we’re not going to argue against them. If they 
believe that they can try to do it, then more power to them. 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3792 

Would you suggest that a legislature anywhere should make that decision for me or for the member for 
Swift Current; or should say that even though you complied with the very law we wrote less than a year 
ago, that you are any less a member of this legislature and entitled to whatever support staff you can 
have from this legislature? Would anybody suggest that? No. But that’s exactly what it does, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I haven’t been very happy if you’d like the truth, Mr. Speaker, about sitting around this Chamber 
for the last 9 or 10 days. I mentioned last evening in committee that on a minute by minute attendance 
basis, I’ve probably been the best in this Chamber in the last 9 or 10 days, because minute by minute 
that one of mine was coming up. It was on the list every single day. 
 
I was assured we’d get to it. I kept thinking, oh, the House Leader wouldn’t do that. He wouldn’t put all 
this stuff on the order paper just so the only time I get to speak on Bill 105 is at 9 or 9:30 at night when 
the press has all gone home and I can’t get my message out. He wouldn’t do that. That’s his right as 
House Leader. I suspected it from time to time but I never had a chance. 
 
For the last nine days it’s been on the paper and every day I wait, sitting here looking. Is it coming? Oh, 
yes, yes. Are you guys going to talk some more? Oh no, no. I wait till 10 o’clock at night. It’s a fact . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 7 o’clock, then 8 o’clock, then 9 o’clock, every day. It’s been relatively 
tiring, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I realize . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You know, the member for Bengough-Milestone is saying, 
who’s dragging his feet now? Well I’ll tell you about dragging feet. This bill in fact is a very simple 
issue. It’s very straightforward. It is an attempt by a government to use the power of the majority to 
thwart the aims, ambitions and ideas of individual members of that Assembly even though they have 
complied with all the laws. That’s what it is. But, Mr. Speaker, it is so much against the fundamental 
freedom of speech, it is so much against the traditions of parliament, that we have to refer to what others 
have written about it. 
 
So much has been written on this, Mr. Speaker. The member for Bengough-Milestone, I know, will want 
to pay attention, and all of the other members in this Chamber will want to pay attention, because so 
much has been written on this very point, on this very issue about freedom of speech and freedom of 
association and the rights of man. I have here a book, The Logic of Liberty. This entire publication is 
right on the point, even the title, The Logic of Liberty. That’s what we’re talking about. That’s what 
we’re dealing with here. It’s only one publication that has to be drawn to the attention of every one of 
the members of the legislative Chamber. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s another one. I’m just alerting you that these are all important. I’m sure you’ll 
agree when I begin supporting the arguments I’ve been making. I’ve had to make the arguments first, 
since I get on so late at night, so whoever’s left up in the press gallery might hear the arguments. After 
that we can support those arguments with documented evidence. 
 
Here’s one that is terrifically to the point, Mr. Speaker. It’s called, Thomas Jefferson on Democracy — 
The immortal Writings by America’s Architect of Freedom. Many of the people of Canada and of 
Saskatchewan believe there is a similarity between the rights in the United States of America and the 
rights we have in Canada. In fact many of our rights grew from the rights produced in the United States. 
So in order to understand 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3793 

what those rights are, you’d better hear it from the very first source, Thomas Jefferson. I intend to draw 
from the writings of Thomas Jefferson because they are right on the point, because they talk about the 
rights of association, the right of free speech, the right of people to think for themselves. 
 
Now another publication, Mr. Speaker, that I wanted to draw to your attention, is this one. These Rights 
and Freedoms. It’s a text that’s written on the United Nations. I might even start with this one, because 
the United Nations I think, especially for the members opposite, is one of the . . . 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, you understand that an entirely extemporaneous speech shouldn’t last much 
more than 40 minutes or 45 minutes, or you’ll bore the rest of your audience. I want to support my 
argument with some documents because extemporaneously I think I have made a couple of points 
tonight that I haven’t been able to make before, although there is one thing I do want to go to, Mr. 
Speaker, before I start with that. 
 
I have said that this bill is attacking the member for Swift Current and the member for Nipawin because 
of their ideas. Their ideas are that Canada is falling apart and that there is an alternative which should be 
presented. Now what evidence do I have that it is falling apart? Well, here is a letter from the publisher 
of the St. John’s report. It was written June 15, 1979, and it was sent to me by (this will surprise you, 
Mr. Speaker) a supporter and member of our party from Ontario who sent this to us for our information. 
Here is what it says; the club at Bay and King is the reason why the country is falling apart. 
 
Excuse me, I had to get new glasses the other day. I’m sorry but these are my reading glasses — old age. 
 
If anyone would like to acquire an inexpensive treatise on what’s wrong with Canada, he should buy the 
book that is now before me and let it fall open at any page. It is the Financial Post’s directory of 
directors, and it is a compilation of the leaders of all the great corporations in Canada, an anthology of 
the most powerful men in the country. It has fallen open at page 350. On it in the succeeding five pages, 
are the names of 129 corporate directors. Of these, eight come from Alberta, one from Saskatchewan, 
four from the Maritimes, 10 from British Columbia, one from northwestern Ontario, five from 
Manitoba, 29 from Montreal and 72 from Toronto or nearby parts of southern Ontario. 
 
That is what is wrong with Canada. Be it mining, manufacturing, banking, real estate, engineering, 
advertising, accountancy, machinery, steel, rubber, food processing, automobiles, aircraft, television, 
newspapers or candy, the head office is almost certain to be in or around Toronto, or failing that, 
Montreal. 
 
Oil, you say, is an exception. Not at all, Canadian had offices of Imperial, Gulf, Shell and Texaco are all 
in Toronto. The natural leaders struggle for the top and the top is almost always in the same place. 
 
Canada as a consequence is run by a kind of club, a club that almost always meets in Toronto. We will 
listen in on one of the meetings. Up for consideration is some vast project proposed say for northern 
Saskatchewan. The preliminary work was done by Acres Consulting over on University Avenue. They 
have cleared with the locals. Charlie is here with that story. The financing is being handled by Ames. 
Pete can report for 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3794 

them. George will be here from the Scotia. They are doing the banking. And Harold from over at 
Clarkson Gordon will be on hand for the tax problems. The meeting lasts an hour, and the future of 
some remote corner of Saskatchewan is virtually decided. It is held on the 39th floor of the 
Toronto-Dominion Centre at Bay and King, Toronto. That is how Canada (much of it anyway) is 
governed, is supposed to be governed, always has been governed and as far as the club is concerned, 
always will be governed. 
 
The club method of government has two great merits. First it appears inescapable. Just as the crucial 
decisions in Alberta tend to be made in one of two great cities, so do those for Canada. 
 
Secondly, it is efficient. The members of the club come to know one another. They meet one another 
socially. They yacht together, they marry, they breed, they come to know individual strengths and 
weaknesses, and above all, they easily and regularly communicate at Bay and King. Everybody who 
matters is just down the street. Canada, in fact, would go on like this forever were it not for three things. 
 
Firstly, the club is not inescapable. The Americans, for instance, have escaped it. The American private 
sector does not centre itself in a single city. It has finance centres in New York, oil in Houston, aircraft 
manufacturing on the west coast, meat packing in Chicago, St. Louis and Omaha, automobiles in 
Detroit, steel in Pittsburgh, textiles in Atlanta, cotton in New Orleans, chemicals on the Texas coast and 
movies in Hollywood. 
 
Secondly, the club, in the long run, is not efficient. A system which demands of every region that it 
offers up its finest sons and daughters because they cannot achieve their best unless they leave home, is 
a system which breeds disunity. The present disintegrated state of our country is a fruit of the club 
system. 
 
Finally, the Toronto club has boobed. Years ago when the boys in the cowboy boots approached it, 
Stetsons in hand, requesting a little capital for their mad schemes to create oil wells, the club scoffed and 
turned them away. So they went instead to another club in Houston which seemed to talk their language 
and wasn’t afraid of risk. The wells were found, so now those boys have formed a little club of their 
own. They don’t need the club in Toronto. As opportunity affords, other centres may find ways to do the 
same. The power of the club will be gone. What will be saved will be called Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that was this man’s opinion. I happen to believe, and the member for Swift current 
happens to believe, that the club will never let go, never, and that this will always be the case. Mark my 
words, I’ve said it before and I will say it again. Mark my words. The club which controls Mr. Trudeau 
will insist they attack they very basis (as this man says) for changing the club. Those are the oil revenues 
of Saskatchewan and Alberta. Mark my words. That is what he promised the people of Quebec. That is 
why the country won’t survive. Because I say, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite, (if they want to 
be honest) have been saying exactly the same thing since their inception, no more club rule. That is what 
the PCs stood for before too and perhaps still do. No more club rules; it is our turn. We want to rule 
ourselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, is that the idea which the members opposite and the members to my right who 
happen to agree with the, are attempting to kill with this bill? They are not going to succeed. But is that 
what they are attempting to do? Is that the break-up of Canada, someone who says, I don’t think the club 
is going to let go? Are you prepared to 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3795 

stay with the club? Well, I ask the members of this Assembly and I ask the people of Saskatchewan, are 
you prepared to stay with the club? Because if they are prepared to stay with the club, Mr. Speaker, all 
that I am saying is lost. It is gone. I don’t believe it. I don’t believe any member of this Assembly 
believes it either. 
 
If the club insists on staying at Bay and King in Toronto, the people in western Canada will rise up and 
tell them no. If the club attempts to stay in Toronto at Bay and King and rule from its corporate 
headquarters and not allow some decision making to shift to Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and 
British Columbia, the people in western Canada, in our judgement, will rise up and will want another 
option. They don’t want any more club rule. Is that the idea you are trying to discourage because 
someone is presenting that to you? 
 
Ah, I’m afraid the member for Yorkton wasn’t listening to this man from St. John’s because he said 
they’ve avoided that down there, and to a very large extent they have. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that’s not on the topic of this bill; but at some point in this legislative session, 
when the Attorney General decides to call intergovernmental affairs, I think the member for Yorkton 
and others in this Assembly will have a chance to hear whether or not the club rules in Washington, or 
whether it rules in New York or Chicago or Los Angeles or anywhere else. They’re going to hear and 
find out that, in fact, it doesn’t. The club doesn’t rule there, but the club certainly rules in Canada; and 
that’s what the people in the West are sick and tired of and that’s what they want a change from. 
 
To everyone in this legislature and to everyone in Canada who wants to make a united country, I say 
more power to you. For goodness sakes, get out there and work for it. Make it work. And if you can beat 
this club, which the members across say they’ve been trying to do for 40 years and haven’t 
accomplished yet . . . They are still sitting at their desks (as one member did today, waving a picture) 
saying, how about Exxon? Exxon — $200 million — look at that, we can’t even touch them. It’s been 
going on now for 40 years. You’ve never touched the club, never touched it. 
 
We don’t believe you’re going to succeed. If you believe you can succeed, more power to you. But why, 
Mr. Speaker, do they want to attack an option which they may have to present themselves in due course? 
Why do they wish to do that? If they are unsuccessful, are they prepared to say that we want to be 
Canadian in western Canada, in Canada, run by Toronto forever? If they are prepared to do that, then I 
say they’re not the kind of western Canadians I know. They’re not even the kind of Canadians I know. 
 
The people in the regions of Canada are sick to death of the club and they want to be rid of it. Anyone 
who does not recognize that is not representing his constituents well. Is that the idea you’re trying to 
attack? Or are you going to say at some point in the future. We had an opportunity in 1980. A couple of 
guys in Saskatchewan presented this option. We rejected it. We not only rejected it, we went against 
every parliamentary tradition, every principle that has ever existed in a parliament. We went against 
freedoms which have existed in this country for 100 years. And we did it because they came forward 
with this idea and some of my constituents told me. I don’t want to use my tax dollars to support the 
break-up of Canada. That’s what they said. 
 
But down the road when the club isn’t broken up, when the people in western Canada are rising up and 
looking for options, can you look yourself in the eye as a legislator and say, we did right then because 
now we have to present this as one of the options? 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3796 

There are only two; well, there’s a third. Suppose, Mr. Speaker, it comes down the road toward what we 
say is the eventual break-up of the country. And suppose the members in this Chamber are standing up 
there saying, we’re going to fight for Canada, but we’re not going to accept the club. Which are they 
going to choose then, the club forever, or an independent western Canada, or another association? Those 
are the three choices. 
 
The Attorney General has put forward an idea which I have disagreed with the last six or seven years. 
He says, take over the club. The problem with that is, you just have another club. There it is . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You see, that’s where we differ. You take over the club; you just have 
another club. We say, Mr. Speaker, that’s not right. The Attorney General knows I’ve been arguing 
against that for the last seven years. I’ll probably be arguing against that until the day I die. You don’t 
replace one club with another one. You just don’t do it. I mean it just doesn’t work. What you say, Mr. 
Speaker, is you have to make this choice. 
 
The other thing is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You see, Mr. Speaker. Take over the club. Well I 
suppose that is a fourth option. But suppose that option isn’t available to you . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, I suppose it doesn’t matter. I wanted to get into some of these dissertations, but now the 
Attorney General’s led me off on another important tangent. 
 
You now something, Mr. Speaker, he yells from his char, we’ll take over the club; we’re right here 
sitting in Saskatchewan; we’ll take it over. How many 50 per cent contracts did that club make with the 
club down in Toronto last year? One hundred and some odd, with Exxon, with Gulf, with every major 
. . . Right there. How many did they make? Take over the club! You haven’t taken over the club; you’ve 
joined it. I mean, big deal! We want to be rid of the club and you guys go down to sit on its board of 
directors and say we have to have, you have to have. Terrific, boys. The only difference is you phone 
from Regina down to Toronto. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You have to get in the ring before you can win the fight. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Ah, now it comes. You have to get in the ring before you can with the fight is 
what the member for Kelsey-Tisdale is saying. They’re only into this 50 per cent deal until they have it 
all worked out. Then they can take them over and get 200 per cent. Is that the way you play the game, 
boys? Is that fair play? Are those the kinds of laws you want? No, no Mr. Speaker. The kinds of laws 
you want to bring in are repressive laws like this one. Attack backwards! We’ll make a deal with you, 
sure. Come on, 50 per cent. Let’s go big boys down there from the club. But in the back of my mind I 
don’t want to be half the club. I want to be all the club. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And we make the rules too. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — And we set the rules, right! So we’ll make up the rules. We’re the club. We’ll get 
you out of it so you’re gone, right? You’ve made a deal; you shook the guys’ hands. 
 
I notice everyone’s having a good time here obviously tonight, except me. It very much relates to 
whether or not a handshake means anything. That’s what it is all about. That’s what a rule of law is all 
about. That’s what good negotiations are al about. That’s what any kind of association lives on, whether 
or not your word means anything. If your word to people is that you’re in for 50 per cent and you’ve 
joined with the club, then you have to accept it. If you say we’re using the club to help the people of 
Saskatchewan, fair 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3797 

game. But in fact, you’ve joined them. So don’t try to tell us you’re not part of the club, because you are. 
A few guys in here with a few guys down in Toronto . . . 
 
Did you ever stop to think, Mr. Speaker, that anyone on the other side of the House . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m really sorry, the Attorney General did this. I thought we were keeping it nice and 
clean there for awhile. Did the Attorney ever stop to think; do you suppose in the meanderings of his 
mind, that maybe, just maybe, the point of this article, and the point of what we’ve been saying on this 
side of the House for as long as I’ve been here, is that people don’t want just a few running their lives. 
They want to disperse power. They want a division of powers. They want power all over the place. 
 
If they work their backsides off, they’d like to get a chance to be in the position of a little power 
themselves. Is that really so awful? Is it so bad that people should be desirous to get into a system which 
allows them (if they work hard) to go from one level up to another level? I don’t think it is so bad if 
people want that. They just don’t want a club in Toronto; they don’t want a club in Regina. They don’t 
want a club anywhere. They want to run their own lives. They want to think for themselves. They want 
to believe for themselves. They want to associate with whomsoever they might like to associate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that brings me back to Bill 105. I want to associate with whom I want to associate. I want 
to obey the laws of the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t want to live in a society which changes the 
laws that I have accepted that I helped to create just a year ago, because some constituents are running 
around saying, I don’t want to pay good tax money to somebody who wants to break up Canada when 
they have no idea what the position is because they have not had a chance to hear it yet. How are they 
gong to get a chance to hear it if a government or an opposition or anybody says, these are the rules but 
we are going to change them because we don’t like what you think? 
 
Now I say to you, after the people have had a chance to hear it, and if then they want to say, we reject it, 
it’s terrible, we don’t want any part of it — fair game. But don’t tell me or come in and tell the people of 
this Assembly, or anyone, that you are bringing in a bill because it is deficient, when it was enacted less 
than a year ago! Don’t tell me you are bringing it in because you can support it back in your home 
constituency, because people don’t want to pay their tax dollars to support somebody who wants to 
break up Canada. They don’t even know whether or not we want to break up Canada. You at least know 
because we told you in this legislature just what our position is. Furthermore, we have said outside this 
legislature just what our position is. We are not going to work go break Canada up, but if we are right 
and it breaks up, we’re going to present an option to people that they can understand before the darn 
thing sinks. If it doesn’t break up, terrific! But if it does break up, they will at least have had that option 
presented to them in advance. They will not be forced to rush into it. 
 
Tell me that’s bad. Tell me that’s wrong! I say to you, you are the one who is short-sighted if one of the 
options is not presented. You said there were four options. That’s right; there are four. Take over the 
club, live with a club; go by yourself or join with somebody else who has a different set of rules. Those 
are the four options. All right, what is politics all about? Politics is all about presenting those options! 
Who is presenting take over the club? — the Government of Saskatchewan. Fair game, if the people like 
that option, terrific! If they don’t like it, they will reject you. Who is presenting stay with the club? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Right there! 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3798 

MR. COLLVER: — I’m not going to say. I’m not going to say because you’ll have to decide that for 
yourself. But there is a party presenting stay with the club. No, I don’t think it is the members to my 
right. As a matter of fact, I think it is the present Government of Canada. The present Government of 
Canada I saying stay with the club. That’s who is saying stay with the club, the Liberal Party of Canada. 
If you don’t believe that, just look at Mr. Ryan’s proposals. If you don’t believe that, just look at the 
position Trudeau is taking today. If you don’t believe that, just look at the kind of position Lalonde is 
taking today. That’s the party which says, stay with the club! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — What about Joe Clark, is he any better? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I’m not going to enter into that debate. But the options have to be presented. There 
are four options. We are presenting one. We don’t want to break it up, but we are presenting an option if 
it does. To those constituents of yours who say, I don’t want my tax dollars being used for somebody 
who wants to break up Canada, maybe they should think for themselves for a moment and ask, are they 
really trying to break it up? Are they running around trying to break it up? Are they counselling people 
to violence? Are they counselling people to take to the streets? No, they are not doing any of those 
things. Are they doing their job as legislators? Are they presenting things to this legislature? Are they 
standing up for certain rights they believe in? Are they adding anything to the legislature? Are they 
helping any bills get through? Go talk to the people in your constituency about that. See how honest you 
get. Oh, the member says, let me hear it. The fact is that they aren’t talking that way. They’ve taken 
what happened as this. In the flush of the referendum in Quebec, the belief of the people of 
Saskatchewan was that their country was going to break up and that there were people in Quebec, who 
in fact counselled violence at times, who were attempting to break it up. They weren’t presenting 
options but were attempting to break it up. 
 
In that flush people said, they frighten me, so get them out of my sight. Break every rule; break every bit 
of intelligence that you have toward the preservation of a legislative Chamber and a legislature and a 
free society. Break every rule you have in order to persuade someone because in the flush of that . . . I 
promise you, Mr. Speaker, if the members went back to their constituencies now they would find fewer 
people who say, . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Guess again says the member for Yorkton. I don’t think 
he’s been back there for a while. Well, I think you would find a lot fewer who would speak that way at 
this point because the flush of the referendum is not upon us. 
 
And you know, the Minister of Agriculture, I believe, has attempted to be a reasonable man in this 
legislature from time to time. He’s never very political when he gets on his feet. Hardly ever does he 
turn every question in question period into a positive for the NDP and negative for the opposition. And 
that’s what it’s all about in this legislature. I don’t think the Minister of Agriculture could possibly 
support listening to constituents who would say, let’s eliminate all the natives because they’re a bunch 
of . . . But you know people say it. You can go back to your constituency and hear all kinds of damn fool 
ideas from constituents. 
 
Would you come down here and present them? Rule of the majority does not mean suppression of the 
minority. When rule of the majority becomes suppression of the minority, it becomes nothing more than 
dictatorship and no freedom is worth anything. 
 
That’s fact. Lots greater people than me have said words like that and I intend to bring those people to 
the attention of this Assembly before this debate is concluded. You do not suppress minorities just 
because the majority wants it. What Ukrainian in 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3799 

Saskatchewan could support that? What native Indian could support that? What Jewish person could 
support that? And, as a matter of fact, for the information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it will 
remain to be seen, Mr. Speaker, let’s not let the catcalls degenerate into that kind of talk. 
 
The point is that minority groups in the province of Saskatchewan know what it’s like to be in a position 
of minority and know that the majority must never be allowed to suppress the minority. Never, if you 
have a free country. And to the member for Rosthern who sometimes, I must say, has not the clearest, 
most logical, most persuasive mind to grasp issues, (and I say that with all deference and respect to the 
member for Rosthern) I say go back to your own people and ask them if you suppress minorities because 
the majority wants it. I ask him to go back to his own people; read a little of his own history; find out 
whether you suppress minorities because the majority wants it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I lived in a part of Canada in my younger days where precisely that was done. I lived in a 
part of Canada where Jewish people were not admitted to any clubs. They weren’t admitted even into 
restaurants in my lifetime. That’s how recent it was. You don’t suppress minorities because the majority 
wants it. That has happened from time to time in our history and all of us should be ashamed of it. In 
every walk of life, we should be ashamed of it. From whatever political part, we should be ashamed of 
it. 
 
That’s what this bill is, Mr. Speaker, nothing more than an attempt to suppress a minority viewpoint. 
Money is not an issue. I’m not getting a dime. It’s going to go to the community. The united way of . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I think, Mr. Speaker, I must inform the members that when they draw my 
attention to such a sight and my wife is sitting up there, it’s not acceptable, especially not when you’re 
attempting to come forward with these wonderfully sparkling witticisms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going now to draw the members’ attention to the kinds of things that have been written 
by others. I started out one evening. I guess it was a week or 10 days ago (the last time I had a chance to 
speak on this issue) by going through the text, Free Speech in the United States. I turned to a chapter 
called Purifying the Legislature. Now this is an interesting chapter because these are things that 
happened there that indicate where legislators can go too far, where they can, if you like, be hoisted on 
their own petard. I got down as far as the comments by Tolstoy, so I’ll commence with those. I’m glad 
that the Minister of the Environment agrees . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, for the information of the Attorney General, who knows what it’s like, you don’t want to kill your 
audience. Eventually, Mr. Speaker, it’s necessary to bring them back to life with the hard words of 
someone else. It’s always important . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s fair enough. I’ve had to sit 
here for the last nine days, going through the same darn thing. Now it’s your turn. 
 

The agitator’s effort (says this chapter) is made on behalf of those thoughtful men as well as for 
his own sake. And if he wins, the gain to truth comes not perhaps from his ideas but from theirs. 
 

I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I have to go back to remind them, because it has been so long. We were 
talking about censorship. Tolstoy was talking about censorship. 
 

The men and women mentioned in this book whom reflection has made me 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3800 

consider victims of unwise (now let’s get this, Mr. Speaker) and often illegal suppression, are not 
indeed political prisoners whose ideals I can share. 
 

Mr. Speaker, you know they say they’re going to be bored, but it’s just sparkling wisdom. 
 

. . . as I might those of Silvio Pellico or Grotius and it may be even that after due allowance has 
been made for the natural blindness of the contemporary to the merit of their thinking that only 
one or two men among them, like Bertrand Russell, are men whose work has enduring worth. 
Yet the views and even the personal qualities of the victims of persecution have little relation to 
the justice of their cause. Few objects of intolerance have touched such a low level of thought 
and action. Few have rendered more numerous and more valuable services to liberty than John 
Wilkes. 
 

Now they’re going to talk about John Wilkes and I’m sure the Attorney General will be interested. 
 

In his person though he were the worst of men I contend he fought for the safety and security of 
the best (that’s Lord Chatham). 
 
That name, says Trevelyan, which was seldom out of the mouths of our great-grandfathers for 
three weeks together had been stained and blotted from the first. A rake, prodigal, unfaithful to 
the wife whose fortune he had looted for use in election briberies, lacking in genuine devotion to 
an political ideal, he nevertheless by sheer pluck and impudence led the fight to establish in the 
law of all English speaking countries five great principles of freedom; the immunity of political 
criticism from prosecution; the publicity of legislative debates; the abolition of outlawry which 
condemned the man in his absence; the protection of house and property from unreasonable 
searches and seizures; the right of a duly elected representative of a constituency to sit in the 
legislature unless disqualified by law, no matter what personal objections his colleagues may 
have to his opinions and writings or to his previous convictions for sedition. 
 

Pretty close to being right on point, wouldn’t you say, Mr. Speaker? 
 

So great were his achievements that he became a household word on this side of the Atlantic. 
 

I want to interject here to remind members that the man who killed Abraham Lincoln was named after 
this man John Wilkes; he was a very, very famous American libertarian. 
 

One of the largest cities in Pennsylvania is named for him. Colonial patriots repeatedly toasted 
Wilkes and No. 45 at tavern dinners. Men called their children after him. My great-grandfather 
named his three sons, Wilkes, Pitt and Liberty. In the eyes of our forefathers he was the most 
conspicuous combatant against the doctrine so obnoxious to them that men might be maltreated, 
imprisoned, exiled, disenfranchised for the supposedly evil tendencies of their political opinions. 
 
Preceding chapters have shown the gradual revival of that doctrine in our midst . . . 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3801 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you will note that I have spared the members of this Assembly the preceding 
chapters. If they don’t pay attention I may have to go back there to those preceding chapters so that we 
can lead up to the point which this man is making in purifying the legislature. They are not paying 
attention, so it may be necessary . . . 
 

. . . first in war and then in peace, first against pacifists and pro-Germans, then against radical 
aliens until finally the war with evil thinking brought us to the point of governmental action 
against radical citizens with a constantly diminishing standard of radicalism. And even the last of 
the great principles for which Wilkes fought amid the applause of our ancestors was in grave 
peril, the right of the people to choose their representatives. On the 23rd of April, 1763 appeared 
No. 45 of the North Briton commenting upon the king’s speech and upon the unpopular peace 
recently concluded with France. 
 
The North Briton was conducted by Wilkes who had played a large part through this newspaper 
in driving Lord Bute from office and now castigated his successor. The successor was George 
Grenville of stamp act fame. 
 
Other journalists abused public men under such disguises as the use of initials, but the North 
Briton called them by name. The minister resolved to prosecute for libel, but it was unknown 
who was the libeller since those responsible for the newspaper had kept their identity concealed. 
Lord Halifax, one of the secretaries of state, issued what was then called a general warrant, 
directing four messengers to take a constable, search for the authors, printers and publishers and 
to seize them and their papers when found. In three days they arrested 49 persons on suspicion, 
many of them as innocent as Lord Halifax himself. Among them was the printer of No. 45. From 
the seized papers, Wilkes was discovered to be the real offender and he was carried off to the 
secretaries of states. As soon as he was out of his house, the messengers took entire possession of 
it, broke into his desk with the aid of a blacksmith, dumped his papers including his will and 
pocketbook into a sack and went off with them, without even taking an inventory. 
 
Wilkes brought an action, not against the messengers, but against the man higher up, the 
undersecretary of state, who had personally superintended the execution of the warrant. Wilkes 
recovered 2,000 pounds; then he went still higher and sued the cabinet minister who had issued 
the warrant for false imprisonment, obtaining 4,000 pounds damages. 
 
His associates brought similar actions. It is said that altogether these suits cost the Grenville 
government 100,000 pounds. 
 
The law of these cases that search must be warranted, describing the property to be seized, is 
embodied in the fourth amendment to the Constitution of the United States. 
 
Then the Grenville government, which had found Wilkes such an expensive opponent, lodged an 
information against him for seditious libel, on account of what would now be considered an 
ordinary political editorial. He was a member of the House of Commons. The House ordered the 
newspaper to be burned by the common hangman and summoned Wilkes to attend for further 
proceedings. Meanwhile, the government encouraged bullies to make away 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3802 

with him. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I must interject to say that not yet has the Government of Saskatchewan used bullies. 
Bully tactics perhaps, but they haven’t used bullies. 
 

Forced into a duel, he fled to France. Evidence was taken of his being the author and publisher of 
the North Britain No. 45, and he was expelled for seditious libel published during his term as 
member of parliament. This expulsion, although perhaps legal, was precipitate and vindictive, for 
Wilkes was about to be tried for his offence and the House might have at least waited for his 
conviction instead of prejudging his cause and anticipating his legal punishment. 
 
Later he was convicted in his absence and outlawed for contumacy. Four years went by. The 
general election of 2768 was approaching and Wilkes returned from exile to stand for 
parliament. After a defeat in the city of London, he presented himself as a candidate in 
Middlesex. The working people allowed no man to travel to the polls without a paper in his hat 
inscribed, No. 45 — Wilkes and liberty. 
 
Convict and outlaw as Wilkes was, his vote was overwhelming. After his election Wilkes 
surrendered himself into custody and went to jail. Lord Mansfield (and for the information of 
those who are not lawyers, Lord Mansfield was probably the greatest of British justices) reversed 
the outlawry and Wilkes was sentenced on the original charge of seditious libel to nearly two 
years in prison. 
 
Obviously the king should have pardoned him. His sentence was unwarranted. Its remission 
would have relegated him, as Trevelyan puts it: 
 
. . . to an obscurity whence but for the infatuation of his enemies he would never have emerged. 
 

Now, there is somebody in this Chamber who used that very statement. It was the Leader of the 
Opposition. They didn’t quite know where he took it from, but I just want him to know it came from this 
particular document or this book. Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? 
 

. . . to an obscurity whence but for the infatuation of his enemies he would never have emerged. 
 

You see, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and some members to my right (the followers of the 
member for Qu’Appelle) think and believe that by pushing this out, they are going to somehow do me 
dirt. Exactly the reverse, Mr. Speaker. Even in 1768 John Wilkes could have been banished to an 
obscurity whence but for the infatuation of his enemies he would never have emerged. 
 
And I say, for the sake of what we are presenting to the people four option), thank God for the 
infatuation of my enemies because otherwise we would never get an opportunity to make these kinds of 
presentations. 
 
A feeble speaker, he would have been negligible (in the words of Junius, the client senator) and hardly 
supporting the eloquence of a weekly newspaper. But the king and 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3803 

the cabinet were his implacable enemies, and he was left in prison. Then going back 40 years to the 
precedent of a member who had been expelled for forgery, the House of Commons declared Wilkes’s 
seat to be vacant by a vote of 219 to 137. A new election was held and though still in prison he was 
re-elected. The House next day voted that having been expelled he was incapable of serving in 
parliament. 
 
A third election followed with the same result. Burke told his fellow members that Wilkes had grown 
great by their folly. And Townsend reminded his listeners that a heavy account would some day be 
exacted from them if they continued to postpone all useful legislation for the sake of a frivolous and 
interminable squabble. But the election was declared null and void without a division. An opponent was 
produced for the fourth election in one Luttrell, who drew one vote to Wilkes’s four, but was declared 
by the House of Commons to be member for Middlesex after a debate in which even George Grenville 
rallied to the support of his old enemy, Wilkes, with such vehemence that when he sat down he spat 
blood, shortening his life to diminish the majority against the lawfully-elected candidate. Blackstone 
tried to show that Wilkes was disqualified by common law, but was confuted by a passage in the earlier 
editions of his commentaries. He carefully altered it in the next edition in 1773 which said that every 
British subject not in certain specified classes was eligible of common right. 
 
The majority was forced to rely on precedents from the great civil war when the majority expelled the 
minority and was, itself, expelled in turn. Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? In Britain, 250 years ago the 
same thing happened. And it was settled there. It was solved. 
 
The members on the government side and some followers of the member for Qu’Appelle are desirous of 
bringing it forward again. Burke expanded the principle involved in Wilkes’ exclusion in his thoughts on 
the present discontent. 
 

The only check on arbitrary power is the presence, here and there on the benches, of members 
endowed (and this is from Burke), with a spirit of independence carried to some degree of 
enthusiasm, an inquisitive character to discover, and a bold one to display every corruption and 
every error of government. 
 
(That’s what we are supposed to be). Such qualities are distasteful to those in power and Wilkes 
was the example chosen to discourage others, just as the arrest of five members by Charles I, if 
successfully conducted, would have stifled liberty as effectually as the execution of 50. The 
question was whether or not the government should select the legislature. The leading Whigs 
stood behind Burke and denounced the position that a resolution of any branch of the legislature 
could ‘make, alter, suspend, abrogate or annihilate the law of the land.’ Of all the statements of 
the cause of Wilkes, that of Burke’s in debate has the greatest value for our time. Accumulated 
crimes, Burke said, are things unknown to the courts below. In those courts, two bad things will 
not make one capital offence. This is a serving up like cooks. Some will eat of one dish, and 
some of another, so that there will not be a fragment left. Some will like the strong solid roast 
beef of the blasphemous libel. 
 
One hon. member could not bear to see Christianity abused because it was part of the common 
law of England. This is substantial roast beef reasoning. One gentleman said he meant Mr. 
Wilkes’s petition to be the ground of expulsion, another, the message from the House of Lords. I 
come into this resolution, says a fourth, because of his censure upon the conduct of a great 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3804 

magistrate. In times of danger, says a fifth, I am afraid of doing anything that will shake the 
government. (Doesn’t that sound like today. Doesn’t that sound like the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland who said that the way to vote on an issue is to abstain). 
 
These charges are all brought together to form an accumulated offence which may extend to the 
expulsion of every other member of this House. This law as it is now laid down is that any 
member who at any time has been guilty of writing a libel will never be free of punishment. Is 
any man, when he takes up his pen, certain that the day may not come when he may wish to be a 
member of parliament? This, sir, will put a last hand to the liberty of the press. 
 
It was not until his fourth election had been annulled that Wilkes left prison. The persecution of 
the government had turned him from an obscure member of parliament into a man of national 
prominence. As Junius said, the rays of the royal indignation collected upon him served only to 
illuminate and could not consume. The people unable to send him to parliament made him 
alderman and then Lord Mayor of London, while Luttrell voted with the majority in the 
Commons. At the next general election in 1774, Wilkes was returned from Middlesex and 
allowed to take his seat, since Massachusetts was causing too much trouble to encourage a 
stirring up of old grievances at home. Thereafter he sat without interruption while the men who 
had expelled him brought England to her lowest humiliation. In 1782 the resolution of 1769 
declaring him incapable of election was expunged from the records as being subversive of the 
rights of the whole body of electors of this kingdom. 
 

Mr. Speaker, before I go on to the next example, I’d like to draw to the attention of the members of this 
Legislative Assembly the fact that although this example of John Wilkes may appear extreme, it is 
precisely the reasoning behind Bill 105. Although Bill 105 does not expel, it removes the right of a 
member; although Bill 105 does not send to jail, it removes the right of a duly constituted political party 
in Saskatchewan to sit in this legislature, as the law was designed to do less than a year ago and Bill 105 
is certainly not as extreme as what was done to John Wilkes in the late eighteenth century, 200 years 
ago. Two hundred years ago it was decided in Britain that kind of legislation, that kind of activity by the 
members and that kind of suppression of the minorities by a majority must not be allowed to happen. 
This man went through hell to stand up for what he believed in. This man walked the extra mile beyond 
any of us in this Chamber to serve us in this Chamber, and Bill 105 does nothing more than the same 
thing they tried to do to John Wilkes 200 years ago. It is exactly the same; there is no difference. 
 
You are withdrawing the rights of members of this Legislative Assembly retroactively, because you do 
not like what they say to you and to your constituents. What’s next? For the benefit of members to my 
right, I don’t think the NDP like very much what you say to constituents. I don’t think they like the PC 
Party. As a matter of fact, I think they downright dislike you. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I hope so. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — The member for Meadow Lake says, I hope so. If the member would act a little 
smarter once in a while they’d dislike you a lot more, because then you’d be winning instead of 
flip-flopping; be a little sharper from time to time and you’d have them hating you so much they’d be 
vicious. There are some people who sat in this 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3805 

Chamber when we were first in here with seven members, and I can tell you we were the most hated 
bunch you ever saw. Why? Because we were winning. That’s why they hated . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, I hope so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next example I’d like to draw to the members’ attention is one Victor L. Berger. Here’s 
a quotation from James Russell Lowell that commences this particular section on Victor L. Berger: 
 

And if my words seem treason to the dullard and the tame, ’tis but my bay state dialect. Our 
fathers spake the same. 
 

That’s James Russell Lowell on the capture of fugitive slaves near Washington. 
 

The most prominent person convicted under the espionage act, with the exception of Debs, was 
Victor L. Berger. He was born in Austria in 1860, came to the United States in 1878 and was a 
founder of the Socialist Party in the United States, editor of the Milwaukee Leader and member 
of Congress 1911-1913, the first socialist to serve in Washington. The left-wing socialists always 
regarded him as a bourgeois member of the party. Before the United States entered the European 
war he gave vigorous expression to the orthodox socialist views about war and employed many 
of the arguments in favour of American neutrality which were used at the time by non-socialists, 
for example, in President Wilson’s note of December 18, 1916, to all of the belligerents asking 
them to state their terms of peace. Unlike the great majority of Americans, Berger and other 
socialists did not consider the German submarine campaign of February, 1917, a sufficient 
reason for changing their minds but maintained that war was justified only in case of invasion. 
He was a member of the resolutions committee of the socialists did not consider the German 
submarine campaign of February, 1917, a sufficient reason for changing their minds but 
maintained that war was justified only in case of invasion. He was a member of the resolutions 
committee of the socialists’ convention in St. Louis and signed the proclamation of war program 
of April 14, 1917 which branded the declaration of war as a crime against the people of the 
United States and the nations of the world, and stated that in all modern history there had been 
no war more unjustifiable. Berger published this platform in the Milwaukee Leader. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I wonder if the member might permit an introduction? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. A.W. ENGEL (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — I would like to thank the member for Nipawin. You 
can use this breather to your advantage. 
 
I would like to introduce three people who were gracious enough to host a number of us tonight at the 
French Pavilion, Mr. Speaker, downtown here. We were entertained by a group from Willow Bunch, the 
Campaign Sisters, who sang just beautifully. And to some of you who like French music, I wish you 
would go down and hear the kind of talent that comes out of the South. But the three people sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery are Mrs. Chabot the president of the society; Floret Bilodeau and Clare Doran are two 
of her assistants, and they are accompanied by my son up there. I would like you to welcome them to the 
session tonight, especially . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the official flag that the Francophone society 
flies in Saskatchewan. They have given me a complimentary one. Thank you. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3806 

SECOND READING – BILL NO. 105 (continued) 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy that the member drew the flag to my 
attention. It’s a beautiful flag and I think it represents the Francophone community well. I must tell Mrs. 
Chabot that a week or ten days ago I used her name in this legislature and her association to provide an 
example of why the particular bill I am speaking on tonight should not be proceeded with, in that it is 
my understanding that Mrs. Chabot is the head of the Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne de la 
Saskatchewan, (am I correct in that), which supported the yes vote in the referendum and was still 
supported by the Government of Saskatchewan financially. 
 
Whether or not you believe in that cause or do not believe in that cause, I support your right to take that 
stand and have that view. I would hope that you would support my right to take whatever stand and view 
I may think is right under these particular circumstances. So I hope Mrs. Chabot will pardon me for 
having used her name in that regard in this House some time ago. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m back to Mr. Victor Berger . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for 
Regina Centre said he thought I would lose track of it. I wouldn’t want him to lose track of Mr. Berger, 
because this particular case exemplifies another step forward that happened to legislators when they 
were attempting and became tempted by all kinds of reasons to get rid of the very traditions and 
freedoms that they themselves, had stood for; those temptations overcame them, and the result of giving 
into temptation is a good valuable lesson. 
 
The member will be reminded, I think, Mr. Speaker, to recite to himself from time to time, the Lord’s 
Prayer, which in part reads, ‘Lead us not into temptation.’ I sincerely hope that all of the members 
remember to say that prayer from time to time. Let’s not be tempted because of what you may see out 
there as being a politically popular idea of the moment. Let’s not be tempted to go overboard and cut 
your nose off to spite your face, as it were. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. COLLVER: — That is the worst I have heard. That’s the worst, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not even 
on topic. That’s the lowest pun that the member for Saskatoon Centre has ever brought into this . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member for Nipawin should avoid the temptation of responding to the 
member who does not have the floor. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — No one even caught the double entendre in terms of the pun and the ham and the 
burger. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they keep interjecting. I want to get back to Thomas Berger because he’s a 
fascinating fellow. Everybody wants to hear about Thomas Berger. Absolutely. 
 
I sort of lost my place, Mr. Speaker, with the introduction and the flags and everything. So if I go back 
over it, you will remind me, I hope, and I’ll get right on to wherever I left off. Now this is about Berger. 
Remember that we have to go back because of the interjection; remember that he was opposed to the 
war in 1917. 



 
May 29, 1980 

 

 

 
3807 

He did not, however, urge anyone to resist the draft and indeed advised one socialist 
conscientious objector to put on the uniform. 

 
Berger testified that several men in his immediate family volunteered, although his opposition 
would have prevented them from doing so. It is of course well known that the record of 
Wisconsin and Milwaukee in the war was very high. Though Berger can take no credit for this, it 
tends to disprove that opposition to war produces violations of the draft act or other war law. 
(That was an aside). 

 
In September, 1917, the Leader was deprived of its second class mailing privilege for the future, 
by a blanket order of the postmaster general and relief was subsequently denied by the courts. 

 
Now that’s where the government started to attack Mr. Berger. 
 

The newspaper thus lost a daily circulation of approximately 15,000 subscribers. All first class 
mail addressed to the Leader was returned to the sender. The District of Columbia Court of 
Appeals said of the articles on which the exclusion was based, and in this opinion the house of 
representatives committee afterwards concurred (and I quote): ‘no one can read them without 
becoming convinced that they were printed in a spirit of hostility to our own government and in a 
spirit of sympathy for the central powers, that through them appellants sought to hinder and 
embarrass the government in the prosecution of the war’. 
 

Here was a guy in the middle of a war, Mr. Speaker. They wanted to hear about Thomas Berger. He was 
advocating that they not be in the war and the legislators were tempted to say, we’re going to take the 
circulation away from his newspaper because what he’s printing isn’t helping our war effort. 
 

The reader can determine the general character of the Milwaukee Leader from the passages in a 
later paragraph, and decide for himself whether the judicial and legislative comments quoted in 
this chapter are correct in concluding that Berger wanted to aid Germany. 
 
My own opinion is that they err in confusing opposition to the war with wishing the enemy to 
win. Whether Berger was within the terms of the espionage act or not, I find in his writings no 
desire that the militarism and autocracy of Germany should triumph, but rather a series of 
extremely bitter and cynical attacks about what seemed to him the Junkerism and selfishness of 
all of the governments on both sides of the war. 
 
They indicated that he wanted the war to end at once because in the absence of invasion her 
sincerely believed it unnecessary and a crushing burden upon the workers of America. 
 
I say this although I am repelled by the attitude of Berger, I can understand the abhorrence of 
Debs for a law which, compels a man to kill fellow workers because their rulers quarrel, and 
recognize that he speaks from the heart, even while I disagree with him. 
 
But for Berger the war seemed only an impersonal step to an economic 



 
May 29, 1980 
 

 

 
3808 

argument. 
 

Now remember, Mr. Speaker, this man was a socialist, the first socialist member in the United States of 
America; if you like, for the benefit of members opposite, one of your forefathers. This was what this 
man had to put up with at that time, and he fought it so you can enjoy the position you’re enjoying now. 
 

He sneers at the possibility of noble purposes in the conflict and nowhere utters a word of praise 
or sympathy for those who gave up home and life for the desire that the world should not be 
made an armed camp and that oppressed nations should be free from military domination. 
 
Despite all this the fundamental question remains, whether it is for the advantage of government 
by public opinion and popular election that just because most of us consider a person’s views 
detestable he should be thrown into prison and American citizens should be denied the right to be 
represented by the man of their choice. (Pretty close, isn’t it? Pretty close!) 
 
In February, 1918, Berger was indicted with four other socialists for conspiracy under the 
espionage act. The indictment was brought in Chicago because the defendants were alleged to 
have agreed there for the issue of publications in various places. The overt acts which Berger 
himself was said to have committed consisted of five editorials in the Leader which were in 
substance as follows . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to interject here to say one thing. Berger, and this man has read all of his 
writings, at no time said, Germany should win the war. Berger said he abhorred the war, not that 
Germany should win. He abhorred it. The member for Swift Current and I have said, we are not working 
to break up Canada; but if it breaks up we want the alternatives presented to people in a fair way before 
it breaks up. We are convinced we are contributing nothing to the break-up of Canada, but if it breaks up 
(as we believe it will) we are going to present an option to the people which needs to be presented . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, for heaven’s sake, Mr. Speaker, for goodness sake! . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I wouldn’t want to repeat this to the member for Moosomin because what the member 
opposite said might be taken personally by some in this House. That’s why I don’t want to repeat it. And 
my wife is here too. My wife is here. I don’t want that repeated in this Chamber. 
 
Let me say to the member, who just said that (for his benefit and others) most of us in this Chamber, I 
think, are very happily married and are not contemplating any divorces of any kind whatsoever. But that 
doesn’t stop us, for the benefit of the member for Assiniboia, from looking up at someone who might be 
pretty walking out of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — We might be happily married and not contemplating divorce, but I can sure enjoy 
it if I want to. And, furthermore, if it presents itself to me attractively, I can sure present the option to 
others as these guys here have done to me tonight. Whether I choose it or not is my view. Whether the 
people choose my option is their view. Mr. Speaker, I believe it is nearing ten o’clock. Am I correct that 
it’s nearing ten? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe the member is correct. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 


