






















































Hansard: April 03, 1980


1445 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
April 3, 1980  

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. J.L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this morning to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislative Chamber, 37 Grade 8 students from Coronation 
Park School in my constituency. They are located in the west gallery. They are accompanied by Gordon 
Forrest and Brenda Markoski. I would like to extend my hope to them that they enjoy the proceedings 
today and find them educational and interesting. I would like to take this opportunity to thank them and 
ask them to thank their fellow students and teachers and their principal, Don Esh, for the very warm 
welcome they provided for me when I was at their school to represent them with their Celebrate 
Saskatchewan pins a few weeks ago. I hope that all members will join with me this morning in 
welcoming them to the Chamber. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R. J. GROSS (Morse) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to also introduce some students to the 
Assembly — 40 Grades 11 and 12 students from Morse who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They 
are accompanied here today by their teachers, Carl Radbruck and Mary Wedhorn. I understand they are 
sponsored by the department of co-ops. I’m sure all members of this Assembly will want to wish them a 
pleasant stay in the legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS  
 

Price Increases  
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, in light of the recent price increases announced by your government in such thins as licence 
fees, registration fees, insurance rates, beer and now liquor, will the Premier, first of all, assure this 
Assembly that these increases are the end of that and there will be now more increases in those items? 
Secondly, would you advise the Assembly what further surprises you have in store for the people of 
Saskatchewan in price increases? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to assurances that there will be no 
more price increases in beer, wine and insurance rates, the answer is obviously no. I cannot assure the 
hon. member that there will be no more price increases. Nobody since 1905 has been able to assure 
people that the price of liquor would not increase some time in the future. That’s equally true today. I 
obviously cannot give him the assurance he requests. If the hon. member opposite can find any merchant 
selling anything who will agree that his price will not increase any time in the future, then I would be 
interested if he would indicate who he is. 
 
With respect to what other items in which changes may be made either up or down, I 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1446 

have nothing to announce. If there are announcements, they will come forward in due course. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. I should have completed my 
question. I apologize for that. I intended to say for the balance of this fiscal year. These are the increases 
that have been announced since the budget was announced in this House. I might repeat my question. 
Are these going to further increase during the fiscal year? Mr. Premier, in light of all of the high interest 
rates we’re faced with in this country today, would you not agree that the people of Saskatchewan are 
entitled to some lead time to prepare themselves for such increases that you may announce this year? 
Will you be assuring this Assembly that there will be no further increases in those items in this fiscal 
year? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to licence fees for licensing automobiles, I think I can 
say there will be no increases during this fiscal year with respect . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You better look over there twice. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — That’s right. This obviously ought to be directed to the minister in question but I 
will attempt to answer some questions. With respect to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
insurance rates, I do not anticipate any increases in the AAIA rates this year — any additional increases, 
yes. 
 
With respect to liquor prices, I can give the hon. members no assurances on that. The policy of the liquor 
board is to pass along, in a timely way, increases charged by the distilleries and if the price of rye 
whiskey or vodka goes up, then in a relatively short time the price in the liquor stores will go up. We 
don’t change with every possible increase because we would be changing almost weekly as different 
distilleries change their rates. But every couple of months they revise their figures upwards and it is not 
the policy of our government, although it may well be the policy of members opposite, to subsidize the 
liquor prices, notwithstanding the fact that we are paying more, and not passing along to the . . . So 
obviously I cannot give the assurance that the hon. member requests. 
 
With respect to beer prices, I don’t know what the negotiations are with the breweries but I would 
anticipate that the increase announced recently would be the last increase for at least some period of 
time. There is also the problem of what happens if the prices which the breweries charge go up and 
whether or not that should be subsidized. Ordinarily that is not the policy of our government. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you have answered on the 
liquor and beer very well. Perhaps you will assure the Assembly exactly what your intentions are with 
respect to utilities. I’m referring to power, to telephones, to natural gas. Will you give us some kind of 
assurance, or announce some kind of price increase this year, or assurance that you will not be 
increasing these prices in this fiscal year? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m really unable to give an assurance on that. The boards of 
directors will be making recommendations from time to time on the prices which are to be. They will be 
instituting the changes. And I’m not denying the fact that if cabinet urged them not to, they wouldn’t 
because I’m not denying that they are not subject to some measure of control by cabinet. One would 
expect that would be the case. But we would anticipate that increases in utility rates would reflect 
increased 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1447 

costs; I would hope nothing more. Just as other increases in prices come about because of increase of 
costs of supplies and the amounts paid to our employees, I would anticipate that would be true with 
respect to natural gas and to power and telephones and to other utilities, as has been the case in the past. 
 

Control of Price Increases  
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — A question to the Premier. It is nice to have the admission that it is 
within the power of cabinet to control these price increases. You indicated that you don’t’ subscribe to 
the policy of subsidizing liquor prices, but the Premier very pointedly misses reference to the fact that 
Sask Tel rates increased at the same time that Sask Tel had a profit tabled in this Assembly, 
 
Would the Premier not admit, given the rapid increase in the rate of inflation and the fact that cabinet 
has the power to control the rates that it is now time for a public utilities price review board, so the 
public may have input into these rapidly rising utility rates? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I understand there is some resolution on the order paper with 
respect to something like that, and no doubt all hon. members will have the opportunity to express their 
views. The views of all members will doubtless have an opportunity to be recorded, and I don’t think 
there is much point in asking each individual member of cabinet where he supports or does not support 
each individual resolution on the order paper. 
 
MR. LANE: — Meanwhile, as a supplementary, we would hope that the Premier would attend that 
particular debate and give his inputs into the debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — That’s not a question. The member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 

Funds for Separate School French Program  
  
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minster of Education. Mr. Minister, it’s been brought to my attention that the Regina Separate School 
Board is likely to drop its type A French program unless it receives further departmental grants. Mr. 
Minister, why has your department required boards by legislation to set up such programs without 
providing the necessary funds for the programs? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member well knows. 
The Education Act makes provision for a variety of types of programs that school boards are requested 
to provide under certain conditions. The type A designated program that the hon. member refers to is 
provided for under legislation and regulations — legislation that was considered in this Assembly. It is 
not true that we have not provided financial help in order to operate these programs. Negotiations have 
been under way with respect to the Regina Separate School Board on this particular program. Those 
negotiations are not complete but I can tell the hon. member that I have advanced to the Regina Separate 
School Board proposals that would quite considerably enhance the financial support over and above that 
which has been available to date. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — A supplementary. I understand something in the neighborhood of $20,000. But 
board director, Mr. Herle, indicates that the separate school board is 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1448 

short $126,000 for the type A program. Mr. Minister, do you expect the board to cut from other 
programs to finance this? How are they to come up with this $126,000? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not possible for me to get into a debate about the figures. I can 
inform the hon. member that the latest proposal from the department is somewhat higher in terms of 
additional support than what the hon. member has indicated. I do not think it would be useful at this 
point for us to try to negotiate the exact level of support that should be advanced by the department for a 
particular program of this sort. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Final supplementary. Mr. Minister, do you expect the separate school board to 
increase its mill rate to finance this? And if this is necessary, do you realize, Mr. Minister, if the separate 
school board of Regina is forced to increase its mill rate above that of the public school board many 
people could choose to opt across to the public school board and thereby erode the financial base of the 
separate school system in this city? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, the regulations and the legislation apply equally to separate and 
public school boards in this province. They are not discriminatory with respect to any particular kind of 
board. In this case the parents have made an application at this time to the separate school board and the 
separate school board is acting on that application. I would say to the hon. member that if he would care 
to take a little time to check the records, he will find (and this will be confirmed, I believe by all separate 
school boards in this province) that no government in the history of this province has had a better record 
in terms of helping to support and advance the financial position of separate school boards than this 
government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I might mention to the hon. member that these negotiations are continuing and 
I’m confident that this program will proceed to the mutual satisfaction of everyone concerned. 
 

Negotiations with Separate School Boards  
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): —New question, Mr. Speaker. Could I ask the minister, are you going 
to settle with the separate school boards the same way you settled with the teachers? Are you going to 
exclude them from the negotiations or are you going to deal directly with the school board this time? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, that question almost defies answering. The negotiations that have 
taken place have taken place with the separate school board. I have met with them on a number of 
occasions. My officials have met with them on a number of occasions. And I can't possibly see how the 
program that the board is involved in implementing could be negotiated with the board excluded. The 
question makes absolutely no sense. 
 

Weight Control Clinics  
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minster of Health, Mr. Speaker. Concerns 
have been raised recently by various professional groups as to establishing in Saskatchewan weight 
control and weight reduction clinics. Does your department have any regulatory control or do you plan 
any regulations pertaining to these clinics? 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1449 

HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I’m personally not concerned about the 
weight control problem, but looking around this House maybe as Minister of Health I should be, looking 
opposite at some of the members there. Yes, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Health I am concerned about 
people who are overweight because many of them end up with heart attacks in our facilities and take the 
beds that could be occupied by other individuals. 
 
In all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, yes, I am concerned about it. I have had some discussions with my 
officials on that particular topic. I am concerned about some of the statements that have been coming 
from organizations which are being established in this province and across this country, whose 
advertisements seem to indicate that it is healthy for an individuals to lose rather drastically a lot of 
weight. That, I think, is contrary to the position that would be taken by the physicians of Canada. In that 
regard I support them and I do have some concerns. As to regulations, no, we have not gone that far in 
negotiating or considering regulations in this regard but I think it’s a valid point the member is making. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it is my understanding your 
department was approached over six months ago with a proposal for a pilot project in Saskatoon, to 
establish a clinic to treat obesity. Has your staff looked into this possibility and whether or not it will be 
covered under MCIC (medical care insurance commission); and are you going to answer the person who 
wrote to you? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer the member by saying that we are making attempts. 
There is a group set up within government to study the whole aspect of changing life styles and 
preventative services. I did mention this when my estimates were under consideration. We expect to 
have a proposal before government that will be considered fro next year’s budget on the whole aspect of 
changing life styles. We are continuing with our Feeling Good program, trying to make people aware of 
exercising, trying to make people aware of a balanced diet, of moderate drinking, of cutting out smoking 
— you know, trying to reduce stress to maintain a healthy kind of atmosphere and attitude of 
individuals, the responsibility of individuals to themselves. In direct response to your question, that 
particular topic is under consideration and an answer will come forth in due time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister. Will the minister not admit that while we’re attempting 
to change life styles, sometimes exaggerated claims are made as to the weight loss potential of going to 
different clinics? Then there is the other aspect about the protection of the funds advanced by individuals 
for joining some of these clinics. Is the minister looking into both of those aspects: one, the claims being 
made, and two, the financial protection of individuals who do pay funds in advance to these clinics? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member for Qu’Appelle would be the first one to yell foul if 
we were to restrict the freedom of an individuals to pay funds where that individuals felt it was 
worthwhile project. He’d be the first open to yell foul and interference with individuals liberties. We 
hear that constantly over there when we say we want to protect individuals against organizations that 
may be advertising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the member we have that particular item under consideration. The 
group studying that whole aspect of changing life styles and giving 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1450 

a new emphasis to maintaining healthy individuals is before government and I’m hoping we will have a 
concrete proposal which I can make to government for the budget of 1981-81. 
 

Purchase of Private Aircraft  
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, have you or 
any of your government ministers or officials had any demonstrations or made representation to any jet 
aircraft manufacturer in Canada or the Untied States for the purpose of purchasing a private executive jet 
aircraft for the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to take notice of that question. He asks whether all 
manner of government agencies have talked with all sorts of people. I’ll take notice and see whether we 
can find it. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Premier. New question, Mr. Premier, do you 
not agree that in this time of astronomical interest rates in Canada and Saskatchewan, with the cost of 
living and the interest rates interference and the problems it’s causing the small businessmen and 
farmers in Saskatchewan, and the homeowners . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take a new question. 
 

Union of Qu’Appelle and Regina Social Services Regions  
  
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the Minster of 
Social Services. I see he is gazing around the gallery and hasn’t heard me. A question to the Minister of 
Social Services. 
 
It has been brought to my attention that the Qu’Appelle region and the Regina region of the Department 
of Social Services are being united. A full-time social worker in that particular area, and in particular my 
own area, will only be there one day a week. The brunt of this overload is falling on the public health 
office and in particular on the public health officer to the extent that a Jill McGillvary has quit because 
of the overload. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Social Services is very simply, is it not detrimental in your 
views to maintain the development of rural Saskatchewan and that particular way of life when you make 
decisions like this? Would it not be incumbent upon you as the minister responsible to reverse that 
decision? 
 
HON. J.J. KOSKIE (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, in respect to the member’s 
question, I want to indicate it is my view that in the administrative change that has been made regarding 
Qu’Appelle and Regina, the overall services that will be provided in the areas which were previously 
served by the Qu’Appelle region will in fact not be detracted from. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, just a final supplementary, just a point of clarification of the 
minister’s statement. You are saying in effect then that these changes have not in any way been 
detrimental to that particular region of social services? If that is so, would you be suggesting to this 
Assembly that in fact those services are going to be improved because of this change? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to indicate to the hon. member we are constantly attempting to improve 
services commensurate with the government’s view of decentralized 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1451 

government. And as I indicated, I am advised that the general area of social will be maintained. 
 

Western Power Grid Survey  
  
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SPC. Mr. Minister, you recently 
announced that the grid electrical tie-in with North Dakota was announced for the third time the other 
day and I appreciate that. You also announced earlier that we are going to tie Poplar River win with 
Montana and we have been tied into Manitoba for quite some time. In this recent news release from the 
Department of Mineral Resources, you announced that we would be having a survey done with Alberta 
and Manitoba in order to tie our lines together and our power grid together. Can you tell me, in light of 
your announcement of the 100 megawatt exchange with North Dakota, is this survey going to include 
Montana and North Dakota as well? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, the member has made some 
comments about the present tie-ins with other jurisdictions surrounding the province of Saskatchewan, 
as well as more specific questions as to what we expect the studies will accomplish in regard to the 
western grid. The member knows we have three tie-ions with the province of Manitoba and now we 
have one under way with Basin Electric Power Co-op in North Dakota. We are working towards a tie-in, 
separate from the western grid or system which he refers to, with the province of Alberta. 
 
There is still optimism there may be benefit for the province of Saskatchewan and the state of Montana 
with a tie-in to Poplar River at Coronach. It is not expected that the study, which I made reference to and 
he makes reference to in the news release in respect of a grid or a system servicing Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan and Alberta, will look at the north-south connections into United States. The primary 
objective of that so-called study which is comprised of a series of studies is to better define the rewards 
and the probability of achieving a distribution of power between Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It was announced that Alberta would probably be 
purchasing something like 1,000 megawatts from Manitoba, Would it not be more feasible for 
Saskatchewan, being closer to Manitoba, to use this as an out as far as building new power plants? In 
1980-81, with the 300 megawatt coming on stream at Poplar River and then the 600 a couple of years 
later, what is our peak load and the reserve as these units come on stream? What is the lead time for a 
new power station at Nipawin? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta is purchasing power from Manitoba, not so much that they 
don’t want to develop their own power in that province, but the demand for power is increasing faster 
than their capabilities to province it. I guess if they made a concerted effort they would be able to but 
there is other economic activity in the province, as there is in Saskatchewan, and they don’t want to get 
the economy too hot. 
 
The problems which are elated to that are costly, as we are all aware. They want to further pursue the 
possibility of transmitting hydro-electric renewable power from the province of Manitoba. It is not 
expected that 1,000 megawatts of power will be sold. It is expected that in real terms 500 megawatts, or 
50 per cent of the line, is about the best you can assume over a long term. So it would be closer to 500 
megawatts. We are hoping we may be able to negotiate some of that power as well because it gives us 
access to a renewable source of power. A problem is where the placement of line might 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1452 

be. 
 
As the member knows about 70 per cent of our generation is in southern Saskatchewan now. We do not 
need more east-west distribution systems in the southern part of the province. We need them in the 
North where the growth is taking place. The study will tell us whether the line can be placed there. 
 
The member also asks what the lead time was in respect to new power stations. We have something in 
the neighborhood of 18 months before we have to make a decision as to whether or not we would go 
ahead with Nipawin. I would hope we would be able to make that decision well in advance of that time 
frame running out. One factor in respect of that decision would be whether or not the studies which are 
under way now, which are hoped to be concluded September 30, will tell us that it is economically 
feasible to have power purchased from Manitoba. If so, we may be able to defer the next power project 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Development of Alberta Tar Sands  
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Minster of Mineral Resources. There is some 
speculation in the East, Mr. Minister, that the federal government is now reconsidering the importance it 
has placed on developing the Alberta tar sands. This is in view of the development in Hibernia off the 
coast of Newfoundland. What effect do you see that having on the development of our heavy oil in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member may be jumping to conclusions in that the tar sands 
may not now play a key role in providing additional energy to Canadian consumers. They certainly have 
expressed that the tar sands, with the technology which is now available, should not demand world 
prices. There should be some means of negotiating a fair return for the exotic techniques of mining oil, I 
believe that there will be some arrangement made even though there may be some differences of opinion 
in reaching such an arrangement and that the tar sands development will still play a key role. 
 
I have not had specific discussions with the minister of energy federally, but in the meeting which I had 
with him several weeks ago we talked encouragingly about heavy oil development in Saskatchewan. I 
believe that heavy oil development has a very significant place to play in that it should be more 
economical than any other exotic process of recovery known today. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT  
  
At 10:47 a.m. the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne and gave 
royal assent to the bill presented to him. 
 

Point of Order on Question Period  
  
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, the point of order has to do with the question period. 
With all due respect to your office, would you please tell me why you sat me down in question period 
today? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I recall the member asked a question about something to do with the 
purchase of a jet aircraft by the government. Then the member asked for a supplementary. I granted him 
the floor on the basis that he was asking for a supplementary. He proceeded to say something which I 
considered not to be a  



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1453 

supplementary but in fact to be a speech. Therefore it was out of order. According to the rules of the 
question period, questions must be stated without preamble or speech or be in the nature of a debate, so 
consequently I asked the member to take his seat. I then took the next question. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, to my recollection I went on a new question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yes, it is unfortunate that the member assumes that he went for a new question. I 
accepted him on the basis of a supplementary. 
 

MOTION  
  

Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing  
  
HON. R. J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I move, seconded by the member for 
Kindersley-Tisdale (Mr. Messer): 
 

That the name of Mr. Vickar be substituted for that of Mr. Tchorzewski on the list of members of 
the select standing committee on public accounts and printing. 
 

MR. R. ANDREW (Kindersley): — I would make a short comment, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
government for this move, as Chairman of the public accounts committee. As people are aware, Mr. 
Tchorzewski is the Minister of Finance and the public accounts committees across Canada, in each of 
the jurisdictions, have succeeded in removing the ministers of finance from those committees. I thought 
our move this year was somewhat of a regressive step in bringing the Minister of Finance back on to the 
committee. For that I thank the government, although I would suggest to the government that perhaps 
there could be other moves by way of procedural changes, etc., to the public accounts committee that 
could also upgrade that committee a bit. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26  
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. We adjourned the committee yesterday dealing with the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, item 1. 
 

Point of Order  
 
HON. J.A. HAMMERSMITH (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Chairman, yesterday, 
just prior to the committee rising, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley made certain remarks in 
reference to me. I refer to the Hansard for Wednesday, April 2, page 1422. The member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley said in reference to me, and I quote: 
 

I say, Mr. Chairman, that this minister is a revolutionist. He is an insurrectionist and an anarchist. 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1454 

My point of order, Mr. Chairman, is that these remarks are unparliamentary, and I ask the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley to withdraw those remarks without qualification or reservation. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. This is related; you might as well deal with them 
all at the same time. Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise on transcript the words by the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley of last day. I will specify the words which I allege are unparliamentary in a moment but 
they have to be said in context. This is the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

We are wanting to know what types of ministers the Blakeney government has appointed. I 
would like this minister to explain the reasons for his writings. I would like him to tell this House 
because what happened as result of this letter, was that there were $5 million in police costs to 
the United States government. There were two people killed and the town was racked and 
bullet-torn. Many people never returned to their homes. That’s the kind of movement this 
minister supports. 

 
I say on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, that the words in the context of the phrase, “That’s the kind of 
movement this minister supports” are unparliamentary and I would ask the hon. member to also 
withdraw them without reservation. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think what we have are two points of order. I’ll deal with the first point 
of order raised by the Minster of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Order. I have had a chance to look over the transcript now and notice that the member did in fact say the 
minister is revolutionist, an insurrectionist and an anarchist. I think those words are probably, in fact 
they are, unparliamentary and I would ask the hon. member to withdraw the remarks. Order, order. I 
would ask the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to withdraw those remarks. 
 
MR. LANE: — Speaking to the point of order. I think that is a debatable point, Mr. Chairman . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It’s not a matter of privilege, wake up. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would ask the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to withdraw those 
remarks. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — On what basis, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — On the basis that they are unparliamentary and I would ask you to sit down. I 
will ask the hon. member to withdraw the unparliamentary remarks. 
 
It is within my duty as Chairman of the House to rule on whether or not expressions by members are 
personal, or disorderly, unparliamentary language offending against the proprieties of the House. If you 
look in Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, I think you will find that and I’d ask the hon. 
member to withdraw the remarks unqualified. Order, I’ve asked the hon. member to withdraw the 
remarks. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, you can’t make an arbitrary ruling. It is a point of order that has been 
raised and I have asked to speak to the point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I have already made a ruling that the hon. member should withdraw the 
unparliamentary remarks and I’d ask the hon. member to do so as this time. 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1455 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, you can’t make arbitrary rulings. I’ve asked to speak on a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I call on the member for Indian Head-Wolseley if you’d care to withdraw those 
remarks. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’m gong to speak to the point or order. The proper procedure, I think, Mr. Chairman, is 
a matter of privilege which was not raised by the members opposite . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. In this particular case I think the issue is clear. I don’t’ need any 
advice from the House as to whether or not these words are unparliamentary. I’ve ruled they are 
unparliamentary; they are in the record; they are clear. I would ask the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley to withdraw the remarks unqualified at this time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, what is not clear is the procedure. The procedure properly and I think 
Mr. Chairman knows it, is a matter of principle and . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would ask you to resume your seat. I call on the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley to withdraw these remarks . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. I’ll have to warn the 
hon. member for Qu’Appelle that he’s skidding himself on very slippery ground. I’ll call on the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I don’t think it’s very slippery, Mr. Chairman, I’ think it’s very solid. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes, I’m going to give the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley one more 
chance to get up and I’m going to warn the hon. member for Qu’Appelle that he is showing an extreme 
amount of disrespect for the Chair and the authority of the Chair in this House . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 

Challenge to Chairman’s Ruling  
  
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, during the considerations of the estimates of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, I asked the member for Indian Head-Wolseley to withdraw a certain unparliamentary 
remark. My ruling was challenged by the member for Qu’Appelle. 
 
Ruling of the Chair sustained on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 32  
 
Pepper 
Allen 
Romanow 
Messer 
Snyder 
Kramer 
Robbins 
Baker 

Mostoway 
Banda 
Kaeding 
Hammersmith 
Kowalchuk 
Feschuk 
Byers 
 

Koskie 
Matsalla 
Lusney 
Prebble 
Johnson 
Nelson 
Thompson 
Lingenfelter

 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1456 

 
Skoberg 
McArthur 
Shillington 

Vickar 
Cowley 
Cody 

White 
Solomon

 
Nays — 14  

 
Berntson 
Birkbeck 
Larter 
Lane 
Taylor 

Rousseau 
Swan 
Pickering 
Garner 
Muirhead 

Katzman 
Duncan 
Andrew 
McLeod

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26  

 
Item 1 (continued)  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I call on the member for Indian Head-Wolseley to withdraw those remarks. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, I withdraw the words that are 
deemed by the Chair to be unparliamentary. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Thank you. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I read to you earlier, and I don’t know if you want to have me read it over again, 
my point of order on unparliamentary remarks. Perhaps because of the lengthy interruption I should read 
them for the purposes of the record. In the record the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley is quoted 
as follows: 
 

We are wanting to know what types of minister the Blakeney government has appointed. I would 
like this minister to explain the reasons for his writings. I would like him to tell this House 
because what happened as a result of this letter was that there were $5 million in police costs to 
the United States government. There were two people killed and the town was racked and 
bullet-torn. Many people were returned to their homes. That’s the kind of movement this 
minister supports. 
 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I’ll make my point very briefly. In reality the whole paragraph . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. You wouldn’t let me comment on it, now you 
are letting him give a speech on his point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the words that I find offensive are, “that the kind of movement 
this minister supports”, in the context of police costs, killings, rackings and people returned to their 
homes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Are there are comments on this point of order? 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Speaking to this point of order, Mr. 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1457 

Chairman, I think it is the fuzziest sort of point of order that has ever been raised in this House and it 
indicates to me that members on that side of the House have selective hearing. Last week or within days, 
the Minister of Highways referred to the member for Regina South as a dehydrated Frenchman and 
further referred to the two Independent members as traitors to their country, which may or may not be 
true, but is very unparliamentary and they chose to ignore it at that time. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! You’re out of order! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I’ve had a chance to look over the section referred to by the Attorney 
General and I think if the question is whether or not there’s unparliamentary language — just wait a 
second. 
 
I’ve had a chance to consider this and this particular point of order I don’t think is as clear cut as the one 
before. The one before dealt with unparliamentary language; this one I don’t think deals with 
unparliamentary language. What it does do, I believe, is, and I refer hon. members to Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, section 319: 
 

In the House of Commons a member will not be permitted by the Speaker to indulge in any 
reflections on the House itself as a political institution; (and here’s to the moot point) or to 
impute to any Member or Members unworthy motives for their actions in a particular case; 

 
And I think that in my view this does and I would ask the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to 
withdraw those remarks. 
 
MR. LANE: — Speaking to the point of order, the point of order was very specifically raised by the 
Attorney General and now seems to be changed to another matter. So there’s no raising of the point of 
order on the other matter. The point of order is out of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I don’t want to get into an argument with the member. I cited the section under 
which I made this ruling in Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition. You could look 
it up, but I’d ask the hon. member to withdraw the remarks. 
 
MR. LANE: — Speaking to the point of order, my recollection is that must be raised by the Chair at the 
time, Mr. Chairman, not at a considerably later period of time. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’m replying in response to the point or order that was already made. If the hon. 
member would like to withdraw those remarks as well . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, except the point of order was made on a different topic. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I am going to ask the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to 
withdraw the remarks. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, what phrase did you sue though? You thought it was not nice. Was that right? 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1458 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I stated my ruling. I stated the case in which I’ve set it. I’m asking 
the member to withdraw. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, then would you state your ruling again? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’m going to repeat it one more time. I am going to ask the hon. member then to 
withdraw. I said the case was not a clear case of unparliamentary language as was the previous case. 
What I did say further was that having looked over the rules of the House and cited section 319(3): 
 

In the House of Commons a Member will not be permitted by the Speaker to indulge in any 
reflections on the House itself as a political institution; or to impute to any Member of Members 
unworthy motives for their actions in a particular case; 
 

I call on the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley to withdraw the remarks. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Mr. Chairman, may I speak to your comments. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. You may not. I will call on the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley to withdraw. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I would like for you to spell out to me what you feel are the unworthy . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I would like you to withdraw immediately, on page 1423 the 
paragraph: 
 

We are wanting to know what types of ministers the Blakeney government has appointed. I 
would like this minister to explain the reason for his writings. I would like him to tell this House 
because what happened as result of this letter, was that here were $5 million in police costs to the 
United States government. There were two people killed and the town was racked and 
bullet-torn. Many people never returned to their homes. That’s the kind of movement this 
minister supports. 
 

That imputes on the minister that he supports this type of movement. I think that is an unparliamentary 
way to refer to a fellow member. I would ask you to withdraw. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, as you well may know, there are a number of things I want to find 
out about the . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I call on the hon. member to withdraw the remarks — unqualifiedly. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It seems to me there is quite a bit of doubt. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well to expedite the proceedings of this House . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order . . . withdraw those remarks, please. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — . . . I will withdraw the words that are deemed by you to be unworthy, 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1459 

did you say? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Unparliamentary. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Motives. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Thank you. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’d like to direct a question to the minister responsible for DNS. The minister was a 
rather prolific writer in his youth when he was an employee of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. We’ve referred to a letter that the member now wishes he hadn’t written. I’m going to 
refer to another letter that got a great deal of press coverage in the Prince Albert Daily Herald. It’s an 
open letter to the Premier from the minister now responsible for DNS dated August 12, 1973. From that 
I’m going to take some quotes and I’m not taking them out of context. The hon. member knows the 
letter. He refers to DNS programs. 
 

To turn the responsibility for such programs over to Bowerman and Churchman and their B&B 
Gang (Bookkeepers and Bureaucrats) is to invite even greater disaster than characterizes DNS 
presently. 
 
My judgment of the motivation and competence of Mr. Bowerman and Mr. Churchman has been 
made very clear. Since the actions of your government have depended largely on the judgment 
and the recommendations of these two men, I withhold any further judgment of you and your 
government, little as my opinion may be worth, until we see what you do with the information 
herein contained. 
 
It is also important to me that everyone involved understand the facts, insofar as I know and 
believe them to be true, of the recent firings by DNS. 
 

Then you go on to your own personal firings and you make other quotes. 
 

It is a fact that Jonas Favel, Roy Fosseneuve and Bernice Jacobson are all very articulate, 
fluently bilingual, politically aware, de-colonized, half-breeds. DNS apparently cannot tolerate 
“uppity-Indians.” In the eyes of Mr. Bowerman and Mr. Churchman and the frightened 
collection of programmed “yes-men” they are gathering around them, a “good” and 
“responsible” Indian is one who keeps his or her mouth shut, blindly and without question 
carrying out the orders of the department even when it is obvious that such directives are not in 
the best interests of native people. It is apparent within the department that “white is right,” and 
no Indian employee from the North should ever question the orders of his white superiors from 
the South. The fact that these three people refused to be token Indians, providing political 
window dressing for DNS, probably had more to do with their dismissals than any other factor. 
Certainly your officials, like racists anywhere, will deny this vehemently. Their protestations of 
innocence may convince you and your government; however, they fall on deaf ears in the North. 
 
I would urge those NDP members who retain some conscience and some understanding to 
review their northern policy in the New Deal for People and to seriously examine the extent to 
which Mr. Bowerman, Mr. Churchman and senior DNS officials are making a mockery of the 
goals so confidently and so 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1460 

bravely stated two years ago . . . 
 
Lest you feel that the charges of racism and fascism are excessive, I invite you to consider the 
following: 
 
1. Mr. Bowerman has devoted much time to and takes much more direction from Fred 
Thompson and white teachers in the North than he does from native people. 
 
2. A petition, signed in one day by 554 native people in five communities on the ‘west side; of 
northern Saskatchewan, asked to have Dennis Poudrier retained as area community development 
worker. Fred Thompson, a few hysterical whites and a few “white” Indians yelled for our 
dismissal; Bowerman responded to the latter. 

 
3. Fred Thompson, Bowerman, and Nesdoly’s political hack in the North, defends the school 
system in the North with a passion; however, he sends his own children to school in Prince 
Albert. 
 
4. Chief Felix Sylvestre of Dillon, who has never met either Dennis Poudrier or myself, asked 
Chief David Ahenakew of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians to complain to Mr. 
Bowerman of our activities. Chief Ahenakew did this and it was upon receipt of this complaint 
that Bowerman finally acted. I have been informed that Felix Sylvestre was told by Fred 
Thompson that “Hammersmith and Poudrier want to shoot all the priests and run all the teachers 
out of the North.” These are tactics reminiscent of Hitler’s rise to power in Germany. 

 
Very familiar I think. 
 

5. Fred Thompson has organized two separate meetings of white school teachers on the “west 
side” to personally attack and misrepresent the efforts of Poudrier, Favel, Bourgeault and myself. 
Native people were deliberately excluded from these meetings unless they were known to be in 
agreement with Mr. Thompson. 
 
The meetings were designed to do nothing more than make vicious personal attacks on us for our 
efforts in assisting native people to have a greater say in the direction of educational programs 
offered their children. One of these meetings was attended by Bowerman and Eli Nesdoly, M.P., 
and neither of these men attempted to get an opinion from the native people involved or from us 
 
6. The priests in Ile-a-la-Crosse told people in the community that “Jerry Hammersmith and 
Jonas Favel are working for the devil.” The people who make such statements and for those who 
respond to them are political allies of Fred Thompson who is the northern political crutch for 
Bowerman and Nesdoly. 
 
7. The former principal of the Ile-a-la-Crosse School told Wallis Smith of DNS that, “if Jerry 
Hammersmith comes back into this community, ‘someone’ in this community will be shot.” The 
principal is a political ally of Fred Thompson and thereby of Bowerman and Nesdoly. 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1461 

8. Fred Thompson informed Bowerman and Churchman that new teacherages in La Loche 
should have priority over sewer and water for native people. Teachers live in modern house 
trailers while the majority of people in La Loche live in substandard housing and do not have an 
adequate water supply. Native people had unanimously expressed a priority of sewer and water 
over new teacherages. Bowerman and Churchman have in this case, and in every other, 
responded to Fred Thompson and his “white is right” militancy. 

 
9. There is as much money being spent on new jails in northern Saskatchewan as there is on 
economic development. 

 
And your letter goes on: 
 

11. These recent firings have created an atmosphere of fear and frustration among those DNS 
staff members who were sincerely committed to carrying out the objective of DNS. Fred 
Thompson has carried out a systematic harassment, supported b y Bowerman, Churchman and 
Nesdoly, of such staff members and the government now appears to have indicated its official 
support for such tactics. The tactics of Fred Thompson are based on rumor, misrepresentation 
fear of political reprisals and the threat of physical violence. This man is fully supported by 
Bowerman, Churchman and Nesdoly and, by implication, the provincial government. 
 
The type of white backlash led by NDP political hacks like Fred Thompson, the Catholic 
Church, white teachers and businessmen, the old-line civil servants and the few “white” Indians 
tied economically and politically to the white power structure is nothing short of being totally 
racist in motivation and fascist in tactics and content. By taking their direction from this segment 
of northern society, Bowerman and Churchman assisted by Eli Nesdoly, have tied themselves 
and your government to the most viciously repressive and reactionary elements in the North. 
They have repeatedly assured the traditional white, corporate, ecclesiastical and administrative 
elite that it is “business-as-usual” except for the annoying persistence of a few community 
development workers who will soon be gone. They have now fulfilled that latter commitment. 
 

And you go on in your letter to the Premier. Now obviously we were raising your past statements for a 
reason — because we have attempted to get a judicial inquiry. Those statements made by you years ago 
for your first-hand knowledge and the statements made by Mr. Justice Noble indicate that after nearly 10 
years nothing has changed; that in fact we have a bureaucracy run amuck; that you raised that seven 
years ago and nothing was done. And you want to criticize us for raising this? And you want to criticize 
us for attempting to get to the bottom of the mess in DNS, when we see that for seven long years 
nothing’s been done and you’re the minister and you have first-hand knowledge. You were concerned 
enough then that you are raised it with the Premier. And now we get judgments from the Court of 
Queen’s Bench that we have been debating for the last week and you won’t do anything about it. I 
suggest to you that’s a dereliction of duty on your part to stand up in this Assembly and refuse to have a 
judicial inquiry when you brought matters to the fore seven years ago and are today the minister. You 
have the facts and the statements of fact from the judge, and you won’t take any action. Let me tell you 
that’s a pretty shameful position you’re in when after your pseudo-concern 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1462 

you stand up and want to cover up and your refuse an inquiry. 
 
I don’t think the Attorney General or anyone else takes the statements of Mr. Justice Noble lightly. I 
don’t think anyone does but they are damning statements. They are important statements. They are 
important not just for the facts, the particular case, but they also now tie in to what’s been going on for 
at least seven years and you say that doesn’t justify a judicial inquiry. 
 
I think it’s a very, very sorry day when you as minister responsible for DNS stand up in this Assembly 
and refuse a judicial inquiry of a long-standing administrative and bureaucratic mess. I used your words 
— the situation in northern Saskatchewan — I would hope that you would respond and say that, yes, 
you now support the judicial inquiry asked by the Conservative. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Chairman, I want to get into this 
discussion, and I do so with a heavy heart. I have been watching what has been happening in this 
Assembly and as all hon. members know. I’m a relatively new member to this assembly. I have been all 
of my life a citizen of this province. I grew up in this province in rural Saskatchewan. As a young boy I 
used to watch and observe the proceedings of this Assembly. 
 
I used to follow the activities of this Assembly perhaps influenced by my parents, my father, who took a 
very lively interest in politics and public life in this province and who ran for a party other than the one I 
stand for and I respect him for that. I took a very, very deep interest throughout my youth in the 
proceedings of this Assembly and as I became older watched with a greater interest the discussions and 
the debates about policy. There have been many, many great debates in the tradition of the British 
parliament in this Assembly. There have been many, many fundamental disagreements about the 
direction the government of this province should take with respect to new policy initiatives and new 
activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout all that time I developed a very great respect for this Assembly. One of the 
reason I made the decision to enter politics is because I believe this Legislative Assembly has a tradition 
that stands up to the tradition, the honor and respect of any Legislative Assembly anywhere in the 
Commonwealth. This Assembly, Mr. Chairman, is an Assembly that treats matters of policy, matters of 
government, the kinds of directions and policies that this province should pursue as fundamental and 
serious matters. 
 
I became a civil servant in this province eight or nine years ago and had another perspective in watching 
this Assembly. I used to, in this very committee, come into this Assembly, sit beside my minister, 
observe the happenings and advise my minister, much as civil servants in this Assembly are doing now. 
 
I watched members of this Assembly who sat on the side opposite — the likes of Mr. Steuart, Mr. 
MacDonald, Mr. Cameron and many, many others engage in lively, hard debate about what the 
government was intending to do. They were critical — extremely critical. I used to watch with 
admiration the way they would mount their arguments in defence of their position and in criticism of the 
government and the activities they were engaged in. Those members, Mr. Speaker (and it is in the long 
tradition of this 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1463 

Assembly), talked about policy. They talked about direction; they talked about matters of substance; 
they talked about what government should or should not do. They debated it in this House and they 
debated it in the honorable traditions of this House and in the honorable traditions of parliaments — 
coming from our mother parliament in Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have sat through this committee of finance. I have sat through the discussions which have 
been taking place with respect to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I have been observing what 
this opposition is doing. It has been passing through my mind, what is happening here? What kind of 
opposition do we have in this Assembly today? Do we have an opposition, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The hon. member for Regina South asked the question — what kind of government do we have? What 
kinds of things, I would hope he would be saying, is this government proposing to do? What kinds of 
programs does this government have? What kinds of policies does this government have? Are they 
good? Are they bad? What is the matter with them? If they are lousy, what’s the matter with them? Get 
up and debate and say so. Criticize the government; that’s your job. Criticize it constructively; come 
forward with some criticism of what the government is doing, what the programs and policies of this 
government are. But no, Mr. Chairman, that’s not what we are getting from the members opposite. 
 
The members opposite are pursuing a very interesting tactic. They have spent, I don’t know how many 
hours, of this Assembly’s time, attempting to defame the character, the motives of the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan. This minister, I know, is working long, long hours making a dedicated 
commitment to further improving the conditions in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Now, Mr. Chairman, that’s not an easy task and I say that from experience. The 
North of this province had had long-standing problems and difficulties and grievances. They are 
grievances which we and all members of this House, not just the government side, should listen to and 
respect and deal with — but deal with, Mr. Chairman, as matters of substance, as matters which affect 
the people who are living in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I know this minister has worked in North for a very long time. I know he has criticisms of what has 
happened in the past. He has criticisms of what is happening today and he is trying to do an honest job 
of making things even better. But I point out to the hon. members that if any of them (and I suspect 
maybe this would be something that many of the hon. members would not have appreciation of) would 
go back a few years and look at the situation in northern Saskatchewan, the history of that area of our 
province, look at the needs which that area has had, the needs the people of that area have had and look 
at what this government, this administration (before I was part of it) undertook to do up there. This 
administration did nothing less than mount a total program aimed at a social and economic reform and 
development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This administration did it with courage, something the honorable members might want to think about 
when they are trying (if they ever get around to trying) to develop some real suggestions for what should 
be done in the North. This administration did that with courage. I was not in this Assembly at that time, 
but I recall the fact that members of this 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1464 

administration recognized how difficult that job was going to be. Members of this administration 
recognized that dealing with the kinds of social economic problems that have existed in northern 
Saskatchewan for so many, many years would not be easy to deal with. But this administration 
proceeded with courage, the type of courage no other government in Canada has displayed to address 
those problems of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Do we hear anything from the hon. members about the programs, about those kinds of things the 
government is trying to do? I’ve listened here with interest through this whole thing. Not once have I 
heard the hon. members make even one suggestion about the improvement of the particular program I 
suspect they must be trying to discuss here, though you have to wonder. Not one suggestion, not one 
suggestion! 
 
What are their tactics, Mr. Speaker? This is interesting because they now have a new leader and that 
must be very significant. Having given their outgoing leader a standing ovation — who said previously, 
our tactics as a party are serious; we intend to pursue questions of policy and substance; we don’t throw 
mud — now they have a new leader and you know, since that new leader became leader we have not 
seen anything else but slinging mud. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what that tells you? I suspect it tells you an awful lot. I 
suspect it tells you they are deeply embarrassed about the division within their caucus. They are deeply 
embarrassed about the position they have found themselves in with a disintegrating caucus that has no 
idea about what it wants to do, what it would do, what it would try to do if it were in government and 
had the opportunity to do so. That is absolutely clear; there is no evidence whatsoever that they would 
have any idea what they would want to do. The hon. members use tactics on a continuing, never-ending 
basis which I say to you and all members of this House are completely out of character with the 
long-standing tradition of this Assembly which has up until this time stood in the highest regard all 
across the Commonwealth as a Legislative Assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I say sincerely to all members of the House, both on this side and to the 
members opposite, a continuation of this kind of tactic not only is going to mean that the hon. members 
opposite are going to pay and pay dearly for that kind of behaviour (in political terms), but also that this 
whole Assembly is going to be a lesser Assembly because of that. Mr. Chairman, I as a member of this 
Assembly with the respect in which I’ve held this Assembly and with the respect I’ve held parliaments 
all across the British Commonwealth, find that a most distressing prospect. I say to all hon. members, 
let’s join in debate; let’s play hardball as one member said the other day in terms of debate. That’s fair 
enough. We take our politics seriously; we take what we’re doing seriously (I hope) but let’s always 
remember we have a very important responsibility here in this Assembly. 
 
The hon. members opposite make allegations that the minister and the previous minister won’t do 
anything about difficulties as they arise. Now they know that is absolute nonsense and the hon. member 
for Qu’Appelle just went on about this a few minutes ago. He went on about how ministers won’t do 
anything about problems. I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, I hope that we continue to have ministers such as 
the previous 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1465 

ministers and the current minister who continually work long and difficult hours doing something of 
substance about many things and many problems that they encounter in their job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I ask the hon. members how they can substantiate this kind of nonsense. The 
hon. member for Qu’Appelle refused to recognize the very extreme difficulties of talking about some of 
the specific matters he wants to talk about which are before the courts of this province. And that tells 
you something of very great significance about the hon. member because I know (he is not an ignorant 
man) that he knows full well the rules and procedures and traditions of this Assembly and other 
assemblies. I know he knows that and he recognizes full well the kind of ground he’s walking on when 
he advocates that this Assembly deal with certain kinds of matters the way he has advocated .But there 
is something else that is very interesting and it shows how empty and shallow this debate has been. He 
says that the hon. minister will not do anything about this particular case. 
 
And I sat in this Assembly and I heard the minister repeat it more than once, that on the first evidence of 
any problem, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan took action. They did do something about the 
problem and the very reason that this particular thing is being dealt with now in the courts is because 
DNS did take action on the problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — And that is the highest degree of responsibility and I’m proud to say to the hon. 
member for Qu’Appelle that I am part of a government which acts and acts quickly, even though 
difficult situations come up such as that came up. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan takes its 
responsibility seriously and moves to take action and moves quickly to take action such as they did here. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to close with a few brief remarks about the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and its programs and its activities. I say to the hon. members and I say to them seriously 
— you have departmental reports from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan; you have a great deal 
of information about what is happening in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan -what kinds of 
programs, what kinds of things the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is attempting to do. It is a 
comprehensive, social and economic program dealing with the situation in northern Saskatchewan. It 
started in approximately 1972. Now as hon. members you have a responsibility to perhaps just do a little 
bit of work. You are led by a leader who, based on his background, surely shows some evidence of 
having the capacity to lead that kind of research work and get a little bit of information so that you as 
members might participate in debate in some sort of substantive way. 
 
Now, I invite you - -there’s lots of data and statistics and information available — to go back and do 
some research and assess what’s happened in northern Saskatchewan, what those programs have done. I 
invite you to assess the public service in northern Saskatchewan. You have come forward with some 
absolutely incredible allegations against our public servants. I invite the hon. members to look at the 
record of the public servants in Saskatchewan; they work under very, very difficult conditions. There’s 
no question about that and no one is going to deny that. I say to the hon. members, from my own 
personal experience, from my own observations as a public servant and now from my own observations 
as a member of this Assembly, that the public service 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1466 

deserves the highest degree of commendation for the work they have done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — That is not to say there won’t be mistakes; that is not to say there won’t be 
difficulties. Indeed, if we took the position that we are going to avoid all mistakes and avoid all 
difficulties we wouldn’t have a Department of Northern Saskatchewan and we wouldn’t have the kinds 
of things happening up there that are now happening and which the northern people are proud of. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — These are good people. Mr. Chairman, these public servants, just as all our 
public servants are in my view, worthy of the highest degree of commendation. 
 
I heard the hon. member for Maple Creek the other day stand up and make an incredible, insulting 
statement about public servants. It’s just a continuation of this tactic that is being pursued. I ask the hon. 
members where is it leading you? Where do you think you’re going with these kinds of tactics? I think I 
know where you’re going; you’re going straight into the gutter. You will as a result of that, suffer the 
full consequences of that kind of approach to opposition. I hope, Mr. Chairman, that in the continuation 
of these estimates we are going to see some attempt by the hon. members to deal with the North, to deal 
with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I say, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. members do not do 
that, if the hon. members do not take that kind of approach, then the future for this Assembly is not just 
distressing, it is frightening. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — We know, Mr. Chairman, there were serious problems in DNS. We 
also know there were serious administrative problems in DNS from the outset. There have been 
suggestions by members of the opposition since DNS was formed that the proper way to establish that 
department was to have some experienced civil servants set up the infrastructure so it was efficiently and 
effectively organized at the outset and we could do the social experimentation around a solid and 
financially sound infrastructure. That was ignored. In fact when the government opposite set up DNS it 
brought in a whole hodgepodge of people. I think the hon. member himself, who was deputy minister, 
knows full well that he was taken up there to try to solve some of that administrative mess. 
 
He wants some positive and constructive suggestions. He says the government has always acted. I have 
releases here going back to 1973, where every time a problem becomes a public the minister of the day 
covers up and refuses to bring the problem s out so they can be resolved. Don’t blame the opposition for 
the mess in DNS; blame the government! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Let me tell you I am prepared to accept and the opposition is prepared to accept the 
statements of a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench that there were problems, and serious problems. I 
think the hon. member accepts it. Then why don’t you — why didn’t’ you support an inquiry? Why 
didn’t you? Why did you sit silently . . . (inaudible 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1467 

interjection) . . . when the judge is making damning statements? Why did you hide back in your chair 
when finally a Court of Queen’s Bench judge made damning statements about the administration as I 
say, here’s a headline from a 1973 editorial in the P.A. Herald — that’s how far back this goes: 
 

Evasiveness won’t solve the problems in the North. Rather than defend the issue raised in the 
report referring to this, to answer previous charges, Mr. Bowerman chose at a press conference 
Monday to lash out at the Metis society and the newspaper reporters for being critical of his 
department’s operation. It was an ill-advised statement on his part and buck passing at its best. 

 
And that’s not from the opposition, that’s from the press in northern Saskatchewan which sees daily 
what is happening. When I see opposition members attempting and the opposition critic has laid out a 
direction, I’m surprised the hon. member didn't refer to it when he released it to the press a month ago, 
as to what we want to see done in northern Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You missed it 
at that time, don’t go blaming the opposition for that. When we see back at that time the Liberal 
opposition making a tour up there — people are pleading for help but he doesn’t accept that as being 
concern, doesn’t accept that as being concern — a rather selective defence. What we can’t understand is, 
how long does this have to go on before something is done? I’m going to give you another alternative. 
This one I know you can support if you’re really sincere in what you say, because I’m going to move a 
motion. The only defence we have had, I might add, that of the Attorney General opposite, is we can’t 
have a judicial inquiry because it’s before the courts. That’s the only defence the government opposite 
has to the very serious charges of Judge Noble, a pretty weak one but the only one. 
 
It’s not my words that are as follows: “right on your doorstep are some of the most intolerable social and 
economic and political conditions that exist anywhere. And yet the only response of which your 
government seems capable is a chorus of political platitudes.” Not my words, not the words of the 
opposition you’ve tempted to pass the buck on to, not at all — the present minister. Not my words that 
say the native people have no illusions about the racism of DNS and the government and society it 
represents, not my words. Not my words, not the opposition’s words, that say not only those who 
supervised your actions in this whole affair. It’s almost a case of a bureaucracy run amuck if one can 
believe all the evidence that was here with respect to this scenario. Not only did they stand by and let 
you go about your business of ripping off these unfortunate people, in some ways they even actively 
assisted you. For example, they failed to inspect your work. They authorized the payment of your work 
despite the obvious shortcomings of it. I suppose they took the view that since the money was being 
supplied by yet another bureaucracy, namely Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation, it didn’t 
matter. But the evidence indicates they went even further than that; they delivered those cheques right 
into your hands, completely contrary to the instructions they got from CMHC. Referring to Thompson, 
the judge said you completed the whole scenario yourself by depositing the cheques to your account. 
Again that was in complete disregard of the fact that each of those homeowners was entitled to endorse 
that cheque and O.K. or disapprove of your performance. 
 
The irony of all this, I suppose, is that your bank, probably by oversight, but not necessarily so in my 
view, committed an unforgivable error by cashing those cheques, casually putting them through your 
account as though the money was yours. There was 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1468 

one endorsement, but not on the cheques. So a lot of people, a lot of institutions, contributed to this 
series of events which culminated in your conviction. 
 
You’ve been convicted of fraud. As I’ve said, I’m satisfied you could not have perpetrated that fraud 
without the writing or unwitting co-operation of some of the people in the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan; those are serious allegations. It’s got nothing to do with motives of intent to try and solve 
severe social and economic problems. It’s a lot more than that. Let me repeat: you’ve been convicted of 
fraud. As I’ve said, I’m satisfied you could not have perpetrated that fraud without the witting or 
unwitting co-operation of some of the people in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. You say an 
opposition is muckraking when it brings that before this Assembly. You say that’s muckraking? That’s 
responsible. The court does not take lightly the conduct of those who take advantage of the poor and 
unsophisticated and, in this case at least, two very aged people in our society. Because of what occurred 
here when this fraud was committed, it includes a misappropriation or a rip-off, if you like of public 
funds. That’s muckraking? I have too much respect for the hon. member to know that he didn’t support 
the action. I know he doesn’t support the action. I believe the hon. member is sincere about his concerns 
for northern Saskatchewan. I don’t think because an opposition raised concerns about a man who is now 
in a position of public trust as a member of the Executive Council, it is muckraking. I don’t believe an 
opposition which raises the statements of a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench is muckraking. I don’t 
accept that. 
 
It would be irresponsible for any opposition to ignore statements such as that. It would be irresponsible 
for an opposition to not question a man who I believe was sincere when he raised his concern back in 
1972 and 1973. He took a very gutsy action. You don’t’ do that lightly, to write to the Premier with your 
concerns. I don’t say that’s muckraking. I think the man at that time showed guts. The problem came 
when seemingly nothing was done about it. 
 
I think it’s fair for this opposition or any other opposition in this position to now question in DNS 
estimates, a man who saw those problems first-hand and now has an opportunity to do something about 
it. I think it’s fair for the opposition to challenge that same minister who has lived in the North and who 
saw first-hand the problems to finally support the opposition, to find a vehicle for bringing these 
problems into the open so that government can deal with it. I would like nothing better than to spend our 
time in this Assembly debating the philosophy of government of the policies in departments. But when I 
see statements by a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench that there are serious problems, those policies 
and the philosophy are obviously subject to criticism — and I think fairly so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, the problems are severe. I think and the opposition feels that it’s time to 
bring the problems into the open and start acting on them. I’m gong to give all members an opportunity 
to take that course of action. As I say, the only defence the government opposite had to judicial inquiry 
was a very narrow and a very limited one. But I am going to urge, rather than a judicial inquiry: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately appoint a royal 
commission, to be chaired by Mr. Justice Nobel of the Court of Queen’s Bench of Saskatchewan, 
for the purpose of investigating the operation of and administration of the Department of 
Northern 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1469 

Saskatchewan and that this royal commission be instructed to table its report in this Assembly 
with all convenient speed. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Kindersley (Mr. Andrew). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — My point of order is that this motion is substantially the same as a previous 
motion which has already been dealt with by the House calling for a public inquiry by Mr. Justice Noble 
into the operations and administration of Northern Saskatchewan, the only difference being the change 
of name to royal commission from public inquiry. Since the assumption obviously has to be that a royal 
commission is also a public inquiry the matter has already been dealt with. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I draw to the attention of all hon. members, Beauchesne’s Parliamentary 
Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, sections 148 and 163: 
 

It is a wholesome restraint upon members that they cannot revive a debate already concluded; it 
would be little use in preventing the same question from being offered twice in the same session 
if, without being offered, its merits might be discussed again and again. 
 
A mere alteration of the words of a question, without any substantial change in its object, will 
not be sufficient to evade the rule that no question shall be offered which is substantially the 
same as one which has already been expressed in the current session. 

 
I rule that the point or order raised by the . . . I’ll give you an opportunity to speak. 
 
MR. LANE: — I am sure this Assembly, before you make your ruling, does not want to go on record as 
assuming that a judicial inquiry and royal commission are one and the same. I am sure the Attorney 
General does not want to be in the public position of ruling that a royal commission and a judicial 
inquiry are one and the same. 
 
I think that the judicial inquiries, which the government opposite has had and which have been referred 
to on numerous occasions in this debate, are fundamentally different in form and import than a royal 
commission which doesn’t start with the facts of the particular case. It deals with the totality of the 
administration and the operation and can bring back (hopefully) suggestions for improvement and 
review the philosophy and the goals of the department. It is fundamentally different in concept than a 
judicial inquiry the narrow issue and the individual. 
 
Before you make your ruling, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that the Chair understands the very 
substantial difference between a royal commission and a judicial inquiry. I 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1470 

would hope that Mr. Chairman would take that into account before he makes his ruling. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would like to thank both hon. members for the advice which they offered me 
on this question. I find however that the motion is out of order in that, in my view, it will revive a debate 
already concluded. It would be little use in preventing the same question from being offered twice in the 
same session. I rule this motion out of order. 
 
MR. LANE: — I am going to have to challenge your ruling. I believe there is a fundamental difference, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 

Challenge to Chairman’s Ruling  
  
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of the estimates of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. I ruled that a motion moved by the hon. member for Qu’Appelle was out of order on the 
grounds that the motion was substantially the same as one which had already been debated and voted on 
by the committee. The member for Qu’Appelle challenged my rulings. 
 
Ruling of the Chairman sustained on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 35  
 
Blakeney 
Pepper 
Allen 
Smishek 
Romanow 
Snyder 
Kramer 
Robbins 
Baker 
Skoberg 
McArthur 
Gross 

Shillington 
Mostoway 
Banda 
Kaeding 
Hammersmith 
Kowalchuk 
Dyck 
Feschuk 
Byers 
Vickar 
Rolfes 
Cowley 

Tchorzewski 
Cody 
Koskie 
Matsalla 
Lusney 
Johnson 
Nelson 
Thompson 
Lingenfelter 
White 
Solomon

 
Nays — 14  

 
Berntson 
Birkbeck 
Larter 
Lane 
Taylor 

Rousseau 
Swan 
Pickering 
Garner 
Muirhead 

Katzman 
Duncan 
Andrew 
McLeod

 
MR. SPEAKER: — I declare the Chairman’s ruling sustained. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN—VOTE 26  
 
Item 1 (continued)  



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1471 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, it now being near one o’clock I move this committee rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — It’s been moved by the Leader of the Opposition that the committee rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. All in favor of the motion say aye. All those opposed say no. I 
think the no’s have it. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, I call it one o’clock. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — It’s meaningless to me — one o’clock. I don’t have any power to deal with that. 
I can’t do that; the House refused. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s already been done. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — It’s out of order. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Why is it out of order? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I’ll tell you why it’s out of order. 
 
Order. This is section 83, Rules and Procedures, Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: 
 

A motion that the Chairman leave the Chair shall always be in order, shall take precedence of 
any other motion and shall not be debatable; such motion if rejected cannot be renewed unless 
some intermediate proceeding has taken place. 

 
Well, I think we have maybe designed an escape hatch for our problem here if I can put it in that way. 
We have to have a motion that can be entered in the journals in order for it to show that an intermediate 
action took place. The way we could do that is if some member moves that some other member be now 
heard. I think we could handle the problem that way. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I move, seconded by the member for Qu’Appelle, that we hear from the member 
for Estevan. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Do you want to write that motion up? 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — It’s okay. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is the committee ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the committee to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Motion agreed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’ll call on the hon. member for Estevan for a few brief words. 



 
April 3, 1980 

 

 
1472 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to wish all the members in the House a very happy Easter. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I think that’s a very appropriate speech and I would wish you 
and through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members of the House my apologies for the small conundrum we 
got into here and a happy Easter, and with that intervening piece of business I move the committee rise, 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:10 p.m. 


	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Control of Price Increases
	Funds for Separate School French Program
	Negotiations with Separate School Boards
	Weight Control Clinics
	Purchase of Private Aircraft
	Union of Qu’Appelle and Regina Social Services Regions
	Western Power Grid Survey
	Development of Alberta Tar Sands
	ROYAL ASSENT
	Point of Order on Question Period
	MOTION
	HON. R. J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I move, seconded by the member for Kindersley-Tisdale (Mr. Messer):
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26
	Point of Order
	Challenge to Chairman’s Ruling
	Yeas — 32


	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26
	Yeas — 35
	Nays — 14


