






















































Hansard: March 20, 1980


(826) 827 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
March 20, 1980 

 
The Assembly at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. A.E. Mr. Blakeney (Regina Elphinstone): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to 
introduce to this House and to welcome to this House students from St. Luke School in the Elphinstone 
constituency. They are about 35 in number and they are here with their principal, Mr. James Frolick, and 
one of their teachers, Mr. Ron Szysky. 
 
I expect to have an opportunity to visit St. Luke School in April in connection with our Celebrate 
Saskatchewan presentations. I expect also to be seeing them a little later this afternoon. I hope that the 
young people who are visiting with us will enjoy their visit and find it helpful in their studies. We 
welcome you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Regina North-East): — I would to welcome to the legislature a group of 23 
students from the Haultain School. They are Grade 8 students. They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Marchuk. I hope that their visit today to the legislature will be another good experience in life, and 
particularly help them out in their social studies. 
 
About a month ago I had an opportunity to visit Haultain School. It is always an interesting experience 
to visit that school, particularly because of some of the activities they have going on in the cultural area. 
They put on an excellent concert. When I visited the school I presented them with our Celebrate 
Saskatchewan buttons. This afternoon I hope to visit with them a little later and present them with a 
book on the pictorial history of Saskatchewan. We welcome them to the legislature and hope they have a 
good afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. E.B. Shillington (Regina Centre): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome to the 
legislature and to Saskatchewan, 25 young people who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are 
from all across Canada, here for the Regina Church Basketball League. 
 
I hope the young people are enjoying their stay in Saskatchewan. I think we will want to wish them a 
good stay and wish them the best of luck with their athletics as well. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the Assembly, through 
yourself, the McLean-Qu’Appelle Cubs who are seated in the east gallery. There are 27 Cubs; there are 
two Scouts and they are accompanied by Bernadette Mysko, Louis Denis, Shirley Priddell, Nick Sanson, 
Christine Dodd and Annette 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
828 

Jardine. 
 
I would like to commend those who are accompanying the Cubs and Scouts. You deserve special credit 
for taking your own valuable time, and contributing to such a worthy effort. I know the Cubs appreciate 
it, and I am sure it is well respected within the community. I hope that all members will join me in 
welcoming them, and I hope it is an entertaining and interesting afternoon. I look forward to meeting 
with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. C.B. White (Regina Wascana): — I would like to join the Minister of Culture and Youth in 
welcoming the 25 people from outside the province who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, along with 
their chaperone. 
 
The young people here today are members of basketball teams from Ontario. In the city, as well, will be 
basketball teams from as far east as Halifax and as far west as Victoria. They are in Regina to take part 
in the annual spring classic, a basketball tournament sponsored by the Holy Rosary Knights of 
Columbus. 
 
Taking part in the tournament, a four-day tournament, are a total of 18 teams from outside of the city 
and 6 from Regina. Members of the Regina teams are drawn from the public and separate schools across 
the city. Half of the 22 teams, by the way, is made up of girls and half is made up of boys. They are all 
16 years of age and under. For the information of the House I would like to point out that games are 
being played each evening starting at 6:30 in the gyms at Balfour, Miller and Central Collegiates. I will 
be meeting with them in the rotunda after the question period. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Hotel Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. W.C. Thatcher (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier in the absence of the 
minister of SEDCO, who may have ducked the period — I don’t know. Mr. Premier, a couple of days 
ago a situation which you termed a hypothetical arose in this Assembly so perhaps it is appropriate that I 
go to you with this question. I don’t know whether the Premier is aware that today an announcement 
was made that the director of corporate affairs and, reportedly, the president of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan are involved in the purchase of the Hotel Saskatchewan. The announcement has come 
that the hotel has been sold to a group headed by Mr. Waters, Mr. Gundy, and reportedly, as I indicated, 
Mr. Dombowsky. My question to the Premier is this. Will the Premier in the absence of the minister of 
SEDCO assure this Assembly that SEDCO is not involved in this transaction in any way, shape or form 
— and that includes a loan, a guarantee, a grant or a letter of intent? In other words, that it is free and 
clear of this transaction? 
 
Hon. A.E. Mr. Blakeney (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to SEDCO, I have no knowledge of 
any involvement by that corporation. With respect to the preamble concerning the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, I’ll ask my colleague, the chairman, to add to what I have said. 
 
Hon. J.R. Messer (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I made it clear when the subject 
was raised in this Assembly last that certainly Mr. Dombowksy was 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
829 

not in any way involved in the purchase of the Saskatchewan Hotel. The member should be criticized for 
continuing to allude to Mr. Dombowsky’s being involved. He should be chastised for that and I again 
convey to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the present, Mr. Dombowsky, is not in any way involved in 
the purchase of the Saskatchewan Hotel. I was informed today that the purchase of the hotel has indeed 
been concluded, and that Mr. Waters, who is an employee of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
has given notice that he will be leaving the corporation at the end of the month. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the Premier has some difficulty 
in appreciating the question. Mr. Speaker, without being forced to sit down, or lose my question, I would 
like to repeat to the Premier. Will the Premier assure this Assembly that SEDCO — in the absence of the 
minister in charge — is not involved in the fashion I described. Furthermore, Mr. Premier, in light of the 
minister’s answer from a couple of days ago, in which he indicated that no formal application had been 
received and that he had no knowledge of any potential involvement of SEDCO, will you assure us that 
if SEDCO ultimately does turn out to be involved you will sack the minister in charge? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — New question, Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier is simply that, if 
SEDCO is involved will you first assure us . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 

Moosomin Judicial Centre. 
 
Mr. L.W. Birkbeck (Moosomin): — I would direct a question, Mr. Speaker, to the Attorney General, 
and I raise the question out of a concern for my own riding and in fact my own hometown. Mr. Speaker, 
It’s a very serious concern to not just my riding and my hometown but to many other areas in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s more pertinent because of this year, our 75th year. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I would direct the question to the Attorney General. It has been brought to my attention that the 
judicial centre in Moosomin will be closed as of April 30. I would like to know if there is any action you 
can take in the course of the next few days to reverse this decision? 
 
Mr. Romanow (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, no final decision has been made with respect to 
judicial centres as yet. Part of our package of announced court revitalizations will involve a 
reorganization of some judicial centres. I’d be pleased to receive the members’ representations later in 
writing, or otherwise, and consider them at that time. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It has been brought to my attention upon looking at the 
map, Mr. Speaker, that for any business that people would require from a judicial centre like the one in 
Moosomin they would have to travel at least 80 miles to 90 miles in Saskatchewan. The only one closer 
would be Virden in Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Attorney General this question. Is this part 
of, or a result of, your government’s rural development program? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, clearly the hon. member is not interested in making serious 
representation to me on behalf of his constituents on this matter. I have offered that option to him; I offer 
that to all the members of the opposite side. I tell them again, no decision has been made in this area. It’ 
is very much open and I can only repeat what I  



 
March 20, 1980 

 
830 

said earlier. If he wants to raise it with me, I would be very pleased to pursue it with him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew (Kindersley): — Supplementary to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, I 
am advised that not only the court house in Moosomin but the court house in Arcola and also the court 
house in Kerrobert (which again is a very historical court house dating back to the beginning of our 
province) are in the mill to be turned down. In fact the employees of that court house have been given 
their notice. Indeed it is the practice or intention of the government to close that court house, plus the 
fact is that the law society was never consulted nor the Kerrobert Bar Association and the town of 
Kerrobert was not advised of this. Can you indicate to the House whether or not employees of those 
court houses have been terminated? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I am not able to advise the member whether employees have been 
terminated. I would say that Arcola is in a very special circumstance. Arcola has always had a very, very 
low source of judicial activity. There have been a number of plans in the past and suggestions that 
perhaps the best way to handle Arcola would be for the termination of it. It is in a different category than 
the question of a Moosomin or Kerrobert. The plan is not to close down the Kerrobert Court house. The 
plan is to keep the Kerrobert Court House, to keep employees at the Kerrobert Court House, but there 
may be a reorganization of functions. 
 

Sale of Hotel Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Premier, are you prepared to assure this Assembly today that the Crown 
corporation known as SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) is not involved in 
any way, shape or form with the announced purchase of the Hotel Saskatchewan today by the employees 
who have been discussed earlier in this question period? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister in charge of the potash corporation has indicated, the 
word is singular, employee not employees. Secondly, with respect to SEDCO, I have no knowledge that 
SEDCO is involved. I will not give the House an assurance that I cannot give since I have no personal 
knowledge of SEDCO involvement. I would be very surprised indeed if SEDCO was involved, and I 
think by next week at this time we will find the allegations that SEDCO was involved are the same types 
of allegations we heard with respect to the Regina General Hospital and other allegations, totally without 
foundation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Supplementary question. Will the Premier assure this Assembly that should 
SEDCO be involved, and I emphasize the words should SEDCO be involved, in the light of the 
minister’s answer two days ago, severe action would be taken by the Premier against the minister? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it would be prudent to find out first whether SEDCO is 
involved, and secondly the nature of the involvement before discussing what action should be taken as a 
result of an involvement which may or may not be there but which I suggest is not there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Will the Premier undertake to advise himself as to what his ministers may be 
doing in this area, not only in SEDCO but also in regard to the co-op fund which may also be involved 
in financing of various types, whether or not it is in this case, and 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
831 

will the Premier avail himself of this information that we may address this question to him tomorrow, 
should the minister in charge of SEDCO not be in his chair tomorrow? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, if the member will allege any fact, if he will allege that SEDCO was 
involved, if he will allege that there is any measure of impropriety, then I think it would be appropriate 
to ask minister to go around and look at the facts. But when we are dealing with something that is not, so 
far as I am aware, alleged to be a fact or even reported to be a fact by any responsible person, then the 
question is whether or not we should be spending our time informing ourselves to answer every question 
which hon. members raise on no basis — and they don’t allege any basis. I think, therefore, that hon. 
members have a duty to his House to have some basis for making allegations before they ask ministers 
to investigate them. 
 

Resignation of Senior Official 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — You have just indicated that you have received the resignation of a 
senior official because of involvement in the acquisition of the Hotel Saskatchewan and that termination 
of employment would take effect at the end of the month. A very, very senior (and I suggest important 
official) has in fact given the minister approximately ten days notice of termination. Would the minister 
not admit that he has had, in fact, advance warning of the plans of the officials and misled this House 
last week as to his knowledge of what his employees were doing? 
 
Mr. Messer: — Not at all, Mr. Speaker, And again we find the members alluding to something without 
any factual basis whatsoever. I told this House last week that we were knowledgeable of a member 
having an interest in the acquisition of the Hotel Saskatchewan but there was nothing definite about it at 
that time. I do not, as the chairperson of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, run that corporation. 
The official in question has conveyed his intentions to the president of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan who has weighed the decision of that individual and decided that it would be reasonable 
for the official to leave at the end of the month, and I see nothing wrong with that. I should also point 
out to this House that there is no direct conflict of interest with an individual wanting to acquire a 
business on his own time in order to start up a business independent of his employment with the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 

Government Response to Harvest Program 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Premier, I have a news release from Information Services. Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation is the Crown corporation of some record. The heading is unfair treatment by 
the CBC and to quote, and I am referring from the quotations actually used in the press releases as to the 
reason why SEDCO did not take action against the CBC for the TV program Harvest: 
 

The problem with taking court action against CBC, according to the SEDCO statement, is not the 
strength of SEDCO’s case but the futility of burdening the taxpayers who had ultimately paid for the 
network’s inaccurate production. 

 
Is this a fair statement of the principle of the government and the reason for its refusal to take court 
action against CBC on the Harvest program? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — That’s a fair statement on the views of SEDCO on that matter. I’m not 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
832 

here to share my views. If you’re asking what the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan is, I will 
be happy to give you that. I will respond to the question. The policy is, where we the Government of 
Saskatchewan or one of its agencies, would be suing the Government of Canada or one of its agencies, 
on a matter such as defamation, libel, slander, etc.; we would seek to resolve that difficulty without 
putting each of the governments through the cost of a court action, because, obviously each is going to 
have to be paid for by the same group of taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Premier, I wonder if you would advise this Assembly what actions you took to 
resolve the differences between your government, through SEDCO, and the CBC because of the Harvest 
program? We note the extreme position taken by SEDCO at the outset that they were defamed and I 
would like you to detail now the negotiations or what efforts you have made to resolve these differences. 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks me to detail what contacts may have been made 
by any government employee with the employees of the CBC with respect to this matter. I am sure that 
he does not expect me to give him detail. 
 
I can tell the hon. member that there have been contacts between persons in the Government of 
Saskatchewan and officials of the CBC. We have felt it not appropriate to proceed with any legal action. 
That is my judgment. I don’t know what judgment SEDCO has made and we have not given a direction 
to SEDCO in this regard, as far as I am aware. I have not. I think the judgment not to proceed was a 
sensible one, in the light of the CBC’s statement in print — and I gather otherwise — that they do not 
assert that the details in the CBC story were in any way factual. They have been saying and saying very 
frequently that they are in fact fictional. 
 

Suing of Federal Crown Corporation 
 
Mr. Lane: — Would the Premier not admit that we have a highly dangerous precedent — the statement 
being that the reason SEDCO won’t sue another federal Crown corporation is because it is the taxpayers 
who would ultimately pay? 
 
Would the Premier not admit that it is a highly dangerous precedent? I propose to say that, should we be 
in a situation in the future where Eldorado Nuclear of Canada has breached Saskatchewan 
environmental regulations, the Government of Saskatchewan would hesitate to sue and attempt to 
negotiate, or would hesitate to sue . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Again, the member is getting into possibly a very hypothetical situation. I wonder if 
the member can adjust his question to the current situation. 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Would the Premier admit that this particular proposal, or position, of 
SEDCO as an aberration will not be government policy as we proceed on an area of uranium 
development being closely involved with the federal Crown corporation? 
 
Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it is I think obvious to anyone, with the possible exception of the 
member for Qu’Appelle, that a criminal prosecution in breach of an environmental violation is a very, 
very different thing than suing someone for defamation. 
 
Clearly the public ofSaskatchewan is not going to suffer any irremediable damage because SEDCO’s 
reputation is brought into question. Just as clearly, the public of 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
833 

Saskatchewan would suffer if Eldorado Nuclear did not adhere to environmental safety regulations. 
 
My earlier answer made clear that I was talking about matters of defamation. I think, with respect to 
defamation, I continue to question whether or not the taxpayers of Saskatchewan wish to see the 
Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan litigating the issue of whether or not the 
one has defamed the other. I think that is a very different question than the breach of environmental 
regulations and I can give the member every assurance that in so far as the Government of 
Saskatchewan is concerned, we will pursue the criminal and quasi-criminal law, against agencies of the 
federal Crown as we would against any citizen. 
 

Signing of Mortgages of Low-Income Housing 
 
Mr. D.G. Taylor (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Mr. Minister, it has been brought to my attention that many people 
in Saskatchewan in the low-income housing projects in this province have not had their mortgages 
signed and, therefore, they are not eligible for the property improvement grant or the mortgage interest 
rate rebate. When are you going to get around to signing these so these people can take advantage of 
these programs that you have promised to them? 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite understand 
the hon. member’s question. I don’t sign mortgages. I am wondering whether the hon. member has 
received some information that may be inaccurate. I would be prepared to discuss it with him but I really 
don’t understand his question. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, if I received it, it was from your department this morning. The case is that 
these people have to have their mortgage signed. They are paying on their homes. When that mortgage 
is signed then they are eligible for those, and until it is signed they don’t get these programs. These 
programs are to help these people. When are you going to help them so they can have these valuable 
programs? 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the hon. member has not informed himself. We do not sign 
mortgages. Anybody buying or purchasing a house arranges for the mortgage. The housing corporation 
or I as a minister, do not arrange for mortgages for people in order that they can get any kind of credit or 
benefits of any grants. It’s up to the individual to arrange their own mortgages. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Go ask the banking friends. 
 

Grant to Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne 
 
Mr. Lane: — A question to the minister responsible for continuing education. The Association 
Culturelle Franco-Canadienne received a $55,000 grant in the last public accounts, 1978-79. In light of 
statements made by one particular organization that in fact they are urging a yes vote on the Quebec 
referendum, an endorsement of separation in Quebec, would the minister give the assurance that such an 
organization is not receiving any grant from the province of Saskatchewan or if so, that it will be 
terminated immediately? 
 
Hon. D.F. McArthur (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I could not give the hon. member an 
assurance that the ACFC in Saskatchewan is not receiving any grants from 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
834 

the Government of Saskatchewan. As the hon. member has pointed out, in the previous fiscal year there 
was a grant provided to them and that is for a continuing program that they are engaged in. I am 
certainly reviewing grants before I allocate them. It is not my intention at the present to terminate any of 
their grants for utterances they may have made. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Minister, in fact you are endorsing, are you not, their actions through government 
funding and taxpayers’ money, urging a yes vote to separation in Quebec? 
 
Mr. McArthur: — Mr. Speaker, I am not endorsing the position of that organization. I think, as the 
hon. member is well aware, we provide grants to many organizations as a government. The provision of 
those grants is by no means an endorsation of the position taken by that organization, or any 
organization, on positions or utterances they may make. In the case of the hon. member’s allegation that 
I, as a result of being associated with such grants, am supporting them in their statement is clearly 
ridiculous. I think statements made by all members of this side on this question clearly show that 
statement is ridiculous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Administrators for Lakeside Nursing Home (Wolseley) 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — I’d like to ask a question to the Minister of Social Services, 
and he’s not here. I hope someone else will pick it up. 
 
The Lakeside Nursing Home at Wolseley has been operating on a budget in excess of a million dollars 
and they have been without an administrator for some 10 months. I’d like to know what is the 
department doing to fill the position at the nursing home? 
 
Hon. H.H. Rolfes (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I will answer on behalf of the minister who this 
morning is in the cabinet office in Saskatoon meeting with constituents of Saskatchewan. I think the 
Minister of Social Services indicated to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley the other day that they 
did experience some difficulty in attracting a qualified individual as administrator and they are actively 
recruiting at this particular time. It was his desire, he stated at that time and he was hopeful they would 
be able to fill that position in the very near future. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Tchorzewski (Minister of 
Finance) that this Assembly do now resolve itself in the committee of finance and the proposed 
amendment thereto by Mr. Rousseau (Regina South). 
 
Mr. D. Lingenfelter (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, it is both a pleasure and an easy task to discuss the 
merits of the budget announced by Finance Minister Tchorzewski. It is a pleasure because the budget 
continues the Blakeney’s government’s tradition of sound economic management and it is easy because 
there are many merits to be discussed. The old maxim that it is much easier to praise than to criticize has 
been borne out by the performance of the members opposite. They have demonstrated how difficult it is 
to criticize something good by their inept performance. Instead of the 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
835 

constructive criticism which an opposition is supposed to provide, we have heard nothing from them but 
gloom and doom and about how bad things are — gloom and doom, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that 
every important observer agrees that Saskatchewan’s economy has never been better and that the budget 
will keep it that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are number of old sayings that come to mind when one listens to the opposition 
whining about the budget. There is none so blind as he who will not see, comes to mind and so does, in a 
country of the blind, the one-eyed man is king. So does, to err is human, to err again divine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been said about the budget’s being balanced. I agree 
that this is an important and laudable achievement by the Blakeney government, though I do not think it 
is the most important feature of this budget. 
 
Balancing the budget is a praiseworthy achievement in Saskatchewan’s case because it comes about as 
result of long-term, careful economic planning. It has been accomplished without increasing taxes on the 
province’s citizens and without cutting back on government programs and services. Because when the 
balancing of a budget becomes the be-all and end-all of a government, when it means imposing crushing 
taxation burdens and slashing essential services, then it becomes a dangerous and destructive obsession. 
 
One does not need to look very far for examples of balance-the-budget-at-all-cost syndromes. Sterling 
Lyon has given us an unpleasant example in Manitoba of what happens when social programs are 
hacked apart in the name of balancing the budget. The elderly, the sick and the helpless poor are made to 
suffer. Programs which have taken decades to build are destroyed. Lyon has given us an example of 
what happens when government slashes spending with no consideration of the effects on the economy. 
He has managed to create a recession in Manitoba while the other provinces in western Canada are 
experiencing booms. Ask any victims of the record number of bankruptcies in Manitoba last year what 
they think of balancing the budget at any cost. Even Lyons’s folly in attempting to sell out the people of 
Brandon and dumping McKenzie Seeds was probably motivated by the same obsession. No amount of 
stupidity is impossible when the sum total of a government’s economic policy is “balance the budget.” 
 
That is why I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that whether or not a budget is balanced is the 
most important feature. One must look to see whether or not the budget fulfils the government’s 
obligation to maintain and expand services to its citizens. The question must then be asked: does the 
budget provide for a growing economy and continued prosperity? Next, one should check to make sure 
that a budget does not impose any new crushing tax burdens on its citizens. Only when a budget has 
satisfied all these requirements should the question of whether or not it is balanced be asked. 
 
This budget does satisfy all these requirements and it is balanced. That, Mr. Speaker, is a remarkable 
achievement by the Blakeney government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
836 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there are many good pieces of news in this budget for the people of 
my constituency. The 13.7 per cent increase in the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and the 
inclusion of 14-year olds in the dental plan are good news for all residents of the province. Well, perhaps 
not quite all. There are a few people I mentioned earlier who seem quite upset about good news and who 
sometimes cannot quite hide their disappointment that Saskatchewan is doing so well. But putting the 
few nay-sayers and gloom merchants aside, the maintenance and expansion of government services and 
programs and the strong economy that this budget promises gives the people of Saskatchewan much to 
celebrate in their 75th year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not take the time today to review all the highlights of the budget. That has been done 
in an excellent fashion by the Minister of Finance, Mr. Tchorzewski, and several other members of this 
Assembly. Instead, I will take a few minutes to look at what the budget contains for my constituency. In 
total $6,736,000 has been committed in direct spending in the Shaunavon constituency this fiscal year. 
The Department of Agriculture will put $45,000 into grazing lease improvements and community 
pastures. Government services will spend almost $20,000 in renovating the Shaunavon courthouse. The 
Department of Industry and Commerce will contribute to store-front renovations under the Main Street 
program. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will continue its service to the Shaunavon 
constituency with a $108,000 land assembly program in Frontier. The Department of Urban Affairs will 
be contributing over $205,000 through programs including phase 2 of the community capital fund, the 
municipal water assistance board, the neighborhood improvement program as well as the community 
services contribution program. 
 
The Department of Rural Affairs will provide $1,348, 000 for the construction and maintenance of farm 
access roads and bridges. Finally, the most significant direct government expenditure in my constituency 
this year will be made by the Department of Highways. In all, 4.8 million has been committed to the 
highway department for various projects in the Shaunavon constituency this fiscal year. This includes 
nearly $2 million which will be spent on various sections of upgrading No. 13 Highway into a first-class 
interprovincial highway. Nearly $3 million was spent last year upgrading No. 13 Highways and the very 
significant expenditures planned for this year will do much to hurry along a project that will be 
welcomed by the residents of southwest Saskatchewan. Not only will upgrading No. 13 Highways be a 
great convenience for residents of the area who want to travel east or west in Canada, but it will also 
provide a real boost to the economy of the area by increasing tourists, transport and other businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when some would claim that the strains on the Canadian confederation are 
growing, it is appropriate for me to point out that the development of No. 13 Highway as a third 
interprovincial link not only draws us closer to our neighboring western provinces but it also draws us 
closer to all of Canada by providing another link in the transportation system that we are so dependent 
upon. I look forward with my constituents to the visit from fellow Canadians from both central and 
eastern Canada that developing No. 13 Highways will bring to us and to our constituency. 
 
My sentiments on the value of Canadian confederation stand in sharp contrast to the separatist views of 
the former leader of the members opposite as well as the member for Swift Current. These anti-
Canadian views have received an undue amount of publicity and I disagree with those who believe that 
we should simply ignore these separatist musings until they go away. I believe that the former messiah 
of the Conservative Party must be challenged every time he calls for the break-up of Canada. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
837 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I look across at several deep-tanned faces opposite and wonder about the effect of 
the relentless Arizona sun. There is no doubt that here are inadequacies in western Canada’s deal from 
confederation and I think every member in this Assembly would agree with that. But it’s not good 
enough to simply wring our hands and say that confederation is not working; that we should quit and try 
to substitute western alienation for western provincial alienation. I think Canada is worth a great deal 
more than that. 
 
We in the west have our grievances but it is not good enough just to complain about them. We need to 
research and document our case and then sit down and negotiate a better deal with Ottawa. For many 
months now Saskatchewan has been asking a rapid succession of Ottawa governments why there is an 
export tax on Saskatchewan heavy oil when no other forms of energy are taxed when they leave the 
country. We have asked why there is not export tax on Ontario and Quebec hydro electric power, and 
why there is no export tax on Alberta and British Columbia’s natural gas exports. In 1979 Ottawa taxed 
away 44 per cent of the value of Saskatchewan’s oil exports, and this year that figure will rise to over 60 
per cent of the value of our oil exports. Since 1970, Ottawa’s oil export tax has taken nearly $1 billion 
from Saskatchewan oil exports. This year alone that export tax will amount to more than $0.5 billion. 
 
If these figures are contrasted to those for electricity exports, a rather startling picture emerges. Since 
1979 Canada has exported $1.6 billion worth of electricity to the United States, but not a penny of 
export tax was paid on this electricity. This year alone Quebec and Ontario will collect $0.5 billion from 
electricity exports. Besides the fact that no tax was collected on electricity exports, the price that 
electricity exporting provinces are getting for their product is much higher than for oil. The British 
thermal unit can be used as a common denominator for energy to compare oil and electricity prices. In 
1970 the cost per BTU of exported electricity was twice that of oil. Since 1970, electricity exports have 
increased 10-fold and the price per BTU has more than quadrupled. As a result, revenues from 
electricity exports are now 15 times greater than what they were in 1970 and still this windfall remains 
free of any export tax. 
 
With the rapid increase in the price of oil in recent years, the price per BTU of exported oil has slowly 
begun to catch up with electricity, but the revenues gained from exporting a BTU of electricity are still 
almost twice as high as revenues from oil. As oil exports have been cut back electricity exports have 
increased and that gap will continue to widen. I hope it has become abundantly clear by now that 
Quebec and Ontario’s electricity exports would be fertile ground for Ottawa to collect an energy export 
tax on. A burden, which is being borne entirely by Saskatchewan because we export most of the oil, 
could be shared by these provinces. They are reaping windfall profits from their energy exports and 
some of that money could be used to subsidize the cost of their oil imports. 
 
Before anyone jumps to the conclusion that this is just another central Canadian plot hatched in the 
golden triangle to rip off the West, we should consider the fate of Alberta and British Columbia’s natural 
gas. Just as with electricity, the gas exporting provinces are reaping windfall profits from their energy 
exports. Just as with electricity, there is no export tax. In 1978 Alberta earned over $1 billion from 
natural gas exports while British Columbia earned $250 million. Clearly, this is more fertile ground if 
Ottawa wants to collect an energy export tax. 
 
Why aren’t they doing it? The same question keeps coming up again and again. Why 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
838 

just Saskatchewan oil? Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there is any doubt that Saskatchewan has a legitimate 
grievance over being singled out for energy export taxes. The question is what to do about that 
grievance. I don’t think it does any good at all to simply complain, or to go courting Uncle Sam. I think 
it makes much more sense to do what Saskatchewan is doing. It makes much more sense to research and 
document our grievance, and then have our Premier sit down with Ottawa and the other provinces to 
bargain a better deal. 
 
Change in the export tax situation will not come about either through separatist headline hunting or 
opposition hand-wringing. Change will come about when the most able and respected political leader in 
Canada takes Saskatchewan’s case to Ottawa. Negotiating a better deal for the West in confederation 
will be a long and difficult process, but Saskatchewan and Canada will be stronger for it. Mr. Speaker, if 
the man who led the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan for most of the last decade wants to make a 
case for separation he has every right to do it. But if he wants to make a contribution to the debate he 
will have to do some research and give us some well-documented reasons for his view. Headlines fade 
quickly but the realities and problems of a situation remain to be overcome with dedication and hard 
work. That is the least that must be asked of anyone who wished to participate in shaping the future of 
this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member for Arizona and Nipawin’s successor asked for his resignation from the 
Conservative Party, it occurred to me that his story was being made. We all know that rats tend to swim 
away from a sinking ship and a few years ago we, of this Assembly, witnessed a rare spectacle of a 
couple of rats swimming toward a sinking ship. But I believe this is the first time in history that a 
sinking ship has been observed swimming away from the rat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I digressed for a few minutes today from the subject of the budget because I wanted to 
address the important issue of Saskatchewan’s place in Canada that has arisen recently. The two subjects 
however are not totally unrelated. This budget has laid the groundwork for the strong economy 
Saskatchewan will enjoy in the 80s. That strong economy will provide us with a secure base from which 
to negotiate a new confederation and ensure that we contribute to the utmost of our potential to the 
development of a strong and prosperous and united Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and the ones I mentioned earlier, it is abundantly clear that I will be 
supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. R.A. Larter (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, the budget reply that I had prepared before was a general 
coverage of the budget as it affects the resource industries in Saskatchewan. A general coverage has 
been made in these areas by some of my colleagues. I find after listening to the budget reply of the 
Minister of Highways, as a Canadian and as a veteran of World War II, I could not with a clear 
conscience let the minister’s reply go unchallenged. I therefore will not follow the context of the speech, 
but rather will tell the people of Saskatchewan the way it is. 
 
Two members of the Progressive Conservative Party crossed the floor and are now sitting as 
Independents. The most unbelievable of all is that while sitting in this legislature as members, they 
would try to justify their decisions in a proposed joining of the United States with western Canada. I had 
considered the member for Nipawin to be 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
839 

a bit above the average cut when he convinced me to run in 1975. This adds a little more to my 
bitterness over what has happened. 
 
Like the member for Saltcoats, as he stated in his speech the other day, I too was exposed to what being 
a Canadian was all about and proudly served on convoy duty in the North Atlantic under the white 
ensign and the Union Jack. I am sure that the minister of rural affairs, for Saltcoats, shares the concern 
and disbelief I felt the other day when a member of his party, the self-proclaimed dean of the House, the 
Minister of Highways, the member for North Battleford, so crudely and cheaply displayed the Canadian 
flag on his desk. This was, I suggest, cheap politics. This is the flag that the member for Saltcoats and I, 
along with hundreds and thousands of patriotic Canadian volunteers, risked our lives to fight for and to 
defend. There is the old saying, those that wave the flag the hardest are the most insecure as to where 
they stand. 
 
I also resent the fact that the Minister of Highways cast a slur on our American neighbors to the south. I 
want to apologize for the conduct of this minister and tell our American friends that the minister 
represents only himself and some radicals on the government side of the house, when he makes 
statements like multinationals and the Mafia running the U.S.A., Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell our 
American friends that they are our best neighbors, our best friends, and our number one ally in the world 
today. 
 
Proof positive is the unguarded border that has been there ever since the start of our two countries. I was 
indeed proud to be a Canadian the day that Ken Taylor assisted the Americans in their escape from Iran. 
To our American friends I would like to say that like you, we are very proud of our country, and any 
changes for a stronger western Canada must be done within confederation. 
 
We are not without differences, but then some of our weaknesses are also our strengths. You may have 
the Mafia in the United States, but then you are fortunate in not having the only socialist government 
between Britain and Japan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Larter: — We also have a socialist Liberal federal Prime Minister in Ottawa. The trip he has taken 
our Canada on is a legacy of debt for our children and their children. To confirm true socialism at the 
federal level one only need look at the Liberal and NDP attitude toward our armed forces. Both the NDP 
and the Liberals resent one dime being spent on the armed forces. Proof positive of this is our failure to 
even fulfil our NATO commitment. 
 
I think I should tell the people of Saskatchewan, and maybe our neighbors to the south, just what the 
socialist government has done for — or I should say to Saskatchewan. The farmers of this province had 
better be aware and concerned that this government now owns more than a million acres of farmland. 
This makes the NDP government the biggest landowner in Canada. They have budgeted, in this new 
budget now, to spend another $25 million of farmland in 1980. It is quite possible that with their greed 
for complete control this could be the last decade of private land ownership in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government introduced Bill No. 42 in 1972, which chased the private oil companies 
out of Saskatchewan and stagnated this industry. The government created SaskOil and it was supposed 
to pick up the slack. They then proceeded to buy production and go through the motions of knowing 
what they were going. Then, Mr. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
840 

Speaker, to really let the people of the province think they were in the oil business, they were party to a 
sweetheart deal with Gulf Oil — 500,000 acres for exploration with this multinational at Lloydminster, 
without a tender, without a word to any other company 
 
We don’t know whether Gulf gave $1 per acre or $50 per acre, of if they will be given half of all the oil 
they find that belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. I call that a sweetheart deal! 
 
Mr. Speaker, the uranium situation is still another venture that this government has taken us on with our 
tax dollars. Through SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) the Government of 
Saskatchewan is now a partner in over 245 projects in northern Saskatchewan. Soft markets have been 
predicted for uranium until 1990, but does this government listen to these warnings? No! This is a high-
risk venture in which we, as taxpayers, have already invested over $300 million. No turning back, the 
Premier says. I say to the Premier that on this high-risk venture, you should let the private sector take the 
risks. We say that you should set the rules of the game and not be any more than a referee. We say, stay 
out of the non-renewable resource industry with tax dollars. 
 
As a government you have the power to tax up to 100 per cent on profits, therefore you can set the 
magic number that will keep the industry at a high tax level with no taxpayer investments. 
 
What about potash? Well, Mr. Speaker, this is another case of this NDP government’s direction toward 
total control of an industry. This government has bought an industry with threats of expropriation, an 
industry that was working very well. It created no more new jobs. In doing so you used the excuse that 
they did not want to co-operate, so you threatened them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the word that this government cannot seem to understand is negotiation. They understand 
confrontation, but not negotiation. In four years the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan showed profits 
of about $135 million. Our calculations show that if you had not advanced the $430 million from the 
energy fund, we would have made — that is the people of Saskatchewan — in interest alone, at least 
$193 million in this same period. This would be without investing one dime, plus the fact that the private 
sector mines would be paying a tax at a rate which you set. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to cover one more area before I take my place. I would like the people of this 
province to know of a charade that goes on in this legislature each session and that is the passing of bills. 
The government calls us members in, sometimes once sometimes twice a year to pass bills. Most years 
we pass well over 100 bills. What do these bills do? Well they affect someone’s life somewhere in 
Saskatchewan, every one of them. Now we as members wouldn’t mind going through this charade if it 
weren’t for the fact that every bill we pass places more power in the ministers’ and the cabinet’s hands. 
Why? Because after going through these bills, maybe fighting for some changes, there at the end of each 
bill the power is given to the minister responsible or to the cabinet to change anything or any part of any 
regulation in the bill. Mr. Speaker, you can see that these wide-sweeping, devastating powers make our 
jobs as legislators on bills a waste of time. Both Mr. Lloyd, the former premier, and the present Attorney 
General thought so and said so in Hansard on April 8, 1971. And this is regarding a bill that was 
introduced by the Liberal party at that time and replied to by the opposition which was the members 
opposite. It was on Bill 60, An Act to Establish an Authority with respect to Clean Environment. I 
would like to quote first of all former premier Lloyd. He says: 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
841 

I notice for example, as I understand it, the only appeal which a person who is affected by and 
dissatisfied with a decision of authority is to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council and for the radio 
audience that is the cabinet. If I am correct in that interpretation (he goes on) I suggest that this is not a 
good enough avenue of appeal. This is not adequate and this ought to be taken into consideration by 
the government before the bill is finally passed. 

 
Now, Mr. Lloyd agreed with us on these bills and I will go on and tell you what the Attorney General, 
who was sitting in the opposition that time, had to say about it with regard to the ministers’ names being 
on the bill: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the government for the introduction of the legislation but I do have two or 
three observations which I wish to commend to the consideration of the government which in my view 
would strengthen this type of a bill. It is noticed throughout the bill, particularly in section 14 where 
the powers of authority are set out, there is a repeated clause of: ‘the authority may with the approval 
of the minister.’ (This is the one we object to and he was objecting to it then, and he goes on and says), 
this appears particularly in subclause (e) which says, ‘ The authority may with the approval of the 
minister engage the services . . . where with the approval of the minister may establish a task force of 
persons again with the approval of the minister, undertake public educational programs.’ And as I read 
the bill what concerns me about it is there appears to be a much stronger wedding between the Clean 
Environment Authority and the minister responsible than I think is really desirable. 

 
Those are quotes and these two people, very respected people in those days, were espousing your views 
that they didn’t think the minister of the cabinet should have that much power in bills and certainly we 
agree with them. We would like to know why they have changed their minds? I’ll tell you why. More 
and more government control with orders in council and less and less power to the Legislative Assembly 
and to us as members. This is exactly what is happening. This government does not respect this 
legislature otherwise there would be very few orders in council and less and less power to the 
Legislative Assembly and to us as members. This is exactly what is happening. This government does 
not respect this legislature otherwise there would be very few orders in council. 
 
I would also like to make mention of the environment this government in its venture into uranium has 
also insisted that they should administer the environment. I would like to quote from Hansard what the 
Attorney General when he was sitting in the opposition had to say about the government being involved 
in industry. I would like you to pay attention because at that time told exactly what our views are today: 
 

Suppose, using my hypothetical example, the cabinet is very pro-industry minded, feels that the need 
for job employment in a particular area outweighs the need to preserve and to protect the environment, 
in that example, government is caught in a conflict . . . or may industrialize the province on one hand 
as opposed to the need to keep the province’s environment clean . . . why should the government be 
put necessarily in that type of position? (This is the quote of the Attorney General when he was 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
842 

in opposition. And I go on). The former leader of the opposition talked about that and he also raised 
the question of the legal appeal, the civil rights aspect of it. That is something I would concur in, but 
as far as I am concerned where there is a choice between preserving the environment and promoting 
industry, I’ll come down on the side of preserving the environment. 

 
This is what the Attorney General said in 1971 and now they are coming down on the side not of 
preserving the environment but going ahead with exactly what he said he didn’t want them to do. I 
would tell the people of Saskatchewan, and also our American friends to the south, that this is what 
socialism is all about — total control of people’s lives. If you think I’m fooling, come out to a 
Progressive Conservative political meeting in Saskatchewan. If you see a civil servant or a union person 
present at these meetings he will tell you he is inviting kamikaze. Exaggeration? Not in the slightest. 
They fear for their jobs and for the promotions. Why? Because it’s a fact of life. I will not support this 
program deception. I will support the amendment. 
 
Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina Victoria): — Mr. Speaker, I am once again pleased to enter the debate on 
the budget for the fiscal year 1980-81. I compliment the finance minister on his presentation. First, I 
would like to recognize the fine people in my constituency, Regina Victoria. I wish to express a sincere 
thank you for their confidence and devotion, and I look forward to serving them for many years in the 
future. 
 
The budget placed before us is a balanced budget with a surplus. It is a sensible budget. I suppose we 
can say balanced budgets are not household words across this country. Let’s look at it carefully to see 
what this financial document does for the Saskatchewan people. We first of all look at the health 
financial aspects of the budget. Health costs under SHSP (Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan) will 
receive a 13.7 per cent increase, bringing it up to $301.6 million. What does this mean? Well, it says that 
medicare will continue. A free card will be issued to every person in this province, young or old. It 
means that we will still have free doctor and hospital care. It continues to promote free chiropractic 
treatments. It continues to give prescription drugs with a nominal charge. It continues free testing eyes 
for those needing glasses. It continues and expands the free dental care plan for children now up to 14 
years of age. It increases the funding for the cancer foundation by 16.3 per cent. What about local 
government, the cities, towns, villages and rural municipalities? I say a very generous plan is earmarked 
for all local governments. Let’s look at it. Through revenue sharing the city of Regina will receive 
additional dollars as an unconditional grant for current expenditures towards its mill rate. The budget 
also provides $100 per capita for all municipalities over a five-year period. Regina will realize over $16 
million over five years. We’re building rinks, swimming pools and other recreational and public 
buildings. It gives Regina money for the building or roads, sewage and water facilities for the future. 
These kinds of moneys will generate work programs that will continue to create full employment. These 
are generous grants, Mr. Speaker, and I have yet to hear someone out there say thank you. 
 
Generous grants are again indicated for our educational and school systems for youth and adults. The 
capital grants for our school systems have been outstanding since 1972 by this government, when you 
think of the paltry amounts given before that. For once teachers receive adequate salaries and security, 
through pension and other fringe benefits, and decent schools in which to teach our youth. 
 
The budget continues the expenditures for the property improvement grants of $230 to home-owners; a 
$375 property improvement grant to farm owners is continued; 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
843 

$250 to small individual licensed businesses is still in the budget; property rebates for senior citizens are 
still being given, up to $460 for urban residents and $605 for a farm home; the rebate of up to $115 per 
year for renters is continued — this will now include senior citizens living in the public highrise 
apartments; the home repair grant of up to $650 still exists and can be applied for every five years. I 
hope that councils and school boards will spend their generous grants wisely over the years. 
 
Canada, particularly Saskatchewan, has an immense resource potential. We can talk about the increasing 
activity over the next decade for potash, oil, heavy oil, uranium, coal and other minerals, but the main 
and primary industry will always be agriculture. Many forecasts indicate there will be a 30 per cent 
increase in grant production by 1985. The farmers must be paid proper prices for the production of these 
commodities. The present prices are not sufficient to cover their costs. Farmers are becoming more debt-
ridden as time goes on. Security for the farmer should be the slogan for the ’80s and that can only be 
achieved if they get a fair share of the national income. It is the only way to maintain the family farm. 
 
Other ways in which we can give greater security to the farmer — well, the Crow’s Nest rates must be 
maintained at all times. The present crow rates are worth $350 million a year to the prairie farmer — 
$200 million to Saskatchewan farmers alone. We have much to lose if the crow rates are not continued 
in perpetuity. The crow rates have protected the grain producers in Canada from the price gouging to 
which our American grain growers are subjected. Farmers at Havre, Montana, I am told, are now paying 
$1.50 per hundred weight to ship grain to the west coast. From Shaunavon it costs our farmers only 13 
cents or 13.5 cents a bushel to ship wheat to the west coast or Thunder Bay. In other words, farmers in 
Montana pay over six times more than Saskatchewan farmers to ship their grain, which means they pay 
anywhere from 80 cents to 90 cents a bushel. 
 
I urge the farmers to beware of the branch line abandonments. A university survey indicates that 124 
communities could have a direct loss of $100 million if their elevators are abandoned. 
 
Another mark of security for farmers and farm income is orderly marketing. This can only be achieved 
by the continuation of the Canadian Wheat Board. To make things more secure it should also include all 
grain marketing. To show how important the agricultural trade is to Canada, the exports rose to 6.1 
billion, or an increase of 26 per cent in 1979, making a trade surplus of 1.4 billion. Let’s keep 
speculation out of farm production and income. 
 
It appears that we are in for greater production of our oil and gas resources. I believe we haven’t even 
touched our resource is this area, as will be seen in the future. We should be punching holes in the 
ground for oil and gas as if we were looking for water wells. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker — We should do more with our Crown company than we are doing now. In other words we 
in Saskatchewan must become completely self-sufficient with out energy needs as soon as possible. Our 
coals and gas resources should be utilized to the fullest I the production of electrical energy because this 
could be the answer to our agricultural, industrial and heating needs for many decades. Solar energy is a 
long way off but exploration must be continued. We must have sound spending habits in our province. 
Development of our resources should be in the forefront. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
844 

But let’s not forget about our people in Saskatchewan. With those lucrative returns we should not 
overlook social measures for the betterment and security of a good quality of life for our people. We 
must always see that we have full employment and a good family income to meet the needs of our 
growing costs. Continued good health and welfare programs are needed. A complete dental care plan is 
overdue for all of our citizens, and I may say we can afford it. 
 
I am pleased to see that the minimum wages are being raised regularly. We must see that these are 
constantly monitored so that those on fixed incomes are not caught in the inflationary squeeze that is 
putting so many below the poverty line. Wage earners must be paid a proper salary for their hire. Our 
party believes in the working man, the farmer, the small businessman and the professionals as the 
mainstay of our economic base. Let’s keep a watchful eye for their protection. 
 
What about senior citizens? They too are now being caught in the inflationary and cost-price squeeze. 
Their incomes are gradually being eroded. We must look to the federal government for overall pension 
increases. They need it now. They certainly have my full support. I suggest we in Saskatchewan set up a 
permanent, special economic team to monitor incomes for pensioners, those on welfare assistance and 
low incomes, with a view to making recommendations to this legislature every year. 
 
The pensioners today recommend and make the following suggestions as to their future. They adopt in 
principle for all Canada the idea of a guaranteed annual income, and that the same be incorporated into 
new pension policies including our province. The basic idea is to provide for every man and woman 
reaching the age of 65 years entitlement to one and the same basic pension, of an equal amount for all 
person irrespective of their previous income schedule or office held. This would do away all forms of 
means test, which in my books is an insult to the dignity of man. These recommendations form the basis 
of sound discussion and I share their views and concerns. 
 
I have said in previous budget speeches there are serious clouds upon the horizon in the country, and 
that also affects our province, particularly our finances too. What are these? Higher interest rates can 
only be termed inflationary, creating higher costs of living, creating mass unemployment, adding to the 
heavy debt of the country, adding to the cost of manufacturing goods and less exports, thus creating 
trade deficits as well as diminished revenues, increased expenditures with heavy budgetary deficits, and 
a falling dollars. In other words, it will speed up the day-to-day economic disaster. You all know the 
effects of what it is doing to the housing industry for mortgages, and the effect it has on credit for the 
purchasing of farmland. 
 
High inflation has an eroding effect on blue and white collared workers on fixed incomes who have 
nowhere to turn but to ask for higher wages, and I may say they need it. The pensioner will probably be 
hurt the most if this keeps on, and so once again a vicious financial economic circle is on its way for the 
’80s. Strong measures must be taken to salvage the dollar from becoming worthless. 
 
What is the answer? I said last year, put a New Democratic government in Ottawa. Sorry to say it didn’t 
happen. Where do we go from here? If things don’t change it can only spell serious disaster for all of us. 
With the world situation as it is and millions starving and hungry with no relief in the foreseeable future, 
with war signs and threats of 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
845 

confrontation on the horizon is certainly give a bleak outlook for all, particularly for the youth of today. 
As parliamentarians, it is our task to provide the tools to continue our good way of life in Saskatchewan 
and in Canada, but also to look beyond our borders to play a significant role for the betterment of 
mankind. This is our challenge. Even if our population is sparse, it is powerful because we have the 
resources and the know-how. Let’s accept this challenge and put to use all of our human resources as 
well as our great wealth. I am proud to be part of this legislative process in our great province, a 
province which when all of our resources are in full production will be the wealthiest in our country. 
 
What about the constitution and Canadian unit? Many proposals, Mr. Speaker, are being put forward by 
Canadians and their leaders. My suggestions to this government and colleagues here is to treat with 
caution. Do not make public statements that you cannot retract. I suggest that this whole legislature 
become a body corporate to work out details of any proposals that go forward. This is one program that 
does not belong to our leaders only, but to this House and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
With the exception of resource areas, to me there is nothing wrong with the present constitution. Under 
it we can do anything we please. I strongly recommend that no more expression of policy opinions be 
made until all facts for change are known and gone over by this House. However, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
make it abundantly clear that we must do all we can to keep this great nation together and as a part of the 
great Commonwealth of Nations which now makes up one-third of the world’s population. I am a 
Canadian, Mr. Speaker, and proud of it. Many would give much to become a Canadian today but cannot. 
No one is going to take my citizenship from me, I’ll assure you of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: — Let’s keep Canada as one great nation. Let’s keep faith with our ancestors and our future 
generations. Canada, we need you. I support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W.A. Robbins (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — Mr. Speaker, I am once again 
pleased to participate in the budget debate. 
 
I would like first, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the Hon. Ed Tchorzewski for his maiden budget speech. 
As a former occupant of that portfolio, I am well aware of the long hours and the energy and effort 
which must, of necessity go into the formulation and presentation of a budget address. The hon. member 
for Humboldt presented the speech with conviction and clarity. The content he dealt with was 
commendable and the presentation was first-class. 
 
The financial critic for the official opposition — I must digress here, Mr. Speaker, because we now have 
an unofficial opposition as well consisting of two Conservative or is it Republican? (I don’t know — 
one of the other) members. They classify themselves as Independents. In reality, Mr. Speaker, they 
should be classified as ‘Dependents’ — they are dependent on each other and that, Mr. Speaker, is not a 
very dependable position for either one of them to be in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
846 

Mr. Robbins: — The hon. member for Regina South believes implicitly, as do all Conservatives, that 
the less government we have, the better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Robbins: — I see he supports that contention, so carrying that concept to its logical conclusion 
places them in a very distinct category. They can logically be classified as ‘anarchists’ because they 
believe the best government is no government at all. 
 
Their contention, Mr. Speaker, is that you simply reduce governmental expenditures annually for a term 
of years and the private sector will automatically fill the gap and solve all the economic problems. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is a naïve and erroneous assumption. Our closest provincial neighbor to the east, Mr. 
Speaker, is Manitoba. It has a Progressive Conservative government. In fact, it becomes progressively 
more conservative with the passage of time. Old-fashioned classical economic theory taught that supply 
always creates demand and that, conversely, demand creates supply. In their view, competition is the 
prescribed remedy for an economy whether that economy is expanding or declining. Their rules are very 
simplistic, Mr. Speaker: (1) cut prices to the bone, (2) reduce wages to subsistence levels, (3) reduce 
governmental expenditures irrespective of economic conditions and somewhere at the bottom of the 
economic pit a willing buyer will match up with a desperate seller. 
 
The financial critic talks critically of what he believes about the public debt in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, he ignores the fact that the public debt of Progressive Conservative Manitoba totals $3,989 per 
capital and it appreciably higher than the per capita debt in the province. Manitoba is not, Mr. Speaker, I 
repeat, is not as economically buoyant as Saskatchewan. I am quoting from Statistics Canada, as 
recorded in The Financial Post of November 24, 1979. It shows that the population of Manitoba is 
slightly larger than that of Saskatchewan. It also shows the output, the gross domestic product of the 
province of Saskatchewan, is more than $100 million higher than it is in Manitoba. It shows, when 
taking the real growth and discounting it for inflation, the real growth in Manitoba was 15.7 per cent, 
and in Saskatchewan, 28.8 per cent. 
 
Personal income is roughly equal in both provinces and the employment rate is better in Saskatchewan, 
with higher unemployment rates in our neighboring province. Mr. Speaker, I am well aware that to 
merely quote a figure on per capita debt, without taking into account the assets acquired in the 
acquisition of the debt, is really a futile exercise. Would not one think, Mr. Speaker, that a business-like 
businessman, which the hon. member is supposed to be, would look at the assets side of the ledger as 
well as the liability side — a rather unique, unbusiness-like approach for a Conservative-type 
businessman. 
 
The opposition financial critic chooses conveniently to ignore the fact our assets, after regular rates of 
depreciation of the provincially owned institutions and resources and utilities, exceed the total public 
debt. The financial critic, Mr. Speaker, expresses concern over inflation and inflationary trends in the 
economy. That is a perfectly legitimate concern, Mr. Speaker. However, applying outmoded economic 
theories of a bygone era will not solve that problem. 
 
Profligate economic policies of our national government, under both Conservative and Liberal 
administrations over the past 25 years, assure us of paying a price for those 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
847 

past economic errors. It is an economic fact, Mr. Speaker, that we in this province cannot protect 
ourselves against the inflationary implications of large accumulate deficits at the federal level. 
Inflationary pressures outside our borders flow in over our borders. Mr. Speaker, none of us in this 
Chamber should be so naïve as to believe those inflationary pressures are all due to national 
governments and/or, international trends. Canadians will owe approximately $40 billion in outstanding 
consumer debt when the final statistics are compiled for the calendar year 1979. That is a seven-fold 
increase in the last decade. Mr. Speaker, that does not include what Canadian owe on home mortgages. 
Canadians are currently experiencing very severe economic situations, relating to renegotiation of 
mortgage rates at extremely high interest rate levels — rising rates under both Liberal and Conservative 
federal administrations. 
 
Mushrooming consumer credit is a bad omen in our current situation. We suffer from blatant 
huckstering of consumer credit, and the rather unfortunate ready Canadian response to it. Entrepreneurs 
of finance, of goods and of service, assure of us it is good for business and a stimulant to the economy, 
keeping producers producing workers working. No doubt there is some truth in that contention. Just as 
true are some ugly spinoffs — people under severe financial stress, debtors under collection agent duress 
or parading through debt counselling agencies and the courts, teetering on the outer limits of solvency 
— casualties, Mr. Speaker, of our easy credit society. Plastic poker, the great Canadian credit card 
gamble, is heading us toward economic botulism. 
 
I ask the opposition financial critic to observe the facts of the situation. A goodly portion of the rising 
tide of debt can be properly laid at the door of the entrepreneurial advertising of the private sector, so 
rabidly supporting by the opposition critic and his colleagues who occupy the opposition benches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I make some suggestions for the new Minister of Finance at the federal level? Income 
tax is our most progressive type of tax. Indexation of the exemptions is rational as it treats all taxpayers 
on an equal basis. However, Mr. Speaker, indexation of the marginal rates of income tax is irrational and 
highly regressive. 
 
The progressive theory in income tax is related to the fact that tax rises commensurate with income 
increase. Indexation of the marginal rates results in the major reductions accruing to the higher income 
earner with minimal reductions for the lower income earning strata of society. Indexation of the 
marginal rates has the least value to the lower and middle groups which are most adversely affected by 
the inflationary trends. The last indexation announced in the Crosbie budget effects savings of about 
$150 for a $15,000 per annum income earner and more than $800 for a $50,000 per annum income 
earner. Mr. Speaker, that is irrational. 
 
Additionally, high income earners have much the best opportunity of taking advantage of income tax 
breaks such as RRSP (registered retirement savings plan), MURB (multiple unit residential buildings), 
etc. Removal of indexing of the marginal rates of income tax would reduce our annual federal budgetary 
deficit by approximately $1.5 billion. We did not have it prior to 1974 and we should not have it now. I 
hope the new Minister of Finance at Ottawa will consider removal of indexation of the marginal rates of 
tax in his next budget. 
 
Our accumulate deficit at the federal level by March 31, 1980 will exceed $52 billion. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
848 

The fiscal year ending on that date is estimated to see an increase in the debt in excess of $10 billion in 
the last 12 months. This money, borrowed at currently high interest rates, balloons the servicing cost of 
our cumulative federal deficit. 
 
I wish members of the House to note that there was recent issue of bonds by the federal government 
paying 13.75 per cent interest. A year ago those bonds were being sold on the market in the 11 per cent 
range. 
 
Mr. Crosbie’s ill-fated budget assumed an increase of $1.8 billion in the current fiscal year from some 
$8.4 billion in 1979-80 to $10.2 billion in 1980-81 and it indicated that the cost of servicing the debt in 
his five year forecast would exceed $14 billion by fiscal 1983-84 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are on a slippery financial slope in regard to servicing our cumulative national deficits 
and a partial solution is readily available in the removal of indexation of the marginal rates of income 
tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the financial critic wishes to remove E&H tax from some items now subject to tax. How 
realistic is this suggestion? E&H tax is estimated to raise $276.5 million in fiscal 1980-81. That is some 
13 per cent to 14 per cent of all revenues. Educational and health costs are approximately $1 billion or 
about 50 per cent of all estimated 1980-81 expenditures. 
 
He complains about gasoline taxes. Yet our tax is 19 cents per gallon or 4.2 cents per litre — the same 
rate of tax which was applicable in 1970. Tax increases on gasoline have occurred at the federal level. A 
10 per cent per gallon excise tax by a federal Liberal government, later reduced to 7 cents per gallon, 
was proposed to be increased to 25 cents per gallon by the Clark administration. The provincial gasoline 
tax and motor registration fees 10 years ago paid for 85 per cent to 87 per cent of our road construction 
and maintenance costs. Today they cover only 54 per cent to 57 per cent of those costs. 
 
The financial critic contends that we pay 5 cents (I think he said in his budget address 5 per cent per 
gallon; I presume he meant 5 cents) of our gas tax to SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) as an 
insurance premium. Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. It is 3 cents per gallon or 0.66 cents per litre. 
Conservative financial critics are consistently conservative and consistently wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I was poetic for a minute or two. I do not classify this as passionate poetry vitriolic 
verse. I trust it lies somewhere in between. 
 

One really wonders why the PCs would do so, 
And appoint as their critic a fellow named Rousseau; 
He swings with great vigor a conservative axe, 
His aim to dismantle the E&H tax. 
He claims quite unfairly that SGI rates 
Punish us all, including his mate; 
He says it’s because we built a glittering shrine 
Which we’ll all have to pay for — over a period of time. 
The truth of the matter, the cost was immense 
To pay for repair to her Mercedes Benz’ 
A cautious conservative approach on the road., 
Would not have required us to carry that load, 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
849 

Would diminish our accident frequently, I’m told, 
And permit our premiums to be invested in gold. 
Should you think it unfair that I use his name, 
I ask you to check out the cost of his claim; 
I believe it really not unfair to do so, 
Our rates really rose because of fellows like Rousseau. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is obvious the Saskatchewan electorate have long since decided they have a preference 
for ability in economic matters over agility in economic transactions. I commend them for their qualities 
of a discernment. 
 
It should be obvious to all members of this House that I will oppose the proposed amendment and 
wholeheartedly support the budget motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. E.B. Shillington (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by 
congratulating my colleague and a former desk mate, the Hon. Ed Tchorzewski, on his first budget. 
 
I felt, Mr. Speaker, the budget to be a very reasonable balance between fiscal responsibility on one hand, 
and meeting the economic and social needs of the province on the other. I am sure he is proud of his 
budget and I am sure he is equally proud to be following in the tradition set by the member for Regina 
North-East, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, the member for Biggar, and others. 
 
I can’t help speculating, Mr. Speaker, what our situation might have been had similar leadership been 
provided at the federal level. It is interesting to think on where we might have been had the Government 
of Canada had the same leadership, how much better our situation would have been, the golden 
opportunities that we would have in position to take advantage of. 
 
In speaking on the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to spend a long time on the criticisms 
levied by the opposition. Indeed, I may say (and I say this, I suppose, in part to you to my colleague, the 
Minister of finance) that many of the member seem to make a speech without making any criticism at 
all; many of them seem to go out of their way to avoid talking about the budget. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, there is no higher form of praise to the Minister of Finance than when a member of 
the opposition gets up and can’t find anything critical to say. 
 
I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, with a personal observation — one which stems directly from my 
activities for the past several months. 
 
One of the delights of the Minister of Culture and Youth is the amount of time he travels in rural 
Saskatchewan. In an attempt to give the widest possible representation to my department, my office and 
my government, I travel from one corner of the province to the other, from grassland to parkland and 
over part of the shield itself. In making these trips one travels on behalf of sports, recreation, culture, 
heritage properties, libraries, Celebrate Saskatchewan, arts — and the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more I travel, the more I marvel at an aspect of Saskatchewan the total value of which 
is too little known and too little appreciated. I refer here to our system of 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
850 

volunteer service — volunteers who work for the betterment of life in Saskatchewan, and do so for one 
reason: love of the citizens and love of their community. 
 
I have been to openings of scores of community centres, curling rinks, hockey arenas, community halls, 
in which it was volunteers who raised the money, volunteers who raised the money, volunteers who 
poured the concrete, raised the walls, set the arches and then after it opens up, volunteer to run it daily, 
to open up the door and to operate the canteen. 
 
The affairs of our local libraries are assisted by volunteer workers and volunteer member boards. In 
hundreds of Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, there are successful programs for Celebrate 
Saskatchewan being operated entirely by volunteers. I won’t embarrass the members opposite by 
comparing our Celebrate Saskatchewan program to that in our neighboring province. But, we have 
volunteers striving in the old-fashioned, co-operative way to improve their hometowns and their home 
areas. Not only do they make the plans and carry them out, Mr. Speaker, long after the bunting has 
blown away, long after the last home-coming visitor has left, the same volunteers will be tidying up, 
writing reports and doing the thing they do best, volunteering for a better Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that we have honed volunteerism to a fine art in this province is evident by Telemiracle. 
Indeed the high art of volunteerism is the basis of Telemiracle which is truly a miracle, as a small, 
scattered, largely rural population supports the world’s largest telephone canvass. I know all members of 
the House will want to join me in congratulating the Kinsmen, I know equally they will want to join me 
in congratulating the volunteers of Saskatchewan who make it all possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As an observer of the volunteers of Saskatchewan, I want to extend a vote of thanks 
to those tens of thousands of workers who do so much to improve life at a local level. As I reflect on the 
massive impact of their labors, Mr. Speaker, I regard them as ordinary people doing extraordinary things 
by co-operating together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my examination of our cultural program by referring 
to something that can only be described as a Saskatchewan speciality. I refer of course to our provincial 
library system. We know for a certainty that no other province can match it. I doubt that any other state 
in the U.S. can match it, or anywhere in Europe. As for its acceptance, Mr. Speaker, let me say the 
success of any library is to be found not in the titles on the shelves but rather in its usage and its 
circulation. Here the news is all good. Not only do we have a literate and informed electorate but the 
usage of libraries has been increasing rapidly on a per capita basis. In this province the libraries are a 
growth industry. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, our commitment to the library system stems from our adherence to equality. 
Equality means that no matter where you live in this province, even if it is at the end of a trap line, 
through the mails you have available to you the co-ordinated services of a regional library system. 
Perhaps a brief digression here, Mr. Speaker, may serve as an example of what I mean. 
 
One of our regular library patrons is a livestock breeder near Weyburn who is engaged 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
851 

in bison-bovine hybrid research. Even for a topic as exotic and limited as that, our service through its 
arrangements both inside and outside the province is able to locate and trace the necessary research 
material. In Saskatchewan good libraries aren’t just available in the cities, they’re available everywhere. 
They are an important element in the equality of opportunity we seek for all residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is in recognition of the expanding library service and its expanding usage that we were 
able to in the last year to increase the total grants to municipal and regional libraries by almost exactly 
$0.5 million. Along with the increased grants are increased services. A friend of mine recently, on a visit 
to France, had cause to reflect on all of this. When he returned he told me that the library system in the 
city of Regina is better than the library system in the city of Paris, a city of 8 million people. This caused 
him to reflect on the reading habits of the English speaking world. He said, and one has to agree with 
him, that reading and writing are a speciality of the English speaking world. It’s a form of art that we 
have raised to its highest level. If you were to take the 10 greatest painters since the birth of Christ 
probably none would have spoken English. Similarly, if you took the 10 best sculptors, none might have 
spoken English. But writers — probably half of the 10 best sculptors of all time wrote in the English 
language. We English speaking read and write with a passion that is distinctively ours. In the English 
speaking world, Mr. Speaker, we never the printed word as we manifest the collections of literature, 
periodicals, and research volumes. In England and many communities the most distinctive modern 
landmark is the public library. I am proud to say that in rural Saskatchewan today we reflect this 
thinking. Far-sighted municipal councillors meet the public demand for learning with modern, attractive 
and efficient library buildings to meet the growing public demand for books of all types. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a general presentation of this type I try to proceed with as few statistics as possible, but 
there’s one of such importance I want it in the public record. In recent years prudent budgeting has made 
it necessary for us to hold the line on increased library grants. This year, however, we are giving the 
recognition to libraries and books and the library system as a key factor in the intellectual development 
of a million provincial residents. This coming year, library grants will be increased by 7.5 per cent — a 
level I’m sure will be welcomed by all those in the library system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I never cease to be amazed at the explosive growth of interest in 
cultural affairs for the people of Saskatchewan. A hundred years ago the culture of this 0.25 million 
square miles that we know as Saskatchewan, was mainly Indian with the barest traces of outside 
influences from Metis, both English and French, who scratched out a rough existence as traders, 
trappers, and voyagers. Beginning at that point of about a century ago, in 1880, the first of the most 
venturesome settlers were literally squatters on the open acres in the Northwest Territories. 
 
What followed then is a story well known to all of us as the greatest mass migration in the history of this 
civilization. More than a million settlers came to the prairie provinces from eastern Canada, the British 
Isles and Europe, and almost half-a-million came north across the border from the U.S. The obvious 
impact of this, Mr. Speaker, was that the land was settled, towns were formed, a system of government 
established, and a new society grew up. The not so obvious impact was a veritable cultural explosion 
which resulted from the meeting and the mingling of representatives of perhaps 100 distinct races, each 
with a strongly identifiable culture. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
852 

Mr. Speaker, in that formative period when the unwritten law was either work or starve, when 
conditions were primitive, when the time of each member in the household was fully occupied in 
keeping food on the table — not only was there little time for cultural pursuits, there was little time to 
appreciate the culture of others. There was perhaps little time to reflect on a cultural phenomena — that 
in the remarkable social experiment we call Saskatchewan, a distinctive culture of our own was being 
formed. When I refer to culture in this sense, I’m taking the broadest possible application, the meaning 
which touches on the lives of a million Saskatchewan residents. When people ask me what I mean by 
culture, what I use is not a dictionary definition but, rather, an interpretation, one created by that great 
English essayist, Thomas Carlyle. Mr. Speaker, it was almost a hundred years ago when Carlyle said: 
 

The great law of culture, let each become all that he was created capable of being. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in recent years I have had many occasions to reflect on how appropriate the Carlyle 
comments became. Today, in 1980, with a period of settlement well behind us, with food on every table, 
with shelter for each family, a tax base in the production of our farms and natural resources, the people 
of Saskatchewan have something almost unknown to their grandparents — leisure time. It’s in leisure 
time, Mr. Speaker, that one of the certain indicators of social maturity occurs. 
 
In this regard, the people of Saskatchewan are capable of passing any test ever created. Today in this 
province there are more people making better use of more leisure time than I believe you’ll find 
anywhere in Canada. We engage in healthful, recreational activities, such as jogging, curling, baseball, 
or handicrafts, or, as so many are doing, writing the local history of our communities, or increasingly 
using books from an excellent library system, or coaching or assisting in organizational sports, or 
participating in one of a dozen other callings designed to meet the critical definition of culture — that it 
represents an improvement, an improvement in your mind and an improvement in your physical well-
being. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to address myself to those activities which are culture and appear in a purer 
sense. In this regard we have a broad program indeed, including support for the arts, heritage resources, 
multiculturalism, Museum of Natural History, the Western Development museum, community 
museums, etc. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it became obvious to us during 1979 that we were making progress 
on so many different fronts that we would benefit from a province-wide assessment through which we 
might match specific programs against specific needs. And what brought this to mind was a cumulative 
total which astonished me when I first saw it, and astonished me still. In the past year, Mr. Speaker, 
through the grant programs which assist cultural groups, my department paid out $785,000 to 1,100 
recognized groups and associations. With a view to determining what this province’s long-range cultural 
aim should be, we established the cultural secretariat to give us a detached appraisal of provincial needs. 
When the report is in hand, Mr. Speaker, I’m convinced it will make compelling reading for all residents 
of the province. When this secretariat was organized and given its single-year tenure, its mandate could 
be described as a subject of rapidly growing interest. We have a heritage rich in values and payments. 
This province is blessed with a plenitude of artists, musicians and writers, a surprising number of whom 
can and do compete on a world level. A distinctive Saskatchewan culture is emerging. We have to 
preserve it and reinforce it and strengthen it, to protect it from being overwhelmed by the culture of our 
friends to the South. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
853 

Mr. Speaker, this study was underway at mid-year and those who are conducting it have conducted 
literally thousands of interviews. Perhaps a year from now my comments on this subject in the budget 
debate will be based on a new cultural program, one based on the stated cultural needs of this province, 
needs stated by the people themselves. Mr. Speaker, no one could discuss the culture of Saskatchewan 
and overlook the activities of the members for Nipawin and Swift Current. What they advocate is what 
the rest of us seek to avoid and that’s union with the United States. Here I take no disagreement with the 
comments made by the member for Estevan. Most of us do regard those from south of the 49th parallel 
as our friends. The mistake I think the members for Nipawin and Swift Current have made is that merely 
because we are friends with someone doesn’t mean we want to live with them. What they advocate, and 
their support (I say, Mr. Speaker, I have been surprised that they have any support at all) comes not from 
those who wish union with the U.S. (I think that is a very small group) but those who are angry and 
disaffected with the Canadian confederation — disaffection we might call western Canadian 
nationalism. We have Quebec nationalism, and now it appears we have western Canadian nationalism. 
This frustration needs redressing; something must be done about the freight rates, something must be 
done about the economic imbalance in this country, the right of provinces to develop their own 
resources in their own way and be protected and preserved. In this respect the people of Saskatchewan 
are fortunate, indeed, to have someone of Allan Blakeney’s calibre leading them. Disaffection needs 
redressing; it does not need to be fanned. This anger and frustration needs to be met; it does not need to 
be encouraged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I listen to the two Independent members, and as I listen to the Progressive Conservative 
opposition who lose no opportunity to suggest to the Premier that he is not being strident enough in his 
demands on western Canada, they all begin to sound a bit alike, I ask all of the opposition members to 
ask themselves whether this country needs its regional differences and frustrations fanned and 
encouraged or whether we need a more proper look at Saskatchewan’s place in confederation — the 
kind of thoughtful, sincere review taken by the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone yesterday, the 
Premier, who I thought struck a brilliant balance between speaking on behalf of western Canada and 
recognizing the legitimate needs of Canada as whole. 
 
As for the ongoing program, Mr. Speaker, our activities include the study of two major projects about 
which you may hear more later. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I hesitate to interrupt the minister while he is making his address, but I wonder if I 
could allow a member to make an introduction? 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. A.W. Engel (Assiniboia-Gravelbourg): — I hope you will excuse me Minister of Culture and 
Youth. I am really pleased today to welcome a group of young people here from own high school at 
Lafleche, along with some Grade 12 students from Glentworth. Both classes are here together under a 
joint visit that is sponsored by the local co-ops. Mr. John Dubnick from the department of co-ops has put 
together a program where the local co-ops have sponsored and paid for the kids’ trips. They visited some 
of the co-ops in Regina and are here visiting the legislature. I thought we should take this opportunity to 
welcome them here today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
854 

Mr. Shillington: — I want to join my colleague in welcoming the co-op students. I was minister of that 
department for three years which I thoroughly enjoyed. Particularly, I want to say hello to John Dubnick 
whom I had the pleasure of working within that department. 
 

Budget Debate Continues 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As for the ongoing program, Mr. Speaker, I was discussing two projects in the final 
stages. One is the development of a new heritage act; one, I think, which refers to our coming of age, for 
it is based on the need to preserve and protect structures of cultural significance from modern economic 
progress. This project is in its formative stages. I can’t discuss the details. They’re too embryonic. I 
think I can discuss, for the benefit of all members, particularly the members opposite, the need for such 
an act. 
 
It’s been said that the greatest conservation program in the world is a prolonged recession; and a most 
destructive force to heritage properties is a boom. The greatest conservation program in the world is a 
prolonged recession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some provinces in Canada with Tory governments that have some excellent 
economic preservation programs. We live right next to one, Manitoba. These provinces with 
governments that seem to try induce recession with a mindless adherence to 19th century economic 
doctrine don’t’ really need a heritage program — they don’t feel much pressure. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
is Saskatchewan with an NDP government. We are in the midst of buoyant economic times brought 
about in part by far-sighted development policies of the NDP — and there’s real pressure here. 
 
The second new venture, Mr. Speaker, will be a major museum policy — one in which this government 
will outline its official recognition of the cultural value and the social value of the many community 
museums which have sprung up in recent years. 
 
Just before passing into the area of heritage, I want to mention briefly the Western Development 
Museum (WDM). Mr. Speaker, we have, in the Western Development Museum, one of the finest 
collections of its kind in Canada. This museum has the potential to be one of the finest museums in 
Canada or elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to note in this budget funding to the WDM has 
increased significantly. I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say we’re well on the way to seeing the WDM 
reach its full potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me introduce the activities of our sports and recreation branch by saying its rapidly 
expanding activities cover all ages of our residents and all areas of our province. Its influence in the 
health of sports and recreation activities can be found in the recreation games for the handicapped, 
operated by department employees directly or indirectly through sports governing bodies and other 
sports organizations, and provided with grant funds through which our many talented community 
volunteers are continuing to recruit volunteers. 
 
Just a couple of highlights from the sports program, Mr. Speaker. I refer here to the 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
855 

Western Canada Summer Games in Saskatoon — superbly organized in a record short period of time. 
Saskatoon picked up the games on the rebound from Victoria after the parsimonious government of that 
province had withdrawn the funding. In the scant few months, the games went forward with military 
precision and great spirit. A great credit to Saskatoon; and Saskatoon was a great credit to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that in the next budget, we’ll be extending similar 
accolades to the city of Estevan, host of the 1980 summer games. 
 
A word on lotteries, Mr. Speaker. I recognize it’s somewhat early to engage in a scathing denunciation 
of the new federal government. Perhaps I’ll be forgiven if I do just that A brief history of lotteries might 
be in order, Mr. Speaker. The provinces, not the federal government, developed lotteries in the early 
’70s. Manitoba developed in 1970 its lottery commission. We developed lotteries under the aegis of 
SaskSport. Alberta and British Columbia did likewise. Out of that grew the Western Canada Lottery 
Foundation and the interprovincial lottery. 
 
The provinces developed this field and this is the norm. The provincial or local governments around the 
world run lotteries. There’s a practical reason for this. The manner in which lotteries are conducted, the 
kind of lotteries allowed and the aggressiveness with which lotteries are marketed are matters of 
significant local concern. These decisions should be made at a local level and not at the federal level. 
Thus, in Switzerland, Germany, the United States and I think all other federal states, lotteries are 
conducted by local or provincial governments. And this was the case in Canada during the first half of 
the ’70s. Out of the field, however, came the Trojan horse in the form of Loto Canada. The excuse of the 
federal government for getting in to the lotteries was to assist the province of Quebec, and I think it’s 
fair to say the other nine provinces concurred in this goal. It was done on the strict assurance, Mr. 
Speaker, that once the funding from the Olympics was over, the lottery would be wound up. The 
legislation enacted by the Parliament of Canada reflected this. Thus Loto Canada was limited so that it 
would be wound up on August 31, 1979. 
 
But the flesh proved weak. The federal government, seduced by money so painlessly raised, announced 
in 1978 they were tearing up their agreement. Any attempt to resolve the dispute with the former 
minister, the Hon. Iona Campagnolo, proved fruitless. Thus we had the absurd situation where two 
levels of government were competing for the same lottery dollar. What’s wrong with competition? the 
hon. members opposite may ask. Perhaps I could explain my opposition by analogy. Would you approve 
both levels of government competing to sell liquor? I doubt you would. You would say that 
governments by encouraging people to purchase their liquor rather than competing governments’ liquor 
would be encouraging people to drink more. Lotteries, like liquories, need no encouraging. 
 
It may pacify the members opposite to know that all this changed on May 22, 1979. So many on this 
side of the House have had a good deal to say about the Tory suicide squad who operate in Ottawa as 
they do here, Mr. Speaker. What about self-destructing on issues such as Petro-Canada and the 
Jerusalem embassy issue? Each of us, I think, have our own list of issues upon which we feel that 
government invited defeat. But on the issues of lotteries, the PC record is exemplary. Within two months 
of the election we had signed an agreement turning Loto Canada over to the provinces. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
856 

I was enraged, therefore, a week ago to hear the Hon. Gerald Regan, Minister of Sport and Fitness, 
declare that he’d be reviewing the agreement to see if he had to turn Loto Canada over to the province, 
and if he did, whether or not the federal government could start up a new lottery. I find that an 
outrageous attitude, destructive of what that government espouses — co-operative federalism. Surely 
one of the assumptions upon which co-operative federalism must be based is that various levels of 
government will deal with each other with honor and keep their word. I think it’s just been assumed that 
various levels of government would not tear up agreements. 
 
That assumption is implicit in our constitution although I’ve never developed any expertise at 
constitutional law. I am fairly confident that there is no way we could enforce that former agreement. I 
doubt we could get an injunction. I doubt we could get damages. It was just assumed by our forefathers 
that various levels of government would deal with each other in honorable ways. However, John A. 
MacDonald and the fathers of confederation reckoned without the present Liberal government, for the 
federal government is looking for a loophole telling minister privately as they have, that they don’t care 
what we agreed to — they are tearing it up. They are going to resurrect old wounds and old wars. 
 
Just one final word on this sorry affair, Mr. Speaker. Anyone who believes the new Liberal are any 
different than the old Liberals, who were defeated on May 22, doesn’t sit where I sit. As the member for 
The Battlefords so ably said: 
 

All the intervening nine months of Conservative government did was to make that incredibly bad 
Liberal government look good. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, another highlight in our year in sports and recreation was SaskSport 
officially coming of age. At last the branch with thousands of supporters and adherents felt their 
activities come to fruition through establishment of a permanent home. The land titles office building 
was dedicated to a new purpose. It became the administrative centre for SaskSport. It also became the 
repository for the SaskSport Hall of Fame. I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that the executive director of 
the sport and recreation division of the Department of Culture and Youth, Bill Clarke was inducted into 
the Hall of Fame last year. 
 
Strictly speaking, Mr. Speaker, I think his induction was based on the years he played with the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders — years of great distinction and many of them. As he has said on occasion, 
when he left people were joining the team who were in diapers when he started his career. I would like 
to think, Mr. Speaker, as well, that his many yeas of dedicated service to the sport fraternity as executive 
director of the sport and recreation division played a key role in this very high honor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suppose that is what one might call a general overview of our departmental affairs. What 
of the future? Who knows! But in the field of culture and youth the general direction will be the same. 
We will continue to assist people to improve themselves so that in the words of Thomas Carlyle, each 
may become all that he was capable of being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying, I will be supporting the budget and voting against the amendment. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
857 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. J.G. Lane (Qu’Appelle): — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with pleasure that I join the 
budget debate. The opposition has expressed on numerous occasions its opposition to the budget; in fact 
it is a second and third mortgage on the future of Saskatchewan citizens. The debt load incurred by the 
government opposite in the last five years in horrendous. How a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
resources and the potential should have to go into such massive debt is beyond comprehension and it is 
not sound fiscal management. 
 
The fact that we have virtually squandered away a heritage fund, so that we have approximately $60 
million left out of over $1 billion, is shameful. I don’t consider, Mr. Deputy Speaker, governments 
which are afraid to give marketing studies necessarily can justify their call for assets. I believe that 
governments have an obligation — a moral obligation — to be more forthright and table the study to 
prove to the people that those assets are sound; that the future potential is a good one and that it is no 
good to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars of the taxpayers’ money merely to try and justify 
government activities, but not spend the equivalent amount of money to prove to the people of 
Saskatchewan that investments in uranium are sound. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had two very vigorous and different positions taken on the role of western 
Canada within confederation and I am sure all members heard both the Premier and the member for 
Nipawin articulate those positions. Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this rather historic session of the 
legislature, I would like to articulate the Progressive Conservative position. The Progressive 
Conservative Party has a history of fighting for and defending a united Canada. We are proud of this 
role and apologize to no one for it. Indeed, the party has made a committed effort and committed policy 
to fight for and strengthen the regions of Canada. The Progressive Conservative Party today, is Canada’s 
only truly national party, with elected representatives from every province and every territory in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — In Saskatchewan, the Progressive Conservative Party has been the political vehicle for a 
man known as one of Canada’s most loyal and most patriotic citizens: John George Diefenbaker. To 
attempt to leave the impression that a member of the Progressive Conservative Party is not a Canadian is 
an insult to every Progressive Conservative member and support in every region of this country. 
 
As I stated, Mr. Speaker, we have recently heard two positions on Canada and confederation, and 
Saskatchewan’s position therein — one diametrically opposed to the other. One is the extreme position 
of the member for Nipawin, advocating the dismemberment of Canada and joining the United States, an 
option I do not believe will be taken seriously by many. Then we have the equally strong and vigorous 
position taken by the Premier, a position which was a strong defense of the status quo. 
 
Why does the Premier so strongly defend the position of a strong central government? It would seem the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is prepared to implicitly assume and accept the right of the 
federal government to challenge and direct our resources. For example, Mr. Speaker, I point to his 
acceptance of the national government’s right to possibly force development of uranium, should the 
people of Saskatchewan speak otherwise. That was referred to in this Assembly on Tuesday. For 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
858 

example, he quietly accepts the national government’s right to influence the development of our oil and 
gas so he has to bargain with Ottawa for benefits from our resources. He starts with the premise our 
resources are negotiable, not with the premise the resources are our resources. Mr. Speaker, I think it a 
sorry day in Canada when the Premier of Saskatchewan says the province may have to agree to less than 
it would like (and this is on the oil find) because the alternative would be a settlement imposed 
unilaterally by the federal government. What has our system come to, Mr. Speaker, that a government 
has to back off from a strong position because of a fear of a federal government? That is not the system 
of confederation we in the Conservative Party envisage. 
 
We don’t agree with a system that says Saskatchewan must give up resources for fear of an attack by the 
federal government. The status quo was argued so vigorously by the Premier is part of the status has to 
be asked, why? And I think the reason is obvious. The Premier is part of the status quo on confederation. 
He has been Premier since 1971; he has no choice but to defend the existing structure’s inequality 
because he functions in it and will not necessarily benefit by change. He has to defend his actions over 
the past nine years. He must justify and defend why a situation has developed so that in Saskatchewan 
two MLAs sit today as separatists; a situation that has developed where there is anger and frustration in 
western Canada (the anger and frustration is so evident in Saskatchewan); a system that has led to strong 
regional differences; a system that has led to threats against the very existence of confederation; a 
system that has led to tears in the very fabric of confederation. 
 
As a Premier he has been a part of and a participant in the very centralist system which is today to be 
found so sadly wanting. As an active player in confederation and its actions over the last 10 years, the 
Premier is part of a system which is today in jeopardy a system which today has failed to bring equity 
and justice and fairness to a significant region of Canada, that of course being western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Blakeney and his government administration have no choice but to defend the status 
quo. To do otherwise, Mr. Speaker, would be an admission of failure. Therein lies Saskatchewan’s 
dilemma. On careful review of the Premier’s remarks of yesterday, I note he made no new proposals for 
dealing with western alienation. The Premier’s speech made no one reference to a proposal for taking 
the West’s issues and concerns to our national government. He acknowledged with concern the 
impatience of westerners but only the impatience of westerners. He made no proposals. No proposals 
after nine years of being the Government of Saskatchewan, no proposals after nine years of 
federal/provincial conferences, no proposals after nine years of dealing with our western provincial 
allies, not one proposal in that historical debate which started yesterday. He made a defence and a 
defence only of the status quo. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, in light of the Premier’s comments of yesterday, what does western Canada have to 
do to get action? Grant Devine and the Conservative caucus recognize there is strong western alienation 
and are sympathetic to the reason for that alienation. The Conservative caucus recognizes western 
separation is a real and deep concern. The Conservative caucus believes the West has no effective means 
of communication to voice its concerns and dissatisfaction to our national government. The 
Conservation caucus believes our existing national government cannot and will not be able to relate to 
the concerns of western Canadians because it neither understands nor relates to western Canadians. The 
Liberal Party in western Canada is in no serious way perceived 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
859 

as a vehicle to deal with western concerns. That is not a recent phenomenon, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
subscribe all of that to the present leader, Pierre Elliot Trudeau. That same problem existed under Lester 
Pearson. Certainly though, I believe the Prime Minister of Canada has exacerbated the problem by 
attitude, by his actions and by a lack of comprehension and understanding of western Canada. 
 
We reject separatism and the western separatist movement. The Progressive Conservatives also reject 
the status quo as articulated by Premier Blakeney . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — . . . and his support of a strong centralist government. The Progressive Conservatives in 
Saskatchewan under Grant Devine have continually proposed and today more than ever propose and 
believe in a third option — the option of opportunity for western Canada and Saskatchewan within 
confederation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — We believe western Canada has the ability, economically and intellectually, to solve many 
of its own problems, be they transportation or the lack of an industrial base, metrication and agriculture, 
or financial development. We believe we can solve those problems in western Canada by developing 
anew that spirit of co-operation and self-reliance, the very attributes that built western Canada. We 
believe the Premier, rather than confronting our other western premiers, should co-operate with our 
other western leaders. 
 
We believe western leaders should establish a vehicle and lines of communication with each other to 
build on our strengths and no isolate the differences. We believe the western Premiers must stick 
together — work together to resolve the differences for national unity and to be able to confront the 
national government with one voice on vital issues — a voice of strength with economic and political 
power behind it. 
 
I would rather work with and negotiate with a Peter Lougheed, or a Sterling Lyon, or a Bill Bennett, 
than have to negotiate alone with a very powerful central government that has a historical record of 
dividing and isolating the provincial governments within a region. 
 
We’re not suggestion that there will be agreement on all issues. And we’re not suggesting that there will 
not continue to be differences of opinion with our western neighbors. But the Progressive Conservative 
caucus believes negotiations and consensus or agreement prior to the negotiations with Ottawa or with 
Ontario, or with Quebec, or with the Maritimes will give western Canadians strength in our position. 
We, as westerners, have more in common with western Canada and we say let’s build on that 
commonality. 
 
Already in this session we have seen more attacks on the Lyon and Lougheed governments than on our 
national government. I quote the Minister of Highways from yesterday referring to the separatists, 
asking whether or not they are the advance guard for Lougheed and a new western Canadian party — 
the stalking-horse as it were. And I’m ashamed to hear, Mr. Speaker, the deputy leader endorse that 
attack on the Premier of Alberta as being something less than a Canadian. We reject that position of the 
government opposite. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
860 

The NDP has compromised with Ottawa on national energy funds which will cost the people of 
Saskatchewan $2 billion over the next 10 years. And I’ll repeat that, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite didn’t hear that. The NDP has compromised with Ottawa on the national energy fund which 
will cost Saskatchewan people $2 billion over the next 10 years. The premier said he would agree to 
take less than he would like. That’s the Premier of Saskatchewan. The NDP has agreed to proceed and 
agree with the blended price for oil, a position recommended by Canada’s major oil producing province, 
our immediate neighbor. Mr. Blakeney has again further compromised the West’s bargaining position 
— not a credible position for a have-not province. 
 
The Premier argues that now is the time for compromise and conciliation with Ottawa. Progressive 
Conservatives in Saskatchewan say now is the time for the West to stand together and to stand firm 
against a strong centralist government. We believe in a confederation, Mr. Speaker, so that eastern 
Canada need not fear a strong West, and we believe, Mr. Speaker, in a confederation where eastern 
Canada begins to respect western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — We believe that there is another way, an option of opportunity for western Canada, an 
option of unity of spirit in western Canada. If western Canada does not begin to work together, the 
central government will continue to deal with the western provinces one by one which will only weaken 
our position and continue to increase western alienation. 
 
We believe than an attitude of co-operation among western Canadian leaders will give western 
Canadians an outlet for their legitimate frustrations and their legitimate anger. We believe it will be a 
positive force for western development, growth, and enrichment. Such a co-operative attitude and spirit 
will allow us to bargain with the centralists from strength. 
 
It’s the only way to bring home to eastern Canada and to the Ottawa government our concerns, our 
frustrations, and our aspirations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of us in the Conservative caucus is proud to be Canadian, but we’re also proud to be 
western Canadians and we won’t apologize to anybody else in Canada for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, to no one in this province for being born and raised in this 
province and I will not be a second-class citizen because I am born and raised in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — And I am angry, as most westerners are, with a system of government which causes 
alienation and disharmony. I’m angry with a national leader who prefers confrontation to conciliation. 
I’m angry with a national government which campaigns by pitting one region against another. But I’m 
just as angry at our provincial government, which fights other western provinces, and at a provincial 
leader who prefers to work against other western leaders rather than work with them. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
861 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — I am angry with a provincial government whose strongest attacks against eastern 
institutions are reserved for the Supreme Court of Canada which cannot defend itself. 
 
We believe the western provinces should immediately commence discussion amongst themselves on 
changes in our national political structures to recognize regional imbalances and to alleviate regional 
imbalances. 
 
We believe the western . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, the Deputy Premier says, never heard of the 
western premiers’ conferences. We’ve heard of it but we say that with the western premiers’ conferences 
the benefits are negated when, in this Assembly, from one day to the next around this province, the very 
people attending that conference are attacking the other premiers and attempting to discredit them within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the western provinces should begin discussion among 
themselves to bring about internal structures to solve our transport problems. We believe the western 
province should commence discussion to establish their own immigration and employment goals. We 
believe that the western provinces should commence discussion to consider how best to develop and 
take advantage of western Canadian markets. 
 
To say that a strong western Canada would weaken confederation puts the lie to the rhetoric of members 
opposite. If Canada can accept Quebec with its own language and culture, basically its own foreign 
policy, Canada should welcome then a strong, vigorous, vibrant and exciting western Canada. We reject 
the proposals of the member for Nipawin, but we also reject the status quo of the Premier and the 
members of the government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — We believe that the West must stick together, that the West must work together. We do 
not suggest there will be agreement on all issues or that there will not continue to be differences with our 
western neighbors. But we believe that negotiations and consensus or agreement prior to negotiations 
with Ottawa or Ontario will give us strength in our position. Let us, as we say, build on the commonality 
of interests and aspirations in western Canada. 
 
We believe we are not a colony of Ontario or Quebec and we want to make it clear we are not second-
class citizens. We believe we must tell Ottawa and eastern Canada that we in western Canada want, and 
insist upon, control over our resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — And with control of our resources we are perfectly capable and willing to take into 
account the national interests and legitimate interests of other provinces. Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that 
opposition to a bad bill that gets rejected by the Supreme Court of Canada is something to be, in fact, 
proud of. And, Mr. Speaker, if the government opposite hadn’t sat down and co-operated with Alberta, 
B.C., and Manitoba 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
862 

for a unified position they would have accomplished greater control over Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we have a belief that the people of Canada, if given the control of their 
resources and take control of their resources, will make constructive and positive decisions in the 
national interest, and with concern for the national interest. We, western Canada, must insist that making 
those choices is part of the acceptance of the responsibility of being Canadians. We will not accept the 
imposition of obligations of confederation by a centralist government. We believe we are mature enough 
and responsible enough as a people to offer and co-operate with what’s agreed upon to be the national 
interest. We resent and oppose as do all Conservatives — and I think all members of this House — any 
effort by the centralist government to take control or our resources either directly or indirectly in so-
called national interest. We, in western Canada, are mature enough to use our resources willingly in the 
national interest, but we don’t need to be told what to do. The Premier says ‘one Canada’ and we agree. 
But we differ as well and say there must be a new Canada — a Canada that recognized and respects a 
new, mature and strong western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lane: — A new Canada that believes, Mr. Speaker, in strong regions — strong regions that can 
contribute in a positive way to a new spirit of confederation. I would hope the members opposite would 
see fit to see the advantages of western co-operation rather than confrontation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. W.E. Smishek (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Speaker, we just heard from the 
president of the political party — obviously an angry young man, an angry young man because as 
president of the political party he has been the cause of part of the demise of the Conservative Party 
during the last federal election he is also the cause, or partial cause, of the ongoing defections He feels 
guilty. Remember it is just a matter of four years ago he started the defection movement from one 
political party to another political party. You know I almost sense that he’s on the move again in making 
this speech. Now it was interesting when we watched the leadership campaign of the Conservative Party 
that the president of the PCs chose not to run. He knew that as possible political leader he stood no 
chance in getting his party anywhere so he took the other prize so he could have influence with the Clark 
administration. But that didn’t last very long. In fact, as a lawyer, I understand he wasn’t even able to 
negotiate enough agreement to keep himself in good stead for a while. 
 
Now the hon. member is criticizing the Premier. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the PC president 
would be criticizing Premier Blakeney, a man who is recognized as the outstanding political leader in 
this country; a man who is recognized as the outstanding premier of this country; a man who has given 
outstanding leadership in his nine years of service to this province and to this country. I invite the 
members opposite to take a Premier has attended at the federal-provincial level. I happen to have had the 
privilege to attend quite a few federal-provincial conferences, and I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker, 
whenever Allan Blakeney rose to speak at that conference the place was hushed. The people wanted to 
listen to him. The media people wanted to ensure that 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
863 

they heard what he was saying, because whether it was on the matter of the Canadian constitution, 
whether it was on the question of resources, on the question of taxation or health or energy, 
Saskatchewan was the province that provided the leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I think some of the members of the Assembly are being ridiculous. 
Members will all have an opportunity to contribute to the debate if they have something to contribute, 
and there will be an opportunity for everyone. I understand we’re sitting this evening. There should be 
lots of time and if the members can keep their interjections and collect them, perhaps they can put them 
in the form of a speech later on and contribute them toward this debate. For the time being I’d appreciate 
it if we adhered to the rules of the House and allowed the Minister of urban Affairs to complete his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. No, obviously I’m hitting a sensitive nerve when 
the people opposite can’t take it. They know full well that Premier Blakeney has given outstanding 
leadership, not only to this province but to this country, in practically every question of importance to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to the people of Canada. Mr. Speaker, I was interested in hearing the 
member for Qu’Appelle setting out some kind of a position on resources. Well we know where the 
Conservatives stand on resources. They want the resources to be controlled and owned by the 
multinational corporations. That’s what they wanted in the case of potash. That’s where they stood on 
oil and practically every resource, Mr. Speaker. We know where the Tories stand on resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by congratulating my colleague, the Minister of Finance, Hon. Ed 
Tchorzewski, for bringing another progressive budget. In reading and listening to the media and the 
public reaction, I think the people seem to be well pleased with the budget and there is a good reason for 
this reaction. The budget does much to protect people from inflation and strengthen our economy. In 
fact, personal taxes and charges for the average Saskatchewan family are the lowest in Canada. Yes, 
they’re even lower than Alberta and all the other provinces, Mr. Speaker. On the other hand, this 
government has continued to survive and finance impressive levels . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The members of the Assembly, I think, should know that we don’t refer to members 
by their personal appellation in this Chamber. We refer to them by the constituency they come from. I’m 
as generous as anyone in allowing members to make the odd comment across the Chamber, I don’t think 
that harms the rules being applied, but I think when members are consistently calling out across the 
Chamber the member’s name rather than the constituency, or the portfolio the member holds, not only is 
it a disruption of the member’s speech but it is also contrary to the rules of this House I don’t know how 
many times I have to get up and remind the members of this, but all members should be aware of it, if 
they have at least glanced at the rule book. You should be aware that you are not supposed to do that. It 
doesn’t add anything to the debate I ask members to try and adhere to that. 
 
Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we have an impressive record of providing services to 
the people in health care, education, housing, social and recreation. We have good parks to enjoy, good 
highways and roads to travel on, and first-class schools with dedicated teaching professionals. Our 
senior citizens are better care for than anywhere else in North America. They receive the benefits of 
publicly financed health service, nursing home care, senior citizens housing programs, school tax 
rebates, an income support program, and a home repair plan. We have virtually full employment in 
Saskatchewan. Our labor laws, for protection of workers 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
864 

are superior, and our average wages are among the highest in Canada. The business community is also 
doing well in Saskatchewan. The construction, manufacturing and retail trade sectors are performing 
well and our resource industry is the envy of Canada. 
 
Despite the ups and downs in agriculture, caused by forced beyond our control (like weather, 
international market and prices) our farmers are doing well. They know that they have a government in 
Regina that is on their side, a government that stands ready to help, a government that has done much to 
improve all aspects of or diversified agricultural industry. Our young people know there is a good future 
for them. There are excellent job opportunities and education opportunities for them right here in 
Saskatchewan. They can also enjoy the many good recreational facilities — parks, boating and skiing 
facilities to skating rinks and theatres. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have reason to celebrate 1980 and the budget presented last Thursday will 
only strengthen their trust and faith in this province and in this government. The only people who are 
unhappy are the 15 Tories opposite. Not only are they unhappy, they are angry. They have reason to be 
unhappy. They lost the federal election. They lost seats in Saskatchewan. Their former leader deserted 
them. Their new leader is on the outside looking in. None of the sitting members wants to resign for fear 
they can’t even win a by-election anywhere. 
 
At the national level, people used to say ‘Joe, who?’ about their federal leader. In Saskatchewan, they 
are saying ‘Grant who?’ or is it ‘Grant win’ (?) 
 
Since this session opened on November 29, this is the first time I have taken part in the general debate, 
so let me join with others in this House in extending congratulations to several members of the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first to the four members who were appointed to cabinet — the hon. member for 
Lakeview, Doug McArthur; the hon. member for Quill Lakes, Murray Koskie; the hon. member for 
Morse, Reg Gross; and the hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Jerry Hammersmith — I know 
they are working hard. They have added much strength and new ideas to the Blakeney team. I wish them 
well. A special note of recognition is in order to the hon. member for Regina West, John Solomon, for 
winning the by-election last fall. As the mover of the throne speech, he has already demonstrated some 
of his ability. I am sure we will hear a good deal from him in the months and years to come. I wish him 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend my congratulations to the hon. member for Souris-Cannington on taking over the 
job as the Leader of the Opposition. He is the fifth opposition leader we have faced since our 
government took office in 1971. The pay is much better than what it used to be. However, knowing what 
happened to his predecessor, I’m not sure whether I should wish him well or should wish him job 
security. Mr. Speaker, in the light of the dwindling Progressive Conservative caucus, it is difficult for 
anyone to predict what might be happening next. 
 
I want to talk about three aspects of this budget; first, the new Department of Urban Affairs and some of 
its program and plans; second, the area of housing; third, urban native issues. Mr. Speaker, let me begin 
with urban affairs. For the new information of the member legislation will be introduced shortly to 
establish the new Department of Urban Affairs. The new department reflects the growing importance of 
our urban 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
865 

communities and this government’s commitment to them. The Department of Urban Affairs will provide 
many excellent programs and services in support of our cities, towns and villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first of these programs is revenue sharing. For 1980, the revenue sharing pool will be 
$49 million. This is almost an 8 per cent increase determined by the revenue-sharing escalator. The 
escalator reflects the performance of our four major provincial tax bases — the sales tax, the gasoline 
tax, the personal income tax base and the corporate income tax base. In a sense this reflects the growth 
of our economy. With the introduction of the escalator the three major objectives of the program will be 
met. First, we have provided urban municipalities with another major source of revenue. Since 1977, 
Mr. Speaker, grants to urban municipalities have increased 110 per cent. Second, we have strengthened 
local autonomy by providing most of the funds on an unconditional basis. Third, we have indexed the 
revenue-sharing pool to the performance of the economy so urban governments can share in our 
prosperity. 
 
Besides operating grants, the Department of Urban Affairs will provide $12 million in 1980-81 in 
unconditional grants for capital purposes. The new program will be similar to the very successful 
community capital fund which expired at the end of last year. Unconditional capital grants of $100 per 
capita will go a long way in helping urban governments finance many needed capital works according to 
their priorities, Mr. Speaker. Legislation will be introduced later in the session. As soon as the act and 
the regulation are in place, communities will receive application forms. As well, the Department of 
Urban Affairs will provide several conditional capital grants, including water and sewer projects. You 
will notice from the budget presentation and the estimates that have been tabled, the amounts have been 
increased by more than $1.4 million. Funds are also appropriated in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation — $13.1 million for urban assistance. Another $7.4 million is provide in the Department 
of Culture and Youth to extend the term of the recreation and cultural facilities construction program to 
allow communities to take full advantage of the available grants. Another $1 million in grants is 
provided in the Department of Health, for Saskatoon and Regina, to help pay for the public health 
services they provide. Millions of incremental and new program money is being provided for municipal 
operating and capital programs. I regret, Mr. Speaker, that some reports contained factual errors which 
suggested that urban programs are being cut back. This is not so. 
 
In fact, urban affairs and housing corporations will spend $160 million, in 1980-81 — up $15 million 
from 1979-80. This government is committed to making our urban centres a good place to live. 
 
Now, when we took office in 1971, operating grants to urban municipalities totalled a mere $973,000. 
This year they will total $49 million, an increase by fifty fold, Mr. Speaker. Capital grants totalled only 
$2.5 million in 1971; this year they will amount to $25 million. The development and the vitality of our 
downtown cores is a further example of our desire to improve the quality of life in our urban centres. 
 
On March 19, just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the first of the downtown revitalization projects — the 
Weyburn Square — was opened. I know that this project will be a valuable addition to the community of 
Weyburn and the surrounding area. The Cornwall Centre project will also provide a major stimulus to 
the city of Regina. Other cities are also considering plans for their downtown core. 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
866 

Mr. Speaker, for communities with a population up to 6,000, the department provides grants under the 
business district improvement program. The Department of Industry and Commerce administers the 
Operation Main Street program. These two programs will provide this year $1.2 million in grants to help 
smaller communities improve their business districts. To date, 80 towns, cities and villages have taken 
good advantage of these programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, property tax rebates are also provided by the Department of Urban Affairs. A total of $69 
million will be provided in 1980 for the property improvement grants, the senior citizens’ school tax 
rebate and the renters’ property tax rebate. In this way we are using our resource revenues to lessen the 
local property tax burden faced by Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Legislation will be introduced in this session to extend the benefits of the renters’ program to include 
senior citizens living in tax exempt accommodations, who are not receiving subsidized nursing care. 
These pioneers of society will now receive renters’ rebate retroactive to January 1, 1979. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Urban Affairs will provide grants to major urban park 
developments in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. Legislation concerning the Wakamow Valley Authority 
will not be introduced until extensive public consultations are held in Moose Jaw and surrounding areas. 
This will ensure that all interested parties have an opportunity to contribute to the plan and draft 
legislation before it is enacted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now turn to housing. In 1979, we had another successful year for the building industry in 
Saskatchewan. There were 11,700 starts recorded in 1979. They represented a 23 per cent increase over 
1978 and this year was the third best year on record. This increase in activity was recorded during a year 
in which starts throughout the rest of Canada were dropping significantly. The healthy Saskatchewan 
construction industry can be attributed in large part to the buoyant Saskatchewan economy spurred on 
by government initiatives in resource development. An indication of this is that although activity was up 
in all major centres, a substantial portion of the increase was focused on Saskatoon, Prince Albert, North 
Battleford and Lloydminster areas where growth in the resource sectors such as heavy oil, uranium and 
potash is concentrated. 
 
While the construction industry has been producing housing at near-record rates, this in itself does not 
mean, Mr. Speaker, all residents of Saskatchewan will have access to good quality housing. I wish this 
were the truth. The rapid increase in both the cost of buying a house and maintaining it due to increased 
costs, especially in energy, has made it more difficult for many low and moderate income families and 
senior citizens to afford hosing suited to their needs. 
 
The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has, since 1973, been actively involved in the construction of 
housing for our senior citizens and for low and moderate income families who cannot afford to pay 
market costs for housing. Mr. Speaker, one of our major priorities has been the construction of low-
rental housing for senior citizens. Since 1973 the government has started over 6,100 units for senior 
citizens through the public housing and non-profit housing projects. This high level of activity means we 
are now beginning to meet a major need in this area. We will continue to place priority on senior citizens 
housing. The housing corporation is also beginning to redirect the emphasis of its housing towards more 
production for low and moderate 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
867 

income families. Moderate income families are being helped through the co-operative housing building 
program which enables them to afford a new house if they are prepared to contribute some of their own 
work in building the house. The province makes available mortgage loans as well as monthly subsidies 
of up to $150 a month to assist those families who cannot afford the full mortgage payments. 
 
In addition, Prairie Housing Development, a non-profit subsidiary of the housing corporation, has been 
contributing and it will construct housing for rental purposes geared to the needs of younger families and 
individuals who are interested in rented accommodations. This program has been of major assistance to 
the smaller centres in Saskatchewan which require some rental housing but are generally ignored by the 
private developers. 
 
A good example, Mr. Speaker, of this would be the town of Frontier where the rapid expansion of 
Friggstad Industries created a need for rental housing for the employees. The company was not in a 
position to build housing requirements. Prairie Housing Development stepped in and is building 48 
rental units in that community. The introduction of an urban-native pilot housing program in ’79 will, 
when combined with the regular family public housing program and the rural and native housing 
program, make available a wide option of housing alternatives for the low-income families and 
especially low-income native families. 
 
In 1980-81, Mr. Speaker, approximately $10 million has been provided in the estimates for native 
housing. This figure is more than double what we will spend this year. We intend to increase the 
emphasis on these family housing programs in 1980. However, I am very concerned the interest rate 
policy of the former Conservative government in Ottawa and the one it appears the new Liberal 
government is also adopting, will have a major adverse effect on the housing activity this year. The 
impact on the private rental market may be especially severe, Mr. Speaker, since these record high 
interest rates have been combined with the cancellation of the capital cost allowance for rental housing, 
which made investment in this sector of the economy attractive for many investors. With the rapid 
growth we are experiencing in Saskatchewan, especially in Saskatoon, we can ill afford any drop in 
construction activities. The impact of high interest rates is seriously felt by many sectors: the building 
construction industry, the suppliers, manufacturers of housing material, building tradesmen, the list 
seems endless. 
 
Many young families are being forced to postpone buying their first home because of the high costs of 
mortgages. And other families who require improved accommodation are reluctant to take this step 
given today’s high interest rates. The co-operative housing building program and the provincial 
mortgage interest tax credit are of some assistance in this area. However, the major responsibility for 
these difficulties lies with the federal government and so should the major responsibility for remedying 
the problem. Assistance of some sort appears necessary at this time both for families purchasing a new 
home and for those families whose mortgages are rolling over this year at interest rates of up to 15 per 
cent compared to 10 per cent they paid five years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I would like to feel encouraged by the recent statements coming from Ottawa that 
the federal government has placed a high priority on assistance to home owners with interest costs, the 
past record of both the Liberal and Progressive 



 
March 20, 1980 

 
868 

Conservative government is dismal indeed. If they are going to act I urge them to act now. I urge them 
to act quickly since every day that passes simply increases the number of individuals who face financial 
hardship as their mortgages roll over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, compounding the difficulties we expect in 1980 the former Progressive Conservative 
government dramatically cut the federal housing budget for Saskatchewan. Federal housing assistance 
was cut by 33 per cent this year compared to ’79 when funding was barely adequate to meet our needs. I 
will be in contact with the new federal housing minister shortly to urge in the strongest possible terms 
that the new federal government reconsider the housing market for Saskatchewan, and provide us with 
the federal assistance which is badly needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has always placed a high priority on the provision of good quality housing 
for our low and moderate income families and senior citizens; but we cannot do it alone. The federal 
government has an important responsibility in this area which they must not be allowed to abdicate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether I can call it 5 o’clock? 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


