






















































Hansard: April 29, 1980


 
 

2395 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 29, 1980 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
RESOLUTION NO. 31 (continued) 

 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Prior to the break for dinner, Mr. Speaker, I was 
seconding the motion made by the hon. member for Saskatoon Mayfair in which he was calling for 
strengthening the role of the foreign investment review agency (FIRA). Surely that type of resolution 
before us this evening will gain the unanimous support of all concerned. 
 
I am somewhat surprised, Mr. Speaker, that there was very little debate on some of the resolutions. I 
hope on this particular resolution of the hon. member for Saskatoon Mayfair that those opposite will 
recognize the importance of the resolution and its contents and speak emphatically on it and pass it this 
evening. 
 
I think there is a lot of business to be done in this house, Mr. Speaker, and I believe this resolution at this 
particular time could well be discussed and passed this evening without any hesitation on the part of the 
opposition or this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, current events reinforced the urgent need for Canada to regain control of its economy. All 
three of the American-owned multinational giants in the auto industry — General Motors, Ford and 
Chrysler — are responding to the slump in the United States economy with layoffs in Canada. Surely 
that in itself, Mr. Speaker, will gain support from those opposite for this resolution. 
 
Ford of Canada by this summer will have laid off about 5,000 workers which is 35 per cent of its work 
force; Chrysler of Canada has laid off 5,000 workers or 40 per cent of its workers; General Motors of 
Canada has laid off 5,000 workers or 40 per cent of its 33,000 workers; American Motors has laid off 34 
workers at its Point Edward, Ontario Jeep plant. 
 
The layoffs are a classic example, Mr. Speaker, of the dangers of allowing large foreign corporations to 
dominate our economy. The financially struggling Chrysler parent company has asked the United States 
government for $1.5 billion in loan guarantees. At the same time Chrysler of Canada has its hand out to 
the Canadian government (and I understand that decision may possibly be made this week) for loan 
guarantees and subsidies of $550 million in exchange for an estimated $1.2 billion investment in Canada 
over the next five years. Chrysler is in effect, Mr. Speaker, asking Ottawa to finance what are 
foreign-owned enterprises in Canada, to in effect pay for the further entrenching of foreign ownership in 
this country and nothing is being done about it in so far as FIRA is concerned. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, Chrysler has decided to close its Windsor engine plant at the end of the 
current model year for three years to retool for a new fuel-efficient V-6 engine. The gradual reduction of 
production of larger engines already caused 2,000 layoffs by last August. Only 391 workers are still 
working at the engine plant and a total of 3,700 of 14,500 Chrysler auto workers are now laid off in 
Windsor. Surely, Mr. Speaker, this is justification enough for unanimous support of this resolution this 
evening. 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2396 

Even if the Canadian government is prepared to pump money into Chrysler there is no guarantee 
Chrysler will not go bankrupt. Canada could lose huge sums of money for loan guarantees as well as the 
jobs already in jeopardy. The Ford layoffs, Mr. Speaker, at the Windsor engine casting plant are layoffs 
from a plant that has made money for Ford this year. Extra production will be transferred to the Ford 
plant in Michigan which is losing money at this time. 
 
Incredibly Ford received a grant of $68 million to build the plant ($28 million from the Tory 
government of Ontario and $40 million from the federal Liberal government). The grant contract does 
not mention the word job, let alone guarantee increased employment, and that really was to be the 
intention of some of the foreign investment review agency’s terms of reference. 
 
When announcing the cutbacks in Dearborn, Michigan, Harold Poling, executive vice-president of Ford 
Motor Company, described the cutbacks and layoffs as tough medicine. Sound familiar in Canada? Why 
would Ford want to close down a new and profitable plant in Canada to increase production in a money 
loser in Michigan? 
 
Two American economists, Mr. Speaker, have investigated the phenomena of why plants are shut down, 
whether it be in the United States or Canada or wherever it may be. Professors Barry Bluestone of 
Boston College and Bennett Harrison of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology found that a 
disproportionate number of closings could be tied not to large corporations or small businesses but to 
decisions by giant conglomerates. More surprisingly Bluestone and Harrison said many of the 
businesses folded by the conglomerates actually were making a profit up to the day of their forced 
deaths. A corporate and especially a conglomerate closing, the economists recently told the house 
committee on small business, is more likely to be the result of a planned strategy to increase profits than 
is the closing of an independently owned business which may well constitute a truly involuntary failure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does a conglomerate profit by closing a business, especially a business which is 
making money? I would suggest there are many ways. The economists explained this in one particular 
instance. They note that conglomerates are formed not to produce goods but to produce money. While a 
7 per cent to 10 per cent profit on invested capital might be a healthy return for a normal business, a 
conglomerate’s managers might think anything less than a 22 per cent return isn’t worth their time and 
trouble so they close the plant and write it off. Again, Mr. Speaker, does that sound familiar? 
 
Another conglomerate tactic, the economists said, is to siphon off the profits of a plant to finance other 
management priorities. They describe how U.S. Steel’s 1970 annual report showed only 28 per cent of 
the company’s capital investment budget went to steel plants themselves. The major share, Mr. Speaker, 
$500 million, went into the company’s chemical division and toward the purchase of shares in 
Disneyworld, a Florida condominium and hotel project and a chain of shopping malls. That was $500 
million from U.S. Steel. 
 
They told how Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company, then the nation’s eighth largest steel-making 
firm, was purchased in 1969 by a New Orleans-based conglomerate, the Lykes corporation. The 
acquisition was financed mainly by a major loan package which Lykes promised to pay out of the Sheet 
and Tube Company’s very substantial cash flow. During the next eight years Lykes used Sheet and 
tube’s cash to amortize that debt and to expand its non-steel operations. Lykes was clearly pursuing a 
pattern of planned 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2397 

disinvestment in Sheet and Tube. The economists told the House committee there was no question that 
was their plan all along. Consequently, they said, most financial analysts agree Lykes must bear 
responsibility for a good deal of the failure at Youngstown. They quote Business Week magazine as 
declaring that the conglomerate’s steel acquisitions were seen as cash boxes for corporate growth in 
other areas. 
 
Bluestone and Harrison offered a short course in how to wreck a business for profit. Mr. Speaker, when 
I look across the way and listen to some of the intelligent remarks, I do believe many of the Tories 
opposite have taken a short course in how to wreck a business for profit and that’s exactly what’s going 
on. 
 
Both large and small companies may run down their older facilities. And again, Mr. Speaker, does that 
sound familiar? They do that by not replacing worn-out machinery and by using the savings, often in the 
form of depreciation allowances, to reinvest in other branches of their own firms, in other businesses, or 
perhaps in municipal bonds which are paying off better or have dividends. Companies may actually 
close the other facility down altogether, putting the land and or buildings on the market, selling the 
machinery for scrap or to other branches or other firms, Mr. Speaker, multi-plant, multi-store, and 
multi-office corporations may gradually shift some machinery, skilled labor, managers, or simply 
marketing responsibilities from their older to their newer facilities located in some other city, state or 
country. I emphasize that last word, country. Thus the older facility may remain in operation at least for 
the time being but at a lower level of activity. 
 
Although a multi-branch corporation may not physically remove any of the older plant’s capital stock in 
the short run, the profits earned from that plant’s operations are re-elevated to corporate headquarters to 
its newer facilities for use in new product development, for instance. Such milking of profitable plants is 
especially common among conglomerates whose managers have sometimes described these acquisitions 
as cash cows, according to Bluestone and Harrison. Such milking, the economists said, increase the 
chances that a business will run into trouble in the future. It is for reasons like these that companies like 
Ford abandon plants, then talk about tough medicine to the unemployed and to those people who are 
now walking the streets throughout North America. 
 
It is not surprising that when faced with reduced sales, U.S. auto companies automatically choose to lay 
off Canadian workers or abandon Canadian plants first. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, where is FIRA, where 
are the regulations that made FIRA come into being, and where are the Conservatives and the Liberals in 
this particular regard? Canada can bring relatively little political pressure to bear on them. 
 
In the present crisis the U.S. auto manufacturers are bargaining a threat of lost jobs for government 
subsidies. Even the hon. member for Qu’Appelle may possibly understand that. The recent experience 
with Ford should prevent the government from making the same mistake again. But taking into 
consideration the example of both, the Conservatives and Liberals there’ll be no question probably the 
same mistake will be made again. The disastrous effects of the layoffs in the auto industry are one more 
example that the Government of Canada does not have control over the national economy. Multinational 
corporations based outside this country are almost unaffected by monetary and fiscal policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the structure of the country’s industry so dominated by branch plants, 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2398 

makes the prospects of a Canadian industrial strategy a fruitless exercise. In most industrial areas 
Canada has remained a colony reliant upon others for research and development, export opportunities, 
management decisions, and most other characteristics of a modern industrial state, Canadians cannot 
blame the businessmen of the United States and other countries for grasping the opportunities presented 
by the national sell-out. But the federal government cannot continue to turn a blind eye to the problem it 
has created. It must introduce measures to induce Canadians to repatriate their economy, and must 
establish tough and clear rules of the game for foreign companies operating in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting that any company operating in a respective country will respect the rules 
of the game if they are clearly spelled out. Clear rules of the game are spelled out but they are not being 
enforced whatsoever. This should be FIRA’s job. Up to now, as the member for Saskatoon Mayfair has 
pointed out, FIRA has been a miserable failure. Up to now FIRA has been both unable and unwilling to 
deal with the increasing drain on the dollar caused by dividend payments, assets transfers, licensing 
agreements, and many other situations. Actually the real position at this particular time of FIRA is to sell 
off more of Canada’s assets. The people of Canada deserve an explanation of how, with this kind of a 
suicidal foreign investment policy, the federal government hopes to ever introduce effective policies for 
industrial development, energy self-sufficiency, or control over the Canadian dollar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting there are ways of tackling the repatriation problem, if governments are 
prepared to move, which I unfortunately doubt. As long as we have either of the two old-line parties in 
power. It’s very doubtful whether or not there will be any repatriation of the Canadian economy. The 
Government of Canada should recognize it no longer exists in the world of Adam Smith or laissez-faire. 
It should purchase direct control of resource and manufacturing industries, particularly, Mr. Speaker, 
those which promise growth and export markets, technology, employment and resource upgrading 
potential. 
 
The joint venture route with existing owners may be appropriate in many cases. I say to those members 
opposite, if they pay attention to the joint venture route being used by this government at this time, they 
will realize that there is a possibility. Canadian governments have shown they can successfully control 
such industries when and if they want to. Canadian de Haviland and Polysar are all successful examples. 
But Canadian governments have also shown how to make such ventures fail. Under a Tory government, 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, one of Canada’s greatest independent industrial projects, the Avro 
Arrow was sabotaged through government incompetence and indecision. The Tories’ attitude towards 
the Arrow as a government-supported project, destroyed the base on which a Canadian aerospace 
industry could have and should have been built. Other free enterprise governments do not appear to 
share Canadian Tory scruples. They are directly involved in such industries, of particular note is France 
which has also many complex controls on foreign investment and is one of Europe’s fastest growing 
nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would refute the conventional wisdom that private enterprise can always run 
commercial enterprises better than governments. Rather than accepting such doctrine, let its proponents 
demonstrate that a higher proportion of Crown corporations go bankrupt than do privately-owned 
businesses. I ask those opposite to stand up and try to suggest that there is a higher proportion of Crown 
corporations going bankrupt than privately-owned businesses. 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2399 

AN HON. MEMBER: — See, there you are, not one of them stands up. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — The Government of Canada should create more instruments of national policy like 
Canada Development Corporation. Let us have three or four of them, perhaps of varying sizes and 
perhaps with mandates to operate within certain segments of the economy. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — See, they feel guilty. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — We should charge such Canadian development corporations with responsibility to 
acquire or maintain control of Canada’s growth industries to acquire the assets of the branch plants 
dominating certain sectors, with a view towards rationalizing them into efficient and autonomous 
industries to provide venture capital and management assistance to young Canadian companies so they 
are not forced to seek foreign investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada should require that a high proportion of the voting shares of 
any foreign subsidiary, perhaps 75 per cent, be placed on the market for purchase by Canadians. For 
large existing corporations, this might be phased in over 10 years. For smaller companies or new 
ventures, the phase-in period may possibly be five years. Mr. Speaker, this would give Canadians the 
option of acquiring control of their economy; this would reduce the drain on the dollar through dividend 
payments and other financial manipulations; this would reduce the flow of portfolio investment from 
Canada by enlarging the domestic capital market and thus maintaining liquidity for investors. Given 
that, many of such branch plants may not be profitable companies and therefore are not attractive 
investments for Canadians. It would be appropriate, Mr. Speaker, perhaps to reduce the risk of the class 
of shares through means such as the tax system. I think many of us remember the Carter royal 
commission and the tax system that he recommended. 
 
Since it is not the intention of Canadians to purge this country of all foreign companies and investors, 
and recognizing that they do confer some benefits to Canada through new products, technology, 
employment and exports, one might propose an option for companies not involved in exportation of 
natural resources. Mr. Speaker, this could be to allow foreign parent companies to maintain control 
subject to some conditions which could include that the board of directors must be at least 75 per cent 
composed of Canadians, none of whom hold executive capacities in other foreign-controlled companies. 
There could be a condition that there is a full public disclosure of such companies’ financial statements. 
There could be that within an appropriate time period, use five to ten years, the company will be given 
autonomy for the development, production and marketing of specific product lines within the 
multinational or organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the company does not accept such conditions, regardless of the reasons, or would not 
meet such conditions then they would automatically have 75 per cent of the voting shares placed on the 
market for purchase by Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada could, through changes of regulation of the provision of 
incentives in the taxation system, provide the means by which large holders of Canadian capital could 
direct a greater share of their investments through Canadian venture capital companies and into 
Canadian portfolio or debt investment instruments. This would apply particularly to the insurance 
companies, the mutual 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2400 

funds and the pension funds. Small and medium-sized Canadian companies are often more valuable to 
foreign corporations than to Canadians because they can take advantage of internal economies of 
production, marketing, management, overhead, etc. Taxation measures could be introduced to reduce 
incentives to foreign buyers, and to enhance their potential return and investment to Canadian 
purchasers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the success of most of these suggestions is already familiar to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Crown corporations returned more than $350 million in profits to the provincial treasury between 1944 
and 1977, with only $2.3 million in losses. 
 
The Crown corporation SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has the lowest auto insurance rates 
in Canada. Sask Tel and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation provide the lowest rates in Canada, and 
still return a substantial profit to the people of this province. 
 
The potash corporation, Mr. Speaker, which operates mines by itself and in conjunction with partners 
from the private sector, is an outstanding success. In 1977-78 the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
grew to be the largest producer of potash in North America, and the largest potash exporter in the world. 
The corporation’s gross sales exceeded $100 million. The potash corporation realized a net profit of over 
$10 million after paying $29 million in taxes and royalties and reserve taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this House, and the people of this province, should be proud of this success. This 
should be an example for other provinces and, indeed, the federal government to follow. 
 
SaskOil and SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) are involved to a far greater 
degree than the potash corporation as joint ventures with the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through these Crown corporations Saskatchewan’s ownership of natural resources has 
risen from 15 per cent when the NDP took office in 1971, to 60 per cent today. That shows, Mr. 
Speaker, Canadians can take control of their own economy for their own benefit. Unfortunately, the 
members opposite do not agree, nor do they agree that FIRA should move in so far as the federal 
government is concerned. 
 
Just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, the Tories opposite were complaining that SPC’s profit of $40 million 
in 1979 was excessive and that a public utilities commission be formed to review the rates, presumably 
to prevent that profit, a profit which is essential for the corporation’s future development. But, of course, 
the hon. member for Regina South doesn’t accept the fact there should be future developments of our 
Crown corporations. 
 
I can only say that either the Tories are bad businessmen or they want to destroy our Crown 
corporations. I do believe the latter applies in the majority of the cases. It is funny, they don’t object to 
profits in private industry. I haven’t yet heard the members opposite voice any concern over supermarket 
profits, or department store profits, which, for example, are up 89 per cent in 1979. Where were the 
Tories then? But why should they? That is where their party finances come from, Mr. Speaker, and that 
really calls the shots opposite. 
 
We do not need to look any further than the last federal election and the issue of Petro-Can to know 
that’s the Tory position, a position that people of Canada clearly rejected and with good reason, Mr. 
Speaker. The members opposite will be happy to know that 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2401 

despite the bungling of their federal counterparts Petro-Can can and did make a profit of approximately 
$130 million in 1977, as referred to by the hon. member for Saskatoon Mayfair. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, profits alone do not tell the whole story. Public ownership provides jobs and 
investment which stabilize the economy and creates a sense of national unity so important today. Public 
ownership prevents plants moving away to take advantage of cheap labor in undeveloped countries and 
ensures resources are developed in the interests of the people of this particular country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the foreign investment review agency under either the Liberals or Conservatives will never 
take the initiative to protect our economy or our jobs in this country. The present federal minister, the 
Hon. Herb Gray made a lot of noise when he was in government as a backbencher about Canadian 
ownership. Now he’s in a position where he can do something about it, Mr. Speaker. Time will tell very 
shortly whether or not he’s prepared to do it or whether or not he can convince his caucus that that has to 
be done in so far as giving FIRA the real tools to do the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had others expound the theory of Canadian self-determination but what has 
happened? We know there is only one government prepared to use FIRA in the way it was meant to be 
used and that is the federal New Democratic Party. I can assure you that when the New Democratic 
Party federally is elected, FIRA will be put to work, to work for the specific direction or purpose for 
which it was intended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and for those put forward by the member for Saskatoon Mayfair, I 
believe all members will surely want to speak on this this evening rather than deal with something else 
that isn’t of vital importance in so far as this county is concerned. I believe all members should support 
this resolution. I am pleased to second this motion. I urge those opposite to support it unanimously. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, it is nice to hear from one of the government experts 
in bankruptcies. Having listed several of them he forgot one in which he actively participated, one 
Golden Acres Motel which is a . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The debate has been very well in order up to this point. I just want to 
remind the member of the resolution that we are discussing at this time. It’s item 18, Resolution No. 31, 
which deals with the foreign investment review agency and doesn’t deal with the personal matters of any 
member in this House. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I believe the hon. member for Qu’Appelle knows 
full well that there was no bankruptcy when I was involved in the Golden Acres of the Fairview 
Developments. I would ask him to withdraw those statements because he knows he is speaking less than 
the truth. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! That’s not a point of order. I think it’s a point of correction of the record 
which was put on the record out of order in the first place. 
 
MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad we had one of the experts. I would just like to call to 
Mr. Speaker’s attention the numerous listings of certain corporations that were facing financial problems 
by the hon. member to which I believe a response is in order. For example, he suggested Chrysler and 
how the government should perhaps 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2402 

take it over. I think that’s what his suggestion was. As I say the member opposite is an expert in that 
type of corporation. We are glad to hear from him. I think it’s in order that we take a look, Mr. Speaker, 
at the record of the government opposite. When it talks about FIRA and the little monsters, (the FIRA 
little monsters that the hon. member was talking about) I’d like to show the hon. members opposite what 
their record is on foreign investment review. Perhaps the hon. member opposite wasn’t awake back in 
1974 or 1975 when foreign investment was a big political issue. It was the time of Walter Gordon and 
was a fad issue at that particular time. Lo and behold, the Government of Saskatchewan jumps in. It has 
an agency in the Department of Industry and Commerce to deal with foreign investment review. 
 
That’s 1974-75. I’ll show you the branch of the Department of Industry and Commerce. It’s referred to 
on page 18 of the annual report: foreign investment and intergovernmental affairs. You set up a branch 
or an agency in 1974 or 1975 but let me tell you what you’ve done with it. You can’t find it in any 
annual report since. What happened is it withered on the vine because it was no longer a political issue. 
Now the Premier is trying to make foreign investment a political issue — the only one with the 
absolutely irrational premise that the reason for the break-up of Canada, the only reason, is that 
Canadians don’t own enough of their industries. That’s the Premier of Saskatchewan. That’s the reason 
Quebec wants to separate says the Premier. Now it’s an issue again. 
 
This government remains silent on foreign investment review until it becomes what they think is a 
political issue or they want to use it for a political issue. I say you’re guilty of fad politics when it comes 
to foreign investment. Your record belies your words. In fact you’re hypocrites on the issue. In fact in 
1974-75 you gave us a great deal of verbiage. 
 
I’m going to ask leave to adjourn so I can read into the record the statements of the then minister, the 
present Minister of Mineral Resources, who had a lot to say about foreign investment. One of your 
better pictures is on the inside of the cover of this particular issue. I’m sure the hon. member would want 
to hear again, in the 1980s context, his commitments: the commitment of his government to foreign 
investment review; how much of a priority they placed on foreign investment review; how much the 
provincial government could really do in this very fundamental issue; what kind of a role the provincial 
government has had to play in foreign investment review. 
 
All of these matters were well documented before this Assembly. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, all hon. 
members opposite would dearly love to hear the commitment by the government six or seven years ago 
— they would like to have their memories refreshed of the role the provincial government could play. 
Then I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, the public would like to follow on a year by year basis what happened to 
that foreign investment review agency set up in 1974-75 and how it managed never to appear in another 
annual report of the Department of Industry and Commerce. I know members opposite would dearly 
love to hear the record in some substantial detail, a record of failure, a record of not honoring the 
commitments made at that time, a record of calling on foreign investment review only when they happen 
to think it’s a political issue without any firm, true commitment of foreign investment review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2403 

Resolution No. 33 — Confidence in Mr. Speaker 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition) moved, seconded by Mr. D.G. Taylor (Indian 
Head-Wolseley): 
 

That this Assembly no longer has confidence in Mr. Speaker: 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, regretfully I rise to put item no. 20, Resolution No. 33. I tell you at the outset it’s 
not the intention of the opposition to unduly prolong this particular debate. We will simply state our case 
and hope the question is called. I think this could have been dealt with on Friday. It could have been 
dealt with earlier today. We’re dealing with it now, and I think it is not fair. 
 
HON. R. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Stand your motions. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — All of them? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes. You didn’t tell us that when you said you would debate something. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I think it’s unfair, Mr. Speaker, that this motion be left hanging on the order 
paper — unfair to Mr. Speaker that this shadow should be hanging over his head. I refer all members to 
a publication called Mr. Speaker — A Memorandum on the Position, Powers, and Privileges of Speakers 
in the Parliaments of the Commonwealth issued by the General Council of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association, House of Parliament, in London. On page 9 of this particular publication, it 
says as it relates to Mr. Speaker’s ruling: 
 

Fourth, as precedents. The Speaker’s rulings, whether given in public or in private, constitute the 
precedents which although not absolutely binding, serve to guide subsequent Speakers, Members, and 
Officers of the House. The Speaker may depart from the ruling of a predecessor but will do so only 
with the greatest reluctance and in special circumstances. Such precedents are collected and in the 
course of time they may be formulated as principles or rules of practice which are binding. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that particular paragraph I think is in essence what we are trying to get across here today. 
I’ll get back to that shortly. 
 

Procedure and practice for criticizing the Speaker in contesting rules: 
 
Any reflection on the character or imputation regarding the actions of the Speaker may be punished as 
a breach of privilege. Criticism by Members is possible only by a substantive motion. This immunity 
from criticism and challenge, except on substantive motion, has always been upheld as essential to the 
dignity and authority of the Chair. The successful working of procedure in the House requires also that 
there should be complete confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker and not only is his authority in 
the Chair fortified by many special powers, but there are a number of conventions ensuring both that 
he is impartial and that his impartiality is generally recognized. 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2404 

On page 38, chapter 3, 117 in Beauchesne, referring to the Speaker, it says: 
 

His actions cannot be criticized incidentally in debate or upon any form of proceeding except by way 
of a substantive motion. Confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker is an indispensable condition of 
the successful working of procedure, and many conventions exist which have as their object, not only 
to ensure the impartiality of the Speaker but also to ensure that his impartiality is generally recognized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think most people are offended by challenges to authority. I think what would offend 
most people even more would be matters that would cause people to challenge authority. We talk about 
generally perceived impartiality, consistency in rulings, and I think it is important because rulings by 
Mr. Speaker are set down in record forever and they may be used as precedents in some later ruling. If 
there is not consistency there, you’re caught in the situation at some later date when you are damned if 
you do and you’re damned if you don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pulled from Hansard a few examples of what I am talking about. I would just like to read 
them into the record, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking specifically of the inconsistencies that have brought us to 
this motion today. I refer to March 8, 1979. I believe this particular item has become known as the 
budget leak debate. When a motion was put by the member for Nipawin, under rule 17, a priority for 
debate, Mr. Speaker ruled the motion out of order. The member for Nipawin said, ‘Mr. Speaker, you 
have not stated to us why the motion was out of order.’ 
 
On April 11, 1980 when we were dealing in this House with the matter of privilege with the member for 
Qu’Appelle, the Attorney General put a motion and ran into a similar procedural snag. Mr. Speaker said: 
 

I don’t regard that as a good precedent and that in order to have this motion acceptable. I would have 
to have a preamble stating that, in fact, this constitutes a breach of privilege. Then I could proceed 
with it. 

 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that is an inconsistency. On the one hand it is not for you to put the 
member’s motion in order but at some later date, as a matter of fact, about a week or so ago, it was 
indeed in order to help the Attorney General get his motion in order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 2, 1980, on a point of order raised by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, as it 
relates to a question raised by the member for Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, said, ‘I listened to the member for 
Rosthern’s question and I was unimpressed as to the urgency and importance of it.’ Likewise, Mr. 
Speaker, the same day on a point of order raised by the member for Swift Current (this is Mr. Speaker’s 
ruling), ‘I didn’t feel it was of sufficient urgency and importance to proceed further with it.’ 
 
On April 22 on a point of order arising out of question period on a question raised by the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland, Mr. Speaker said: 
 

The idea of a resolution on the order paper should not be used to cut off or prevent what a person 
believes to be an urgent question on a matter which has come up in the question period. 

 
On the one hand, Mr. Speaker, there is the rule which says, I do not see it as being 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2405 

urgent or important, and on the other hand it says, the member felt it was urgent and important and 
therefore took up 11 minutes of question period. 
 
On April 4, 1978, Mr. Lane from Qu’Appelle stood in his place and said, ‘on a point of personal 
privilege, Mr. Speaker.’ Mr. Speaker, ‘there is no such thing as a matter of personal privilege.’ That was 
April 4, 1978. On February 23, 1979, the Hon. A. Matsalla, at that time minister of tourism and 
renewable resources, rose a matter of what he called a point of personal privilege dealing with a matter 
which was covered in the Leader-Post suggesting . . . Well, the Leader-Post article was introducing the 
new legislature to all of Saskatchewan, and it introduced the member for Canora as just that, and not as a 
cabinet minister. Not only was that point of personal privilege recognized by Mr. Speaker, but it was 
added to by Mr. Speaker when he said, I wish to amend the point of privilege because the speaker (I’m 
paraphrasing) is not a member of cabinet. Apparently, the Leader-Post article had referred to Mr. 
Speaker as a member of cabinet. The inconsistency is still there. On April 4, 1978, there was no such 
thing as a matter of personal privilege. On February 23, 1979, personal privilege was not only 
recognized, but amended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I take you back to what the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Houses of 
Parliament say and what Beauchesne's says, in order for this institution to work. Consistency and 
impartiality must not only be there, they must be generally recognized. 
 
One other inconsistency I would raise, Mr. Speaker, is, on March 31, 1978. I am trying to remember 
precisely what it was dealing with. I think it was dealing with some allegations of abuse of franking 
privileges by the then leadership hopefuls of the Liberal Party. The point of order was raised, by the 
member for Qu’Appelle, that a withdrawal in the Assembly and a statement outside the Assembly 
re-opens the matter, continues the matter and makes it a whole new matter again. 
 
Mr. Speaker’s ruling was the fact that if a member goes outside of this Chamber and makes some 
statement to the press it was of no concern to him. You tie that in, Mr. Speaker, with page 12, chapter 2 
of Beauchesne's 19.3. 
 

Statements made outside the House by members may not be used as a base for a question of privilege. 
 
I think, rightly so. That was probably a good ruling. But just the other day the member for Thunder 
Creek made some statement outside the House and indeed it did come into this House as a point of 
privilege, and was dealt with accordingly. 
 
One other inconsistency, Mr. Speaker, is that of ministerial statements. On March 5, 1979 we saw the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce get up (this is page 265, 1979) and give what was simply a 
congratulatory message to the town of Melfort. It had nothing to do with him in his capacity as minister. 
Mr. Speaker has on many occasions in this House laid down the guidelines for ministerial statements. 
He has on many occasions in this House set down the guidelines for making his rulings and the fact that 
he couldn’t make rulings until after he heard what was to be said. 
 
In that particular case, in fact, after what was to have been a ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker ruled it 
was out of order. But when it comes to questions being put by members, it’s a different ball game 
altogether. 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2406 

It seems Mr. Speaker will cut a member off almost at any point in the question period, before he could 
have possibly known what the question was about or the urgency of it. 
 
I take you to April 10 of 1978 when the member for Qu’Appelle was cut off and raised a point of order, 
Mr. Speaker said, I assumed the question had run out. 
 
One further small inconsistency. On April 10 the member for Qu’Appelle asked a question to the 
minister responsible for SGI as it relates to Frank Buck and the agency thing. The minister responsible 
suggested it was a stupid question; it went unnoticed. The same question on April 15 was asked to the 
same minister as it related to a Mr. Smith. The minister again responded that it was a stupid question. At 
that time Mr. Speaker ruled it was unparliamentary and asked that it be withdrawn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now at the situation that brings us here today. It is not just the activities of the last 
week or two weeks; it’s a culmination of many small things and they all add up. They all add up and 
bring us to the situation where we have precedents to fall back on, precedents set by Mr. Speaker that 
cover both sides of the coin. You are causing that situation now where you are damned if you do and 
damned if you don’t. 
 
As for the member for Thunder Creek, the other day, April 1, 1980, Mr. Speaker cut Mr. Thatcher off no 
less than three times. Mr. Thatcher was cut off again in mid-sentence. This was in response to a motion 
asking for the withdrawal and apology of the member for Thunder Creek and no one will question what 
he said was unparliamentary. But it just may be that there could be truth in breach. He was cut off in 
mid-sentence and the first part of that sentence, Mr. Speaker, was: ‘I will withdraw them in an 
unqualified’ and he was then cut off. That was April 1, 1980, page 1346. 
 
I think the instance, Mr. Speaker, of Mr. Thatcher was a situation where emotions had bubbled over and 
it became more of an emotional and a personal argument rather than a strict application of the rules in an 
impartial and consistent manner. The record shows that Mr. Thatcher did withdraw in an unqualified 
way and he was cut off in the middle of that sentence where he was. In fact, withdrawing in an 
unqualified way. Certainly the perception could have been left, and indeed was left that Mr. Speaker was 
not acting with the consistency required of the Chair of any legislature if it is to act, or if it is to perform 
and carry out the procedures of the House in the best possible way. 
 
The final indicator, in my view, was Friday last when the member for Thunder Creek withdrew certain 
remarks in an unqualified way and Mr. Speaker said words to the effect that he was not sure whether the 
withdrawal and apology were generous enough and he would put it into the hands of the House. He did 
and I think, certainly, to the embarrassment of the members opposite. But it indicated to me a lack of 
consistency in Mr. Speaker’s ruling. The fact is the statements of the member for Thunder Creek had 
been withdrawn in an unqualified way, and Mr. Speaker chose to push it one step further, probably 
because of some personal abrasiveness between himself and the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker’s precise words on that occasion were, ‘. . . I think I will leave the matter in the hands of 
the Assembly. If they feel the apology is in accordance with the motion we have passed . . . ’ 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, is obliged to make those rulings in a consistent fashion and not jeopardize his 
image of impartiality. 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2407 

I take you back, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne's. This is where we started: 
 

Confidence and the impartiality of the Speaker is an indispensable condition of the successful working 
of procedure and many conventions exist which have as their object, not only to ensure the impartiality 
of the Speaker but also, to ensure that his impartiality is generally recognized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, convention and tradition alone are not enough. This recognition and respect has to be 
earned. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the inconsistencies I pointed out would suggest to any fair-minded 
person that the consistency of rulings and the generally recognized consistency of impartiality cannot 
exist. 
 
The fact this motion is on the order paper, and the fact that the impartiality of Mr. Speaker is not 
recognized by a very significant and important part of this Assembly, I think is a rather damning 
indictment on Mr. Speaker. I say again this institution cannot work unless the impartiality and the 
consistency with which Mr. Speaker applies the rules of this Assembly is generally recognized. Mr. 
Speaker, the fact the motion is on the table and the fact we have cited a few examples of what we 
believe to be inconsistencies in the application of the rules of this Assembly cause me to move ‘that this 
Assembly no longer has confidence in Mr. Speaker’, seconded by Mr. D.G. Taylor (Indian 
Head-Wolseley). 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, as I rise to speak to this motion, I must 
assure everyone in this Assembly that we, on this side of the House, look on this motion as a very 
serious and substantive motion. It was only after careful and well thought-out action we did present this 
motion to this Assembly. 
 
We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, all members, have a deep concern for the legislative process. 
We have every desire to have this House operate in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and 
this legislature. We have a pride in the British parliamentary traditions, as I’m sure every member in this 
House does. However, Mr. Speaker, we are elected here to legislate business of this province in the best 
interests of the citizens of Saskatchewan. To facilitate this function an important part of the whole 
process is the office of the Speaker. 
 
It is the duty of the Chair to conduct the debate of this House in a most fair and impartial manner. Mr. 
Speaker, that is the important criterion — impartiality. The office of Speaker must be impartial and also 
appear to all members of the House to exhibit that impartiality. My colleague, the Leader of the 
Opposition, has pointed out many situations where it has appeared to the members of this side of the 
House that the Chair has not been consistent, or has ruled in one way to this side of the House and has 
ruled in a different way with regard to the government opposite. 
 
I have noticed, Mr. Speaker, in our questions that many times we have been cut off before the traditional 
number of supplemental questions has been allowed. My colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, has 
pointed out areas where we feel inconsistency has taken place. I refer specifically to the situation of the 
motion at the time of the budget leak, where the Chair said it was not his role to help formulate the 
motion, and most recently the motion referred to by the Leader of the Opposition in which the Attorney 
General was forming a motion to have my colleague for Qu’Appelle 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2408 

put out of the House. The question of urgency, Mr. Speaker, has been brought to your attention where 
our member for Rosthern’s question was considered not to be of an urgent matter, but another question 
having to do with food additives and food dyes, which I suggest have been around for a long time and 
probably will continue to be, was considered to be of an urgent matter and therefor considered in the 
question period. Also my colleague for Qu’Appelle asked a question which the member for Nutana, the 
Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services, in my mind rather rudely called a stupid motion. Then when 
the question was posed again some five days later, it was ruled by the Chair to be unparliamentary. 
These are some of the inconsistencies I would like to draw to the attention of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the office of Speaker carries the authority invested in it by long-established tradition. 
However, the respect and the sense of fair play must be established and maintained by the individual in 
that position. Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to say that although you have the authority of your office, because 
of your actions and attitude during the recent sessions, and especially this past session, you have lost the 
confidence of an important and significant part of this Assembly. Therefore, it is with some personal 
regret that I feel that it is in the best interests of this Assembly that I support the motion of 
non-confidence. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I regret having to take part in a debate such as the one 
we are having on this motion. However, having been a member for over 16 years, having served this 
Assembly as deputy speaker for some of those years, having gained respect for this institution (it’s 
ability to meet our needs as legislators and thereby meet the needs of the public we are bound to serve) 
and having gained more respect for this place the longer I have been honored to serve the public in it — 
for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I feel compelled to take part in a debate briefly as much as I regret 
having to do so. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my regret isn’t because I have even the slightest sympathy for the motion, for I have 
none. In fact I couldn’t have any sympathy for the motion at all. It is all consumed on the people moving 
the motion and those supporting it. Nor, Mr. Speaker, do my feelings of regret come about because I’m 
having to rise in defence of a colleague, because I am not rising in the defence of a member for 
Westmount. Firstly, I do not believe anyone would be serious in suggesting that is what this debate is all 
about; and secondly, if anyone would be unbelievable as to suggest that, I would like to direct him to the 
records of this Assembly. They are transcribed word for word. I would direct people to that record; not a 
line or two, here or there from the record, but the complete record, that is the defence, Mr. Speaker, it is 
an ironclad defence, as solid a defence as any Speaker of this Assembly or of any other legislature in our 
country might wish in a test to his fairness, his even-handedness or his tolerance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I regret having to take part in this debate on this motion, because what this debate is about 
is the defence of this institution — this parliament, its officers, its traditions and its rules of conduct. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — In this Chamber is the last place in which I would have thought we would have to 
defend this institution. In here is the last place I would have expected to have to defend the rule of law. 
Therefore my regret and therefore my being compelled 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2409 

to speak. 
 
The rules and the code of conduct in this Assembly have been developed over centuries. Literally 
thousands upon thousands of individuals have been involved in the formation and the evolution of those 
rules. In the same fashion as our common law was developed the rules and the procedures of this place 
were developed. Precedents established from time to time, and the following of those precedents later by 
other legislative bodies, are what modified and changed those rules. The deliberate and careful 
consideration and subsequent adoption of written changes to those rules have been a procedure used also 
in the also in the alterations of the rules we accept for governing ourselves. That has been the tradition in 
the British parliamentary system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t for a moment suggest that because this has been the tradition, this is reason enough 
for us to follow the same route, not to change. While I have respect for our traditions, in particular the 
traditions of our democratic governmental institutions land while I have great respect. I am not for a 
moment hidebound by traditions) I am rather more impressed with an assessment of how well that 
tradition has served us as members, in obtaining the kinds of results expected from us by the public 
which we are bound to serve. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Whether we sit, Mr. Speaker, to the left or to the right of the Chair — and I remind 
this Assembly that I have occupied a seat on both sides as well as the Speaker’s chair itself — it is the 
results with which we need to concern ourselves. Because I believe that any fair-minded individual 
would conclude that the tradition, the rules under which we operate have served us well and are some of 
the best known to civilized people from the point of view of producing results for their society. It is for 
that reason that all of us should, if we don’t already, treat these rules and the parliamentary tradition with 
respect, the lack of which I think gives rise to this motion and this debate, and the lack of which 
wouldn’t be tolerated for even an instant in any of our courts. And it shouldn’t be tolerated here either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, I think that lack of respect is obvious and it’s incumbent upon all of us 
to do something about it. An examination of the record of the last two months would bear out my 
statement. Nothing more clearly demonstrates my point than pages 2176 to 2186, inclusive, in the 
records. In those few pages, Mr. Speaker, perhaps an hour or so of debate, three speakers took part and 
they were interrupted by Mr. Speaker 14 times to bring them to order. All 14 times were virtually for the 
same reason. Anyone can review it and I invite them to do so. I say it is inexcusable at best and we need 
a better observance of the accepted civilized method of conducting ourselves in here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — In the earlier debate which I think gave rise to this motion, the member for Thunder 
Creek said, and I quote: ‘I guess what has to come into this is a question of respect.’ He is probably right 
about that, Mr. Speaker, and he is probably also correct in suggesting respect cannot be legislated, it has 
to be earned. What I believe isn’t as properly understood as it might be is that respect in other people’s 
eyes starts with self-respect. Yes, respect starts with self-respect. 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2410 

I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, and I want other members to know I am proud of the fact that, I like 
members in all corners of this Assembly, hold strong views. I have never hesitated, whether sitting to the 
left or the right of the Chair, in giving those views with the strongest expression I could. And I have 
always believed the people of Weyburn constituency would judge whether or not that was sufficient. I 
take pride in that, but I take as much pride in the fact that I have, over the 16 years, been able to do that 
within the civilized, accepted rules and procedures. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — I am proud of the fact I have never been named or asked to leave this place, and I am 
proud of the fact I can contribute my views and keep them in order. I demand respect from no one. I am 
satisfied and grateful for that shown to me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — And when this place prorogues each spring I go away with my self-respect intact. It 
is a formula I commend to all members and I suggest it is the only formula under which this place can 
be productive while at the same time bringing on itself the kind of respect it ought to get and absolutely 
requires from the public. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — This institution, this legislature requires a high degree of respect from the public for 
some fairly important reasons. Our society isn’t some barbarian society. It is a highly complex and we 
like to think highly civilized society. We live in a country where we, as individuals, depend each on the 
other for our very existence. We depend for that existence on rules or if you will, laws. Complex laws 
govern that existence in our society today. Those laws which govern all of us are made in our 
parliamentary institutions, the means we have accepted as our way of governing ourselves. These laws 
need to be respected by all of us. We need to have respect for them as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if this place falls into disrepute, the laws it makes will fall into disrepute also. They 
will be disregarded and when that happens our society, our so-called civilized society is going to be in a 
great deal of difficulty. A great deal more difficulty, I might add, than any one of us as individuals might 
experience with the odd bit of frustration we might have in understanding the rules of this place and 
seeing to it that we respect them or change them in a respectable way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the traditions of our parliamentary system, its rules and procedures have served us well and 
we have to show the proper respect for the rule of law or change the laws in a respectful way if we want 
them respected. 
 
For those reasons and because this motion is based on neither of them I cannot support it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — The history of this kind of motion in the British parliamentary system is 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2411 

scant indeed. On the few occasions where there is a precedent there has been some substance. Here there 
is none. I ask all members and the public to consider the facts. I ask them also to consider not some 
particular excerpt from our rules but to consider the overall body of rules which ought to govern us. We 
need not look for some loophole in the rules which is becoming all too characteristic of what some have 
described as the me generation. Rather, Mr. Speaker, we need to have regard for the rights and 
privileges of all. And we need to have regard for the light in which the public sees the Assembly. If we 
could do that, Mr. Speaker, we would be doing a service to the public which is what we ought to be 
doing. If we could do that we would be able to discuss rationally the public’s business rather than this 
unnecessary and uncalled-for motion, which is what we ought to be doing. Mr. Speaker, we should 
defeat this motion for all of those reasons I have stated, and get down to the public business like 
responsible representatives of our people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I join this debate and I join with 
the hon. member for Weyburn in agreeing that this is indeed a regrettable and sad evening here in this 
legislature. It’s not only a regrettable and sad evening, it’s an evening that has become part of a 
regrettable and sad session. A regrettable and sad session because of numerous things we have seen 
happening in this Assembly which illustrate a deep lack of respect for the proper functioning and the 
proper procedures that should be followed in this legislature. I agree, Mr. Speaker, with the hon. 
member for Weyburn that this is an unnecessary debate. We should not have to be engaging in this kind 
of debate, this kind of debate which so seriously reflects the lack of appreciation on the part of the hon. 
members opposite for the proper functioning of a parliament such as we function in here in this 
Assembly. 
 
The accepted impartiality of the offices of the parliament, Mr. Speaker, has as you well know and as all 
members well know, been a long-standing tradition of the parliamentary system. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, again as you well know that the most important of these offices for which the respect for the 
impartiality of the offices demanded is that of the office of Speaker. The Speaker in this Assembly is, 
and I think it’s important we recognize this, more than just a person in this Assembly and ism ore than 
just an individual member in this Assembly. The Speaker represents a long-honoured, long-respected 
office within the parliamentary system, an office without which no parliament or no Legislative 
Assembly could possibly function. 
 
I remind the members opposite that the office of Speaker is a creature not of governments, and indeed if 
you look at the history of parliaments, the office of Speaker is a creature not of the majorities within the 
assemblies and parliaments. The office of Speaker is a creature of parliament itself as an integral whole. 
The office of Speaker is here, fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, to protect the minorities within any 
parliament, to see that the minorities, the people who do not speak or represent a majority party or 
majority opinion, have an opportunity for fully participate in the activities of the legislature or the 
parliament. That is historical fact. That is the primary and basic reason why we have the office of 
Speaker. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, when that office and a person such as yourself filling that office has 
worked so hard to fulfil the responsibilities that are generated by that office, in order to protect the right 
of free and open debate of all members of this legislature. It seems to me incredible, that the hon. 
members opposite who after all represent the minority party in this Assembly should be in a position to 
find cause to be moving a 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2412 

motion such as we see here before us this evening? I find that, Mr. Speaker, quite incredible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Assembly is to permit democratically elected representatives, such as 
ourselves, representatives of the people, to debate on policy, to debate on important matters of public 
interest and to legislate. History very early established, Mr. Speaker, that this kind of procedure (which 
is a fundamental thing within a parliamentary democracy), that this kind of business cannot be executed 
within a parliament without rules, without procedures, without standing orders and other instruments of 
order within a parliament. History established early that no parliament can function responsibly and 
effectively without an officer chosen from amongst its members to interpret rules, to ensure order and to 
oversee the orderly operation of the parliament or the Assembly. 
 
As the hon. members have indicated, there must, of course, be complete confidence in the impartiality of 
the Speaker. But that, Mr. Speaker, is something which must be generated in the minds of the members 
of this Assembly as a result of a respect for the necessary function of this Assembly. It is not something, 
Mr. Speaker, which they can turn on or off and use for their own convenience . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — . . . and, Mr. Speaker, something which they cannot turn on, and off to use for 
their own partisan purposes within this Assembly. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you is what the hon. members are attempting to do with this resolution. 
There are many conventions which have been established within this Assembly and within parliaments 
to ensure the Speaker is both impartial and is seen to be impartial. And those conventions, Mr. Speaker, 
I know are the ones which you follow to guide you in exercising your function as Speaker. 
 
No one questions, Mr. Speaker, that you must make judgments in making decisions within those 
conventions. No one questions that! Surely the members opposite recognize fully that judgments must 
be made. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say to them again, when they decide to impugn the very view of impartiality of the 
Speaker they have done something very serious. They have mounted an attack, Mr. Speaker, on you 
personally and that is despicable given the circumstances. But, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that they have 
mounted an attack on the office. This is an attack on you personally and on the office of the Speaker. 
And as such, Mr. Speaker, because of the integral place of the Speaker within an assembly and within a 
parliament it is fundamentally an attack on parliament itself. 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2413 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — It is fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, an attack on the very process which these hon. 
members, some 18 months ago, indicated to the people that they intended to serve with respect, honor 
and conviction. 
 
The hon. member for Souris-Cannington (and he was joined by the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley) tries to build a case, Mr. Speaker, for this incredible motion; he tries to build a case 
which he says is based on inconsistency in decisions. He reads from Hansards of the past to try to build 
up this case. Well, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, his case is weak. It is pitifully weak, unbelievably weak. I 
listened to that case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to that case because not everything is 
black and white; not everything is clear in exercising the functions which an officer of an assembly or a 
parliament must exercise. Not everything is black and white. It’s not surprising that one could, if one 
wished to do this incredible thing of challenging the office of the Speaker, find some criticisms. I 
suppose I could find my own criticisms of certain things that are made. I would not do that, Mr. Speaker, 
because that I believe is wrong, fundamentally wrong. But, Mr. Speaker, the thing that struck me was 
the hon. members put together such a weak case. It’s got to tell you something. It was just a childish list 
of petty grievances that could only come from someone who really didn’t believe their case, who really 
. . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — It could only come, Mr. Speaker, from people who did not believe the case they 
were making otherwise they would not make such a weak effort or it could only come from someone 
who has no understanding whatsoever of the nature, functioning roles and responsibilities of the office 
of Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to assume they do have some understanding of the office of 
Speaker. Therefore, I have to assume there is some other reason for mounting this case based on this 
petty list of grievances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think its’ interesting to note this resolution arrived on the order paper after one of the 
most incredible displays of improper behavior within a parliament or a legislature; one of the most 
incredible displays of childishness and arrogance I have ever witnessed. The behavior of the hon. 
member for Thunder Creek the other day was really quite incredible. I would say the very fact that this 
resolution followed that incident tells you something very clearly. In addition, as part of this whole 
session, that was not an isolated incident either. We’ve seen challenges made to your role. Mr. Speaker, 
to your office, challenges made to the office of the chairman of committee; challenges which have no 
foundation; challenges which are clearly there and are presented for some other reason. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is a very important relation to this that we, as members of this House, ask ourselves 
some questions about what is happening here. 
 
Obviously with that list the hon. member for Souris-Cannington made he doesn’t really believe the 
substance of this resolution. He’s up to something else. The members 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2414 

opposite are up to something else. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what they are engaging in is what I call the 
politics of distraction. I say to you that in the view of the hon. members opposite this session has 
unfolded for them in such a way that the press, the public, the people of this province must be distracted. 
They must be distracted. The hon. members feel it is completely and absolutely essential that the people 
be distracted from what is really happening in terms of policy; what is really happening in terms of 
leadership; what is really happening in terms of functioning within the party opposite, the Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — This whole session, Mr. Speaker, has developed along a pattern of continually 
escalating and growing attacks on this institution, on the rules of this institution and on the functioning 
of this institution. That makes no sense unless there is some tactical reason for it. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, the reason for that is to distract attention. We reached the climax here, Mr. Speaker, with this 
resolution we are debating this evening. 
 
The hon. members opposite as part of their tactics and strategy are willing to bring the very office of the 
Speaker itself, the most fundamental and historic office of parliament, into their despicable, tactical 
activities. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what is it that they’re up to? Why are they engaging in these tactics 
of distraction? Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of reasons; one of the reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, is because their party is in deep, deep trouble; their party is in disarray. They have no leader in 
this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and they are not willing to make any attempt to try to have that leader 
elected to this legislature. There’s a reason for that, Mr. Speaker, because they’re afraid; that’s the 
problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve all witnessed the pattern of behavior by this party, its 
unwillingness to debate policy, to discuss policy. They have built their whole session on these kinds of 
attacks on this institution and on the conventions and functioning of this institution. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that we shouldn’t be misled I say to the hon. members on this side, we should not be misled. 
That’s not because the hon. members have no policy; they have policies all right. We know where they 
stand on economic development; we know the fundamental kinds of attacks they’re mounting on our 
Crown corporations in this province; we know their principles of privatization. We know all of those 
things which they stand for and we know where they stand on social policy. We know that their program 
and their policy, if they were elected to government would pass more and more costs onto the poor — 
those people who cannot afford to provide the services which are needed to exist in our society. We 
know their policy on agriculture, on the crowrates, on rail-line abandonment — no question on the 
policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The problem is they don’t want to debate it in here. They don’t want to debate in here because they 
know the people will not accept it. So, they have to have a substitute, Mr. Speaker. Their substitute 
involves gaining attention, getting into the press, giving the impression of activity, giving the impression 
of having a role to play in this legislature by the kinds of attacks which they have been making on this 
institution and on the conventions and offices of this institution. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s going on here. To understand this resolution, to 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2415 

understand this motion, you have to understand this is an inevitable further step in this continuing need, 
this continuing process, this continuing strategy of building up a crescendo of attacks upon this 
institution in order to distract attention. They want to give some impression that they are doing 
something, that they stand for something, that they are functioning as members of the opposition. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the hon. members opposite that I hope soon they will stop and 
think about this kind of tactic. I’m quite frankly surprised and amazed that a number of the hon. 
members I know opposite would even participate in this kind of tactic. I’m very surprised at it. I say to 
you quite honestly that there really is no protection this institution has from any outside authority to 
protect against this kind of thing. If this is the kind of thing that fits into your tactics, then the institution 
has no protection, that’s clear. You have the right and procedures and you can get press and publicity, 
and the institution, aside from the role that Mr. Speaker can play to the best of his ability, cannot protect 
itself with the help of any outside authority. 
 
There is no authority in this legislature greater than the Assembly itself. If you destroy it, there’s no 
authority outside that can restore it. You must take the responsibility for destroying it if that’s what 
you’re going to do as part of your tactic. I say the fact you’re doing that as part of these tactics is 
shameful and despicable but furthermore, it’s very, very difficult to understand because surely some of 
you, surely some members opposite, understand that when we leave this legislature, there must be some 
respect left for this legislature. There must be some ability for this legislature to function as a credible 
institution. The only way that can happen is if we leave the public with some sense of respect for the 
institution. The only way that can happen is if we inform the public we intend to recognize this 
institution. We do not intend to display contempt for this institution of parliament but to function within 
the basic and fundamental rules in which parliament itself must function. 
 
I say to you hon. members, as part of your tactics you display complete contempt for this legislature as a 
parliament. It’s reflected in your unwillingness to debate policy issues in this legislature throughout this 
whole session. That is contempt for parliament. It’s displayed in your disregard for orderly behavior in 
this legislature, continuously. That is contempt for this legislature. And it’s displayed now by your 
unwillingness to attack the most dignified, honored and respected office of this legislature, the office of 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have done this, I say, in order to maintain tactical diversions, to hide their own weakness, to hide 
their own troubles, to hide their own unwillingness to involve in substantive debate, and most 
importantly, to hide the basic and fundamental problems they have with leadership itself within that 
party. 
 
You have no leadership in this legislature. You have no leadership outside. You know not how to handle 
parliamentary debate. And so you engage in these kinds of tactics. 
 
I close, Mr. Speaker, in asking members to defeat this motion, by asking the hon. members to consider 
accepting the basic fact that parliamentary democracy, in order to be strong, requires some basic level of 
respect for parliamentary institutions. It requires some basic level of respect for rules. It requires some 
basic level of respect for the dignity and functioning of the officers of parliament. Democracy needs 
respect from the public. The hon. member for Weyburn spoke eloquently on this subject. 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2416 

Democracy also needs respect from those who serve democracy as elected representatives. Without that 
there can be no democracy itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. members opposite in closing that I find it quite incredible that they should 
be pursuing this tactic for one bottom line reason. My understanding of Conservative philosophy 
(however much I may disagree with much of Conservative philosophy) is that at the very roots it is built 
upon an ideology which says there must be respect for the laws, the traditions, and the institutions of 
society. 
 
That is what your former national leader, John Diefenbaker, stood for. That is what, basically as a 
bottom line, real true Conservatives have stood for over the ages. Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, how can 
the hon. members opposite even remain true to their own political philosophy with the kind of tactics 
and the kind of behavior they are pursuing? 
 
Mr. Speaker and hon. members, I say we must defeat this motion. And in the course of defeating this 
motion we must lay to rest once and for all these kids of tactics. The continuation of these kinds of 
tactics, Mr. Speaker, threatens the very basic functioning of this legislature as part of parliamentary 
democracy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate. I enter it with no pleasure. 
Ordinarily I enjoy debates in this legislature. The function of this legislature is to provide a forum for 
debate. One of the rights and prerogatives we have as members of this legislature is to engage in debate. 
We have the right to put out point of view. We have the right to the best of our ability to represent the 
needs and aspirations of the people we represent. What we do not have, Mr. Speaker, is the right to call 
into question the institutions which we have taken a solemn oath to preserve. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — What we do not have, Mr. Speaker, is the right to call into question the forms, 
the traditions and the very procedures of this parliament which have evolved over the ages into the 
system of government we have today. I am not suggesting that we have no right to question individual 
rules. Of course, we modernize our procedure. But, we cannot attack the basics of our system without 
attacking freedom and liberty itself. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — One of the most basic institutions of our system of parliamentary government is 
the role of speaker. Writers on this have all stated the same principle Launby says: 
 

The speakership is an ancient and honorable office, an essential feature of the parliamentary system. 
So great is the prestige attaching to the office that an affront to the Speaker is an affront to the House 
as a whole. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I submit that what we see in this motion before the House is just that, an affront. Not 
to Mr. Speaker Brockelbank, not to the government, not to all the collective members of this legislature, 
but rather an affront to the institution of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2417 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am dismayed. I would like all members to consider the very 
grave nature of this attack on the institution of the Speaker which we are witnessing here tonight. Let’s 
consider for a moment some of our duties as members of this Assembly. Clearly our first duty is to the 
people of Saskatchewan as their elected representatives. It is our duty to concern ourselves with their 
well-being. Members on this side of the House are here to formulate and provoke government policy. 
Members opposite are here to criticize the government, to ferret out mismanagement, to propose 
alternative policies. Certainly that is our main duty. 
 
But, perhaps an equally important duty, although one which we perhaps have less in our mind, is the 
duty of honoring and abiding by the rules and procedures of this legislature. I say that is our duty 
because we cannot perform the first duty of representing our constituency, proposing policies and 
proposing alternatives, if we fall into the habit of riding roughshod over the rules and procedures of this 
legislature which allow us to perform our basic duty. 
 
Over centuries we have decided as a people that we will place at the head of our Assembly a person 
chosen by us, Mr. Speaker. Over the centuries this legislative body has decided it will organize its own 
affairs, choose its own person and place him in a position of authority over us. The speaker is the servant 
of all the members of the Assembly. The speaker is the protector of all the rights of all the members of 
the Assembly; majority yes, minority yes. By years of tradition and precedent, two factors are kept in his 
mind. The rights of the majority to govern and the rights of the minority to be heard adequately. That is 
the tradition of which we are heirs. The idea, the principle, is that even though debate may be of the 
fiercest variety, even though the conflict of opinion may be as great as men of high principle and strong 
opinion can generate, even in all those circumstances Mr. Speaker will be there to protect our right to 
differ, to protect each other’s personal honor, to protect this by ordered and regular procedure so that all 
opinions and all persons may be respected, even though these opinions be minority opinions, even 
though those persons be in a small minority in the parliamentary Chamber. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s our tradition, and motions of the sort we are debating here tonight hamper the Speaker’s ability to 
fulfil this already difficult task. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — We have before us a non-confidence motion in Mr. Speaker. My research 
indicates that in all the history of the Parliament of Canada and the legislatures of Canada such a motion 
has come to a vote only once before. My research indicates (and it could be wrong, it was done hastily) 
that only in the House of Commons in 1956 was a motion of censure raised against Mr. Speaker and 
voted upon. All of us, I think, may remember the particular and special circumstances of that occasion, 
which clearly have no parallel in our legislature here today. 
 
The point I make is that motions of this kind are few and far between and are made only when the 
evidence is clear, unequivocal and decisive. Now, what we have to ask ourselves tonight is whether or 
not the case mounted in support of this motion indicates evidence which is clear, unequivocal and 
decisive. I listened to hon. members, and while they stated they were alleging partiality or lack of 
impartiality on the part of the Speaker they cited this piece of Hansard and that piece of Hansard and 
concluded there was inconsistency. Mr. Speaker, there may well have been 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2418 

inconsistency. I may well indeed by inconsistent in many of my judgments. That hardly proves I’m 
partial. That hardly proves I am not discharging a trust which has been reposed in me, if one had been 
reposed, to attempt to be as impartial as I can. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to hon. members opposite, and we have to remember Mr. 
Speaker is not newly appointed but has been in that high office for five years, and I listened to the 
cullings of Hansard and I heard suggestions that this time he felt a question was of urgency and 
importance and that time he felt there was not urgency and importance, and the questions appeared to be 
somewhat similar. Or I heard them say that in one case he had called a member to account because he 
had used a term like a stupid question, and on another occasion he had not called a member to account. 
It happened, by the way, to be the same member. It’s difficult to mount a case for partiality or 
impartiality on the basis of that. Never mind, this was the sort of evidence offered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we are losing all sense of perspective when we raise issue of that kind, losing all 
sense of the role of Mr. Speaker and the circumstances under which he must operate. Comparisons of 
Mr. Speaker’s comments in debate or on a ministerial statement where there is not hot conflict with Mr. 
Speaker’s comments during the question period are totally invalid. All of us know question period is by 
nature of a bear pit variety. Any one who has watched the Speaker in the House of Commons in Ottawa 
or at Westminster has seen Mr. Speaker during the question period making judgments — crack, crack, 
crack — making sharp judgments, decisive judgements and judgments which are not perhaps exactly the 
same as in debate because the circumstances are totally different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of performing his duties, makes hundreds of judgments — judgment calls. No 
one can suggest that he who makes dozens and hundreds of judgment calls will always make them 
exactly the same way. More particularly, will they look to be exactly the same way when they are 
reduced to print? We are dealing not with the medium of print, but with the vocal medium in this House. 
I must say with regard to the large number of judgments made, Mr. Speaker’s rulings and Mr. Speaker’s 
judgment calls, while obviously not beyond question, represent a skill and perception in dealing with the 
rules of this House which are a credit to this legislature and to Mr. Speaker individually. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — As the member for Souris-Cannington, the Leader of the Opposition said, he did 
not have a case based upon one or two or three overwhelming incidents of partiality. He really did not 
even raise incidents of partiality. He raised incidents of what he alleged to be inconsistencies out of 
which he asked us to infer partiality. I say the evidence was not there. He is frank enough to say it is a 
culmination of small things. I would have rephrased it — a culmination of petty things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is suggested that the duty of the Speaker is to make judgments in the best possible way. 
That is clearly a duty in a theoretical sense. No speaker or no other member of this Assembly or no other 
member of any other office is called to account for failing to make decisions in the best possible way. 
We are all called upon to make decisions to the best of our ability . . . 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2419 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . to the best of our ability under the circumstances in which we make them. It 
is one thing, Mr. Speaker, to make a judgment having had an opportunity to consult Beauchesne, in the 
quiet of one’s office or study and to reach the conclusion that another judgment ought to have been 
made and accordingly this one was inconsistently with one made a year ago. It is quite another thing to 
make a judgment in the heat of strife and conflict which Mr. Speaker is called upon to do. 
 
I say Mr. Speaker has served us well. He is the proud bearer of a proud name borne by parliamentarians 
who have added as much lustre to this legislature as any other name . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . as any other family name in the 75 year history of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity to serve in this legislature for 20 years. Prior to that I had a 
number of dealings with this legislature. I’ve watched Mr. Speaker Johnston in office, and I’ve watched 
Mr. Speaker Darling performing his functions, and I’ve served in this legislature under Mr. Speaker 
Wood and Mr. Speaker Dewhurst on one occasion, and Mr. Speaker Snedker and Mr. Speaker Dewhurst 
on a second occasion, and now Mr. Speaker Brockelbank. I have been in government and I have been in 
opposition. I say that I have watched speakers make judgments under fire. 
 
I particularly watched Mr. Speaker Snedker when I was in opposition. Mr. Speaker Snedker was a man 
of meteoric character, and I didn’t always agree with Mr. Speaker Snedker, in fact I sometimes bitterly 
disagreed with him. I sometimes felt he had dealt with me and with my colleagues unfairly, and I 
muttered; but on calm reflection I reached the conclusion I may have been wrong. And if I was not 
wrong, even if on that occasion he had dealt with me unfairly, he was doing his best to discharge a very 
difficult job. However much I may have been tempted I did not on any occasion suggest that Mr. 
Speaker Snedker was anything but doing his very best to be impartial. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — So I say of Mr. Speaker Snedker, and so I say of Mr. Speaker Brockelbank. 
 
I could say comments about other Speakers. They would obviously bear less weight because they were 
when I was on the government side of the House. But as I say, for seven years I was on the opposition 
side of the House and had to make my judgment as to whether or not the speaker of the day was doing 
his best to discharge his obligations and uphold the great traditions of this legislature. As I say, I reached 
the conclusion he was doing that and he was in fact, in his way, adding lustre to this legislature. 
 
I have said these things, Mr. Speaker, because I believe we should defeat this motion. I go farther. I 
believe the hon. members opposite should consider whether or not they might, with the consent of the 
House, withdraw this motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2420 

 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, they have made their point. Some of us fervently believe in the 
British parliamentary tradition. Some of us believe very fervently in the traditions of the houses of 
parliament and legislatures such as ours. I, and those who believe with me, will be saddened to see the 
affairs of this Assembly, I say, diminished, perhaps even degraded, by calling upon us to vote on a 
motion such as this on the basis of the inadequate. I would choose the word without any emotive 
overtone, evidence advanced before this House today. My plea to all hon. members, therefore, is to 
consider their position and particularly the members opposite, to consider whether or not their interests, 
the interests of the House, would not be best served by a withdrawal of this motion and a recognition 
that whatever the feelings of members opposite may be with respect to Mr. Speaker, he has in the 
months and years that have passed (and I’m sure will in the months and years to come) discharged his 
duties to the best of his abilities in a fair and impartial manner and in a manner which has added and will 
add lustre to this legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my few words to 
this motion put forward by the opposition. And I want to say I have sat in this legislature since 1971 and 
after having listened to the motion I really translate it into this statement — as far as I am concerned the 
motion really accuses the Speaker of being a human being. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, whether a speaker is partial or impartial is relative to where you sit in this 
House. It would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that you have been fair and impartial over the years I’ve sat 
in this legislature and that’s since 1971. As the Premier mentioned, I can recall many instances — 
correction, I shouldn’t say many but some instances — where you and your predecessor made 
judgments and pronouncements with which this side of the House did not concur. But we accepted it 
gracefully, at least I thought we accepted it gracefully because we always felt the institution of the 
Speaker was much higher than anyone individual in this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I say to hon. members, particularly the Leader of the Opposition and I say this 
in all sincerity — he brings up this motion in light of the fact he feels there has been a build-up of many 
small things over the past number of years. And I do say that is in one sense a sign of immaturity in an 
institution where I think maybe the public demands maturity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I emphasize that the motion to me simply accuses you of being a human being. 
I will be the first to admit you are human and you have made judgments we didn’t agree with or 
judgments members opposite didn’t agree with. I also want to bring to the attention of this House the 
matter of the question period. 
 
Lord only knows you certainly have been very tolerant in that area, Mr. Speaker. There are times I 
questioned you to myself but respecting the institution I would be the last person to ever question you in 
your wisdom. You have at certain times cut short the question period and at other times extended it. I 
certainly never heard any complaints from members opposite when you extended it. I think they were 
thankful for it. I suppose maybe that’s right and proper. But in the same token when you cut off the 
question period at the prescribed second. I don’t think members opposite or you or 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2421 

anyone else in the gallery ever heard us complain. Because, Mr. Speaker, we believe that you are a 
human being. 
 
Members opposite, or at least one member opposite, have in the past alluded to the fact that you have 
had occasion to meet certain prominent personnel in this country. I want to ask hon. members if the fact 
I attended a meeting in Elstow, Saskatchewan, sponsored by the Social Credit Party at which Real 
Caouette was present and spoke, made ma a Social Credit, if that made me biased? Maybe it did. I don’t 
know. I’ve heard of the Broadbent issue. Mr. Speaker, I want to say I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. 
Diefenbaker on numerous occasions and heard him speak. I was always delighted to do so, but I don’t 
know anyone ever called me biased because I did that. I also had the honored occasion to meet our 
Monarch on two separate occasions. Whether that makes me a monarchist or not I really don’t know, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, hon. members, I did not visit the zoo. I 
intend to visit the zoo in Moose Jaw this year . . . No, I would not say that. I would not say that at all, 
Mr. Speaker. I would be the last person to say that. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it seems to me a lot 
of pretty things are being brought out into the open. I say to members opposite and I also say to 
members on this side of the House, that it’s certainly your privilege. But I do say we should be taking 
into consideration the sum total. Mr. Speaker, having looked at your way of operating the House, 
running the House as Speaker, as symbolizing an institution since 1975, and having been disappointed at 
times with what you have decided. I want to once again emphasize that the institution of the Speaker is 
bigger than any one of you and any one of us. It is bigger than the sum total of any of us. I’m not 
suggesting that there may have been thought of some political gain on the part of members opposite. Far 
be it from me to ever suggest that. 
 
I do want to say it seems to me having been born and brought up in this province, that sometimes when 
you get into a desperate situation you will clutch at anything. I say to members opposite, direct your 
wrath at members opposite. That is fair play. That is part of the political process. But I urge you, and I 
know Mr. Speaker has his human faults, to direct your ire at members on this side, but do not tarnish the 
image, the impeccable image, of the Speaker within the framework of the Commonwealth and at least 
1000 years of parliamentary tradition, because he who attacks will lose in the end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly, with all the sincerity I can muster in my heart, will be urging all members on 
this side and that side to vote against that motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard, I think, four or five speakers from the government 
side of the House. Not one of them alluded to or offered any defence for the inconsistencies we pointed 
out. The Premier, in fact, stated there is some allowances to be given for emotions that may flare from 
time to time, in this House, and I don’t disagree with him. I am sure it was emotion on the part of Mr. 
Speaker that caused him in a very emotional way to cut off the member for Thunder Creek in 
mid-sentence while he was offering an unequivocal withdrawal and apology. I am sure it was with some 
degree of emotion that Mr. Speaker put the matter of the generousness of the apology of the member for 
Thunder Creek in the hands of the House. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Centre raised the issue of partisanship and I suggest Mr. Speaker is in fact 
partisan. He comes from a very well respected and proud partisan 



 
April 29, 1980 
 

 
2422 

family of Saskatchewan and we expect that. We expect that he should be partisan. What we do not 
expect is that the application of the rules of this House should be done with the lack of regard for 
consistency we have pointed out here tonight. Of course, he is partisan for the whole of Saskatchewan to 
see on television, welcoming Ed Broadbent, as raised by the member for Saskatoon Centre, welcoming 
Ed Broadbent to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my remarks in closing will be very brief. I say, again, and I refer to Mr. Speaker. A 
Memorandum on the Positions, Powers and Privileges of Speakers in Parliaments of the 
Commonwealth. 
 

The Speaker’s rulings whether given in public or in private constitute the precedents, which although 
not absolutely binding, serve to guide subsequent Speakers, Members and Officers of the House. The 
Speaker may depart from the ruling of a predecessor, but will do so only with the greatest reluctance 
and in special circumstances. Such precedents are collected and in the course of time they may be 
formulated as principles or rules of practice which are binding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there was not one word of defence offered by members opposite for what we set out as 
inconsistencies in the application of the rules of this House. Mr. Speaker, Beauchesne’s chapter 3, page 
38, 117(1) in part says: 
 

Confidence in the impartiality of the Speaker is an indispensable condition of the successful working 
of procedure, and many conventions exist which have as their object, not only to ensure the 
impartiality of the Speaker but also, to ensure that his impartiality is generally recognized. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that the motion is on the order paper, I think, would indicate that the impartiality 
and consistency of Mr. Speaker and his application of the rules is not generally recognized. The fact that 
there was no defence from members opposite, I think furthers that argument. Mr. Speaker, if the vote on 
this motion breaks on party lines, I think the argument would be conclusive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the respect of your chair does not come through tradition and convention alone. It must be 
earned through the consistent application of the rules of the House Rulings made by the Chair, Mr. 
Speaker, become precedents for successors. Without consistency we find ourselves in that damned if 
you do, damned if you don’t situation, and I urge all members to support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 11 
 

Berntson Birkbeck Larter 
Lane Taylor Rousseau 
Swan Muirhead Duncan 
Andrew McLeod  
 



 
April 29, 1980 

 

 
2423 

NAYS — 29 
 

Blakeney Pepper Allen 
Bowerman Smishek Kramer 
Messer Snyder Baker 
Skoberg McArthur Mostoway 
Banda Kaeding Hammersmith 
Kowalchuk Dyck Feschuk 
Byers Vickar Cody 
Matsalla Lusney Long 
Nelson Thompson Poniatowski 
White Solomon  
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What’s the point of privilege? 
 
MR. LANE: — On a point of privilege that the Minister of Highways, from his chair, shouted over — a 
bunch of Nazis, fascists, and I ask him to withdraw that statement as unparliamentary, and apologize. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — . . . an opportunity to check the record. I didn’t hear anything. I’m sorry. There was 
a lot of fuss going on in the House. I’ll take my opportunity to check the record. A matter of privilege is 
a most serious matter, as the members of this Assembly should understand. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact, I did say that half of them over there were fascists. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order, order! Order! . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order! 
 
MR. KRAMER: — Half of them are not. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll ask the Minister of Highways to withdraw the statement he made. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I withdraw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — All right. And I will attend the record to see if there is anything on record relating 
to this particular matter. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:32 p.m. 


