






















































Hansard: May 20, 1980


 
3245 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 20, 1980 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE — VOTE 19 

 
Item 1 (continued) 

 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — At the outset in dealing with the Department of Industry and 
Commerce, I'd like to point out that those of us on this side of the Assembly believe the development of a 
strong commercial and industrial sector in the Saskatchewan economy is necessary for future economic 
stability in the province. The present administration has failed to create a favourable climate in the province 
and has not encouraged investment and employment opportunities in line with Saskatchewan's potential. The 
failure of the present government to create a suitable business climate stems from over regulation, harsh tax 
policies and further government interference, all of which hinder economic growth. Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
this situation has not escaped the attention of the Leader-Post editor, for example, and I quote from a recent 
article about two weeks old, the headline of which says: 'Blakeney Bills Show Blind Pursuit of Dogmatic 
Socialism.' 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, an example of this is cited in the article in the form of Bill No. 13, an act which, with 
its enactment, will create a monopoly on communications by the government at the expense, or at least 
through the death, of yet another industrial frontier in Saskatchewan — the communications industry; an 
industry one might say is in its infancy when one considers the technology being discovered and advanced 
almost daily. I am convinced, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the Department of Industry and Commerce is one 
department the government would just as soon see disappear. This department is a continuous 
embarrassment to the government for the simple reason its purpose for being is to promote and encourage 
expansion of industry and business in our province, a philosophy this government is continuously opposing. 
 
The new bill introduced last week, the economic development bill, is further evidence of what I contend. 
Economic development to this government means more government ownership, more government takeover, 
more government interference and less private sector involvement. Otherwise I might ask, why this new 
department? I say industry and commerce is an embarrassment because all of the socialist dogma perpetrated 
on the people of Saskatchewan by this government is contrary to what the principles of a department of 
industry and commerce should be. I foresee and predict, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that the Department of 
Industry and Commerce will be replaced by the Department of Economic Development before the next 
election. Then under the guise of economic development, the government will kick the private sector 
including all businesses (big and small) in the teeth without fear of seeming to contradict itself. 
 
The government should not own and control production in a free democratic society. A balance of 
international, national and provincial private investment capital is essential for a promising heritage of 
prosperity in Saskatchewan. It is also unnecessary and strongly undesirable that tax funds be utilized to a 
wide extent in risk ventures. Why risk tax dollars? Is that what government is for? Forty million dollars in 
profits in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and $25 million in Sask Tel, I ask, to be risked? 
 
Mr. Chairman, if this government, through the Department of Industry and Commerce 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3246 

provided the proper incentives to allow business to establish, to grow and to flourish in this province, then 
we would be so much closer to being a have province rather than a socialist have-not island . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You liked that one, did you Herman? I am convinced that there are those on the other side of 
the House who take great delight in seeing a flourishing business pack up its bags and leave the province. I 
don't know whether I should say that there are those, I'd say perhaps most on that side. The record of 
attracting viable and good industry to this province is dismal. The current government is not looking to 
attract aggressive and ambitious businessmen to Saskatchewan because it believes that they will be against 
the aims of the current government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, last fall the Premier went to Europe, supposedly looking for business and investment for 
Saskatchewan. I should like to review that trip today, which I understand was co-ordinated by the 
Department of Industry and Commerce. One wonders what the real results of that visit to Europe were. For 
example, Mr. Chairman, on September 10, 1979 a six-page feature edition on Saskatchewan appeared in the 
Financial Times of London, the very day the Premier commenced his official European tour. For the record it 
should be noted that approximately 50 per cent of this six-page feature was advertising paid for by the 
Saskatchewan government, its agencies and Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Chairman, according to the Toronto office of the Financial Times the advertising placed by the 
Saskatchewan government and its agencies was over $50,000, plus the agency fees and production costs. I 
mention this because we would be more than interested in hearing from industry and commerce what the 
results were of the Premier's European venture. Just how much business and investment were attracted to 
Saskatchewan as a result of the tour and advertising? These are serious matters which we intend to pursue in 
dealing with industry and commerce. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when one looks at the record of industry and commerce in developing industry in 
Saskatchewan, one wonders if they really have an industrial strategy. For a few moments I should like to deal 
with a report called Economic Development Prospects in Saskatchewan prepared by the Department of 
Regional Economic Expansion of the Government of Canada or DREE as it's better known. 
 
While some of the information contained in it is quite straightforward, I really wonder how much of it the 
Department of Industry and Commerce has taken into consideration. For example, they point out the high 
cost of land and services, low labour pool, vast distances to markets, a comparatively poor system of 
transportation, are all obstacles to the development of industry in Saskatchewan. They are all obstacles 
which could be overcome if Saskatchewan had a good industrial strategy. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it has been suggested that Saskatchewan's best bet for the immediate years ahead is to plan 
industrial expansion to accommodate an expanding western market. It has also been suggested that one of 
the primary aims should be to displace imports, many of which could as well be produced in western 
Canada. This province, Mr. Chairman, has to be careful to remain competitive with such places as Winnipeg, 
Calgary, Edmonton if it is to gain significantly from the development of our natural resources. 
 
I state these things, Mr. Chairman, because I really wonder what the industrial strategy of the Department of 
Industry and Commerce is. It has been pointed out, for example that Saskatchewan could develop an 
industrial base to serve natural resource 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3247 

development not only for this province, but other western provinces as well. DREE (Department of Regional 
Economic Expansion) suggested in its report that the combined investment of western development projects 
could represent billions of dollars of activity through the 1980s. An expanded capacity within Saskatchewan 
to satisfy even a small portion of the western and provincial manufactured commodity demands can be 
expected to make a direct contribution to the balance of trade. 
 
Then, Mr. Chairman, I wonder if industry and commerce has taken into consideration the farm machinery 
industry. With agriculture being the basis of Saskatchewan's economy, and taking into account the recent 
United States approval to permit duty-free entry for most Canadian-produced agricultural machinery, 
implements and parts, these factors should serve as a reason to further encourage that industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
All these points serve notice to industry and commerce of the need to develop an industrial strategy for 
Saskatchewan. Not long ago I stated in this House that our manufacturing sector is doing very poorly; that 
our share of manufacturing in Canada was 0.08 per cent of the total manufacturing in Canada when we 
should be somewhere between 4 per cent and 5 per cent or, put another way, approximately 500 per cent 
more than what we're doing. Every now and then we receive the usual report or news release from the 
minister expounding on the virtues of the government in the manufacturing development of this province. 
Five hundred per cent more would only be your share. I'd say you have a long way to go. 
 
Mr. Chairman, recently the Minister of Industry and Commerce issued a press release in which he stated that 
high interest rates impair the growth of Saskatchewan business. While I will concede the fact that interest 
rates are, in large part, a federal jurisdiction, I do seriously question what types of programs industry and 
commerce might be considering to assist Saskatchewan business in its plight with high interest rates. I think 
it is far too easy for the minister to place the blame with Ottawa and then do nothing. 
 
As I stated earlier, we on this side of the House would encourage the further development of business 
opportunities in Saskatchewan. I would suggest that industry and commerce should encourage the federal 
government to allow an investment tax credit for small businesses wishing to decrease their number of 
employees. Then we would urge the establishment of a place of business tax to be assessed on companies 
doing business in Saskatchewan but with no head office, plant or production in Saskatchewan. Taxation 
policies have to be realistic, yet not hinder business development. Small business is the backbone of our 
entire Canadian free enterprise system. We on this side of the House call for increased availability of 
research and market analysis assistance to small businesses considering expansion. Industry and commerce 
should provide industrial strategy studies in small communities to assess needs and economic potential. 
Preferential treatment should be given to Saskatchewan companies in awarding government contracts for 
service or supplies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, industry and commerce can play an integral role in the economic future of this 
province. And having said that, I also serve notice that we in the official opposition will closely scrutinize 
this department to determine just how effective it really is in economic development. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, I will sit down now to let the minister reply. In my remarks, I asked for certain 
information; we'll start with, if the minister cares to, the European tour. I 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3248 

would like some facts, figures, costs and so on, on that. 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Deputy Chairman, first a direct reply to 
the question on the Premier's European tour. I might tell the hon. member that our department had absolutely 
nothing to do with that trip. It was not arranged, nor was it sponsored in any way, shape or form by our 
department. 
 
The only other question he asked in that regard was whether or not we were involved in placing the ads in 
the Financial Times. We had nothing to do with that either, except for one particular little ad. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would like to make a few comments with regard to some of the 
statements the hon. member prepared. He was talking about the development strategy and the industrial 
development that we in Saskatchewan do not have. I would like to remind the hon. gentleman that if he were 
to take the time to study the program structure we have in the Department of Industry and Commerce, he 
would be amazed to note the various types of programs which are suitable and which are in place to help 
develop industry and the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will just give you a few while I am on that particular subject, Mr. Deputy Chairman. In the small industry 
development program, for instance, last year (1979-80) we had 89 applications to the value of $672,000 in 
product development. I could go on — in product development, we had 29 last year to the value of 
$202,000; in management development we had 40 applications with a value of $22,000. I can go on and on 
in these various programs and list each separately, but I don't think that is necessary at this time. 
 
The hon. member also mentions interest programs: he asks why we are not involved in helping small 
businesses with interest programs. Well, I might suggest to the hon. member that he take the time to look at 
our interest abatement program, which is a popular program both for rural and urban Saskatchewan. In 1978, 
when we first announced the programs, we had 539 applications. Last year we had 489 applications, and we 
paid out to the tune of $240,000 on interest abatements to these various businesses. Now if that is not 
helping to offset the high interest rates which the federal treasury has imposed on us, I don't see what is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, I can go on to point out the various other programs which would, in a sense, offset 
the high cost of dollars for our small and medium-sized industries in the province. We have programs, such 
as the aid to trade program, which assists smaller manufacturers promote their products offshore and 
anywhere on the continent. I might tell the hon. gentleman that program has proven to be very successful. 
The manufacturers are continually asking us to make sure that program stays in place. We have many 
programs which I can go into. The hon. member mentions that we were doing very little for the small farm 
machinery manufacturing people in the province. I can tell the hon. member that in 1978-1979 our increased 
growth in dollars in assistance to small farm machinery manufacturing totalled 48.8 per cent, and the 
estimated real growth (the actual growth) in our small manufacturing sector was 37.9 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have many programs in aid of the various small business people and are always 
willing to assist. The hon. member mentions the studies, the various study programs to assist the small 
business people. Well, we have market studies made for the small business sector, for the small industrial 
sector. We have 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3249 

community profiles for the small people and for those people who want to invest in the province. We have 
those programs. Those programs are available and every one of them are proving beneficial to the 
community at large as well as to the interested developers and investors who come into our province. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I wasn't sure whether the minister was going to continue with 
his remarks when he started out by saying we had nothing to do with the trip and we had nothing to do with 
the ad. I was just wondering what they did have to do last year. Was there something else? However he did 
continue with a few minor programs; I want to question him a little bit on some of those. 
 
You mentioned 89 applications in the small industrial development program. Were those 89 completed? In 
other words were they 89 applications or 89 that went through? And the same with the product development 
of 29 for $202,000 and so on. 
 
Again, he talks about the farm machinery manufacturing end. Here we go again giving those figures of a 
48.9 per cent increase. You know, 48 per cent or 100 per cent or 500 per cent (I don't care what it is) of 
nothing is not very much. If it's 48 per cent of what you have been doing to help the manufacturing in this 
province, it is not very much. It's nothing. 
 
In 1978, Mr. Deputy Chairman, (and these are StatsCan figures) the manufacturing for Saskatchewan was 
$1.126 billion. I mentioned it was .087 per cent of the total manufacturing in Canada and that is right 
because the total in Canada was just under $129 billion. Now I know the minister is going to get up to say 
my figures are wrong. He is going to say we did something around $1.6 billion. Well, I would like to know 
where you get those figures because those are not the figures from StatsCan. And I'm going to ask, are you 
including in those figures potash? If you are including potash then of course you might be right. All right I'll 
ask you where you get your figures of somewhere around $1.7 billion, because according to StatsCan the 
figure is $1.1 billion. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, to answer the first question on the industry development 
program: whether the 89 were applications received. The figure 89 is applications approved, finalized. The 
second question you asked was whether potash was included in the figure you have from StatsCan. We do 
not include the potash figures in our records. We have nothing to do with the potash corporation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, our figures from StatsCanada with respect to manufacturing shipments for the year is $1.885 
million. I don't know where the hon. member gets his figures from. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Did you say million? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — It should be billion. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Perhaps the minister would send me a copy of the stats he has, because they don't 
coincide with the ones that I have and I got mine from StatsCanada, 1978. Would the minister care to send 
me a copy of that? I'd like a minute to peruse it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, there would be no problem. We only have the one copy; we can get a 
copy made and send it over. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3250 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — While we're waiting for that, then, perhaps I'll move on to another area. As you know, 
we on this side have for some time advocated and promoted the concept of long-term sustained economic 
activities within the province, relating to our renewable resources. Will the minister perhaps elaborate if he 
has any intentions of listening to our suggestions? Does he have any plans in place to encourage the private 
sector to develop in that area? And if you do, what would those plans be? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, can I just have the hon. member clarify the first part of that question? 
We're not quite sure to what you were referring. If you don't mind? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I am referring to our renewable resources in particular. For example, in the 
agricultural area we have advocated the development of related industries to promote long-term economic 
sustained activities within the province. Well, let's go for example in the gasohol area. Let's talk about 
irrigation as another example. I'll start with those two. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have to agree with the hon. member when he questions and 
makes suggestions on the work we should be doing in research and development as it relates to our 
involvement with agriculture. We are doing that continuously. We are continuously involved with research 
and development programs as they relate to the local farm equipment dealers and the manufacture of farm 
implements. 
 
We are also studying the manufacturing of gasohol. Now the hon. member mentioned it this afternoon and 
he mentions it again this evening. We are continuously looking at the feasibility of manufacturing gasohol. 
 
From the statistics we are getting now, it does not prove to us to be a feasible promotion because the costs to 
promote the gasohol at this point in time are too expensive in relationship to the price of gasoline and the 
price of our grain or our commodities. 
 
Although that's not saying we are completely finished with the program. We are continuously doing studies 
to try to develop a gasohol program. We're doing that in conjunction with other governments which are 
doing the same thing. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I wonder if the minister is saying that they have looked at, 
studied and done research on gasohol plants. He then would have, I presume, a report or a study written up 
on it. Would you care to table the study or would you care to table a report or whatever you might have? 
When you say the findings you have on this development are not economic or profitable, we would certainly 
question that simply because studies I've seen certainly indicate the time is right for the development of 
gasohol and that it is a very profitable venture. So to ask the question again, would you table any study you 
may have done? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the study we were doing was in conjunction with the Department 
of Agriculture. The Department of Agriculture has the study and I would imagine it's an in-house study. Now 
whether they want to reveal it or not, I really don't know. But they have the study. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, you stand in this House and tell me it's not profitable or 
economic to develop gasohol plants in this province and then turn around and tell me you don't have the 
study and you don't know what's in it. Or if you do know, 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3251 

would you care to tell us what is in it rather than pass the buck to another department? 
 
This is what I was saying originally in my comments. What is the Department of Industry and Commerce 
doing? Why wouldn't the study or the research be done in your department? Why the Department of 
Agriculture? You're the Minister of Industry and Commerce. Is that one of the reasons we're coming out now 
with a new department, an economic development department, because industry and commerce is doing 
nothing? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the study was done by a joint committee of the Department of 
Agriculture and our department. It was done by a private consultant for the departments; our department was 
also involved but we don't have the study. I'm sorry we do have a copy but I don't know whether the 
Department of Agriculture wants us to release it. It was done for their department. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, you're contradicting your statement. You just finished stating that it 
was done by a joint committee. A joint committee to me indicates you're equally responsible; either that or 
you are an associate committee, one or the other. If you were joint, then I suggest to you that you have as 
much authority concerning the report as does the Department of Agriculture. We'll get to the estimates of 
agriculture and they will say: well you know, talk to industry and commerce; it was their report. If it was a 
joint committee done by a consultant and you have a copy of it, are you telling us it is economic, that is why 
you don't want us to see it? Show us what you have. We don't believe that it's not economic or profitable. We 
believe it is. We have figures to substantiate a very high profit venture in gasohol and you're saying (and you 
have been saying all along) that it isn't so. Now you have the report. I ask you again, will you table that 
report? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, the report was worked on and prepared for the 
committee. We have no hard and fast decision to say we would not like to table the report, although the 
report was done for the Department of Agriculture with our help. If the Department of Agriculture would 
like to table the report I am sure that my department will volunteer to see if that report is available for you. 
We don't have any rhyme or reason to say we should not table it at this time. But, we have no authority to do 
that because it was done for the Department of Agriculture. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well you know your tune is changing every time you stand up. What input did you 
have into this report? You say it was done by a consultant and then you say it was ordered by the Department 
of Agriculture. Mr. Chairman, with leave of this Assembly, I would ask a special favour at this point. I see 
the Minister of Agriculture hiding behind a newspaper there. I wonder if he would like to reply to the 
particular request which I've made. Surely one of these two ministers is going to be able to give me an 
answer on that report. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — I think the hon. member directed a question to me 
with respect to a report on the gasohols. 
 
As I recall, and I'm not firm on this, there was a study done by an outside consultant. I don't even have in my 
mind the name of the consultant. If that is the case, and there was a report done by an outside consultant, we 
can make such a report available to the hon. member. We will get back to him to provide the report perhaps 
before the Department of Agriculture estimates so it can be debated. I think we played the lead role, as the 
hon. minister points out, in this gasohol area. I think the hon. member will recall there was a  



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3252 

good deal of publicity out of the efforts, by one of the staff in the Department of Agriculture. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I appreciate the leave of the Assembly to allow the minister to reply to that. I 
am a little astounded by the reply though. It indicates to me that there was very little input by either one. You 
don't even know who the consultant was, nor do you know what the report was called, nor do you recall what 
the report was all about. However, I appreciate the offer from the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Again, then, I would ask the Minister of Industry and Commerce, who indicated to me just a few minutes 
ago that he does have the report . . . There's really no looking for it, you have it. Will you table it? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, we don't have it with us, Mr. Chairman. Now that the hon. Minister of Agriculture 
has indicated he is prepared to table it, you will get it directly from him. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K. I'll accept that and again, I'll thank you. However, I understand that you 
wouldn't necessarily have that report here with you tonight. Therefore it would be difficult to table it. It does 
leave some questions in my mind as to the validity and the amount of work put into this report when you all 
seem so vague about what was involved. To me it seems it would be a very important document. It would be 
important to be pursuing that kind of economic development within this province. That's why I say to you, 
you've paid little attention to this area, Mr. Minister. You're more interested in (at least I get this impression, 
and I'm sure this is probably very true) a few grants to people who in turn buy votes. 
 
I can appreciate the reason why you want to be that concerned about grants to businesses because the 
business area is one area where your government has had difficulties in the past in votes for your party. This 
is a way of getting them. So, your interest and your main concern in your department is, where can I get a 
grant out so I can get this guy on the hook now? You, awhile ago, were giving me an indication of exactly 
that type of attitude. You talk about 89 applications submitted and completed for the small industry 
development program, for $202,000. Frankly, that's an average of about $7,000 each, less than that. 
Management — I can't remember what the rest of that committee or department or program was — for 
$52,000; an average of $1,300 per. 
 
Again it's a way of trying to get votes rather than looking at long-term, sustained, economic development 
within this province. And until you look at that, until your department is prepared to do the research and the 
promotion and show that kind of interest, we will always be, Mr. Minister, less than 1 per cent, for example, 
under the manufacturing in Canada. 
 
Looking at the figures you have sent me, I would ask your department, Mr. Minister, to review these figures. 
Because you show 1978 at $1.5 billion. StatsCanada and the report I have shows at $1.1 billion. These are 
the figures that you, I imagine, have compiled from that report. I would ask you to review them. Because 
when I go through that area — manufacturing — it includes food and beverage industries, tobacco products' 
industries, rubber and plastic products, leather, textiles, knitting mills, clothing industries, wood industries, 
furniture and fixtures, paper and allied industries, printing, publishing and allied industries, primary metal, 
metal fabricating, machinery industries, transportation, electrical, non-metallic mineral products, petroleum 
and 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3253 

coal products, chemical and chemical products' industries, and miscellaneous. What I have listed is not 
included. Are you including what I have not here? You have a higher figure than I have, so obviously you are 
including something which StatsCanada is not. 
 
As I say, I would like you to review that. I would ask your department to review it and come up with an 
explanation or with corrected figures; one or the other. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Our figures are taken from StatsCanada as well. I can give you the list of items which 
this includes. Either our figures are wrong or yours are wrong. I'm not telling you that we are 100 per cent 
correct, but these are taken right from StatsCanada figures. It was just pointed out to me that your statement 
may be taken from a different catalogue. Ours is taken from the monthly shipment survey catalogue. Yours 
may be taken from another avenue. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, the table I have is: estimated value of shipments by industry, group and 
province, which is obviously a different report from yours. However, I say again, I would like you to review 
it and send me your analysis. I'll admit I could be wrong as well. My calculations could be out but I 
double-checked them and that's what I came up with, which is quite a bit different than the figures you've 
come up with. So if you would do that I'd appreciate it very much. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — There's no problem. Our people will check it out. As I said earlier, there may be an error. 
Maybe there is a difference in the type of information each one of us has. Furthermore, I don't see any major 
problem. We're over the $1.5 billion mark and I think that's not a bad average for the province. 
 
MR. H. J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — I'd like to ask the minister to tell us what research has been done 
with regard to the collection of liquor and wine bottles throughout the province. We've raised it many times. 
I know you have been doing studies on the feasibility of it and are looking into it. Now I'd like some 
information as to what your studies are showing and at what point you are in the progress toward 
establishing the beginning of this industry. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — If I have to go into the complete program, my deputy has about 40 or 50 sheets of paper 
here that are part of the study. The question is: where are we, at this particular point in time? Well, we are 
presently awaiting a meeting. We are waiting for a meeting with the bottlers' association and when we can 
co-ordinate the meeting, we should get an opinion from them as to what their position might be on the 
recycling of bottles. That's number one. 
 
Number two, we have and are again going to co-ordinate a meeting with Canaspheres Industries which is our 
only outlet for non-returnable bottles in the province. After the meeting we have with the bottlers' 
association, a meeting of that nature will be co-ordinated. 
 
I may tell the hon. gentleman that we are little concerned and have been for quite some time about the costs 
of a recycling program. We have received studies done in British Columbia, Ontario and Alberta. All those 
programs are subsidized very heavily by the governments. We were trying to stay as close as we could to the 
Alberta program, but that too is very heavily subsidized. And we don't think we are prepared at this time to 
go into a subsidization program. 
 
I might mention to the hon. member that from the standpoint of the Department of the 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3254 

Environment, the non-returnable bottle is not a major problem as yet in Saskatchewan. It is a problem; 
there's no doubt about it, but it isn't the problem we suspect it might be. 
 
So our biggest input at this time would be in the returnable bottle. If it's in the returnable bottle, then we have 
to meet to work out a program with the bottlers' association. We are trying to work something out so we can 
work it out on a cost basis so it would be profitable for the depots or the people who are involved in the 
collection industry. We are trying to promote that through the disadvantaged people's program. 
 
Hopefully we will be able to come out with a program over a period of time but I have to agree with the hon. 
member, it has taken a long time. It might yet take a little longer because of the type of work involved and 
because of the number of different people or programs which have to be co-ordinated in order to get the 
proper statistics. 
 
MR. SWAN: — You know, sometimes you can study too long and act too little. I think that's the case in 
your department. You're doing a lot of studying, but you're not doing much acting. Canasphere Industries 
which you're talking about meeting with . . . Unless you do something fairly soon that will be another 
industry which has gone down to defeat in Saskatchewan and will be in Calgary. They've already built a 
plant in Calgary and are prepared really to leave us. They're waiting patiently for you to make a move, but 
you're not moving; so we're going to lose another industry which is employing about 90 people. I don't think 
Saskatchewan can afford it. I've been encouraging you through question period and through discussion to try 
to move on this, but I don't see much action. Would you be prepared to table the figures you have, the studies 
you have, so we can have a look at what the costs might be in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, yes, we would be prepared to get you the figures done by 
Cambrian Engineering for us in the glass recycling program. That program was similar to the one in Alberta. 
Is that the one? Yes. There's no problem. We can get you the figures. 
 
MR. SWAN: — What length of time do you expect we will have to wait before you can get this program off 
the ground? You were talking of putting in four or five trial collection depots. Could you not start with that 
type of thing, even while your meetings are an ongoing process? You could at least see how those collection 
depots are going to operate. That can't be difficult. Maybe by the time you have had a look at these four or 
five you'll find the industry is indeed viable, and you can go ahead with it. How long would we have to wait 
to take a look at it? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, as soon as we have completed our meetings with the parties 
concerned (which I mentioned earlier), we will be able to make an assessment and decide when we can go 
ahead, or if we can go ahead with our proposed experimental depots. 
 
MR. N. E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think the minister is being all too 
modest in this question of handling one form of solid waste, namely wine, whiskey and other spirit bottles. I 
think we have a fine disposal system in place in the province now. There are about 900 or 1,000 disposal 
sites for this solid waste. They are the municipal garbage dumps and landfill sites. It seems to me that's a 
fairly logical and inexpensive place to dispose of this form of solid waste. I think our national government 
has missed a golden opportunity to deal with a solid waste problem, and that is when the country was going 
metric that the . . . 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3255 

Point of Order 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Point of order. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — The member has raised a point of order. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I have a point of order, do you mind? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Order! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I know he's on his feet. I can call a point of order at any time, can I not? I understand 
the estimates are for members to ask questions of the minister. Mr. Deputy Chairman, if I may state my point 
of order without interference; I understand the estimates are for the members on both sides to ask questions 
of the minister not for other members, opposite side, to answer for the minister. Am I not correct? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — In response to the member for Regina South, any member can raise 
questions and also any member can enter the discussion if it's relevant to the subject. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, may I speak to the point of order? May I make a comment 
with regard to the point of order? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Well, there is no point of order is what I am saying. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What do you mean there was not point of order? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — How can you make a ruling on a no point of order. You just made a ruling. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — No, I told him the situation. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Did you say there was no point of order? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Well, he asked a question and I responded to it. 
 
MR. BYERS: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think this illustrates a blatant attempt by the opposition to impose 
closure on the government. One method could have been implemented on a national scale to deal with this 
question of the solid waste of wine, whiskey and other types of bottles; when the country was going metric, 
the federal government, had it not been so closely allied with the liquor industry, could have insisted on 
standardized bottles being put on the market for whiskey, wine and other spirits. 
 
I don't know whether this is still possible or not; I would think anything is possible. And I would urge the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce, in particular the minister responsible for metric information, and even 
the Minister of the Environment to pursue this issue vigorously with their federal counterparts in any 
discussions. 
 
I have never been overly impressed with the Alberta system. I know they speak in glowing terms about that 
program in that province. I think we should realize the Alberta 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3256 

program is a very, very highly subsidized program. I wish that when the members of the opposition comment 
on the Alberta program they would give us the recent figures on the annual cost of operating that program. 
When that program came into place four or five years ago, the cost of operating it was in the order of $3 
million. It's probably in the order of $5 million to $6 million now. It's a highly subsidized program. 
 
I think if you were to examine the real objective of that program, it was not to clear the litter from the ditches 
and the roadsides, but rather was designed as an employment program and not as an environmental program. 
I would hope that any program that we would undertake in this respect would be an environmental program 
to deal with the matter of solid waste and not operate it under the guise of an employment program. I 
therefore hope the Minister of Industry and his other colleagues in the cabinet will pursue with their federal 
counterparts the question of the prospects of introducing a standardized bottle as a real way to clean up and 
deal with this solid waste question. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I don't know which minister to ask questions, Mr. Deputy Chairman; it's a little hard to tell 
here. 
 
I think in looking at the industry of collecting non-returnable bottles, you have to look at more than just the 
profit that you might get from the processing of the bottles. If, in the process, you provide 90 jobs at 
Canasphere, that has to be worth something to the province. If you provide jobs for a number of handicapped 
people around the province at the collection depots, again you have to look at the value to the people and the 
value to the province of that collection agency and the employment it provides. 
 
But I think you have to go a step further to look at the environmental impact of it because that is of interest 
to almost everybody in this province. I happen to have land along the road, quite a few miles of it. The 
nuisance of the liquor or wine bottles and other garbage thrown in the ditches is a real problem and costs 
many dollars in tractor and implement tires. 
 
So when I'm speaking of this industry, I'm interested in it from a number of different areas, not the least of 
which is the employment of the handicapped people who would look forward to the opportunity to have jobs 
and to earn their own keep. 
 
When you say it costs a lot, suppose it does cost $3 million. How much are you paying out through social 
services and through the unemployment insurance to people in the province who are not able to get 
employment? I think you must look at that figure in relation to the overall figure to know whether it would 
be profitable to proceed. Have you looked at these areas and what kind of figures are you coming up with? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we are equally concerned, maybe more concerned, about the 
employment factor and the job creation that this might have an effect on. 
 
I might tell the hon. member that if we were to use the Alberta program, each job would cost us in the 
neighbourhood of between $25,000 and $30,000 per year, and that's rather an expensive job-creation 
program. I might also say we are definitely concerned about Canasphere Industries, but I have to correct the 
hon. gentleman when he says they have 90 employees. I think our figures were at one time in the 
neighbourhood of 30. But having said that, no matter what the figure may be, Canasphere Industries is not in 
Moose Jaw or in Saskatchewan because we do or we do not have a bottle recycling program at this time. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3257 

We are very concerned about the overall picture and that is why we're in this process at this particular time. 
If we can create employment for disadvantaged people and, as you suggested, take them off the welfare rolls, 
we will be more than happy to do that. But it all has to be done on a viable basis. Even if we have to provide 
some seed money for the operation, I'm sure we won't worry about that either. But we certainly are not 
prepared to invest about $10 million a year, as the Alberta program is presently costing them. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I think if you were to make a phone call to Canasphere, you'd find my figures are pretty 
well exact and that is how many people they employ. For you, I think you might find that it's an industry you 
should take a hard look at saving in this province. It's going to go down the drain because of your inaction. 
 
MR. R. L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Is the minister answering a question now or would he be prepared for 
one? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — If the hon. member previously wanted an answer, I don't have the figure that Canasphere 
employs. I think the hon. member may be confusing the total employment of Canasphere, which includes 
Alberta at this point in time. I don't have the exact figure. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I'm afraid, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I'm going to have to read this question because in 
terms of the minister and what might happen in the future, in the very near future, I think the minister should 
be prepared to answer the question. I have to read it because I'm not equipped otherwise. Monsieur l'Orateur, 
avez-vous un plan pour votre departement pour bilingue en consequence du resultat due referendum ce soir 
au Quebec? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I'll take that question under advisement and I'll come back to the hon. member. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I'm sure he would take it under advisement. The question is, for 
the benefit of the minister, do you have any plans in your department to make it bilingual as a result of the 
referendum results in the province of Quebec? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, there again, I'll take that question under advisement. I don't think that 
requires an answer at this particular point in time. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — My second question then Mr. Deputy Chairman, would be: has the minister made any 
plans or has his department made any plans or has the federal government made any interjections to request 
that he make his department bilingual if a substantial no vote occurred in Quebec or even if it didn't occur in 
Quebec? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — The answer, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is no, they have not. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Is the minister suggesting to me that he has had absolutely no request to produce 
documents in the province of Saskatchewan in French? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, on a very limited scale; my people tell me that we do receive 
correspondence in French and we have people on staff who can interpret it to make the necessary reply. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3258 

MR. COLLVER: — That's not of course what I asked the minister. Does he produce documents out of his 
department for the benefit of those people from the province of Quebec who would be desirous of feeling at 
home in all parts of Canada? Does the minister produce documents in order that they could create businesses 
in French in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, I'm told we do not, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Does the minister believe that is in keeping with the promises made by Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau during the recent referendum debate? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have never been asked nor approached to have any 
documentation or brochures of that nature produced for French speaking Quebec people nor have we on our 
own initiative produced any brochures in the French language for those people. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Has the minister produced any documents in any other language? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, my people tell me that we have, on a limited scale, prepared some 
brochures for Japanese information to be sent out. We have produced some in German for German 
information, but we haven't done any for the French speaking Canadians. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Does the minister believe that attitude of the Government of Saskatchewan with 
reference to the production of documents in other languages, but certainly not in one of the two official 
languages of Canada, is in keeping with a spirit co-operation that has been mentioned by Mr. Trudeau and 
others with reference to the future of this country? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, we feel if we were to produce documents in French to try to promote 
French investments into Saskatchewan, it would be the wrong attitude to take in Canada. That is why we 
produce one document, which is in English, which can be translated from English to French in French 
Canada if they so desire. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — And Mr. Minister, all I can say to you is: right on! But, Mr. Minister, you will be 
aware that is not what has been promised to the people of Quebec. That is not what they believe will result as 
a result of constitutional conferences. Mr. Minister will be aware what they expect is that there are two 
founding languages and therefore these languages will be available from coast to coast. Would the minister 
not agree that is the policy of the federal Government of Canada and that is the policy promised to the people 
of Quebec? That is why the people of Quebec voted 59 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
No? The minister responsible for no labour in Saskatchewan has been sitting in his chair for some 
considerable nights, saying no, and other kinds of lovely remarks that no one can possibly make into 
intelligent remarks. I sincerely hope that at some point the minister will rise on a reasonably important issue 
to present his erstwhile views, because those of us who are rising and presenting our views with reference to 
various departments in Saskatchewan are putting them on the record. The minister, in his own inimitable 
fashion, is not putting them on the record; he is merely swallowing them in his own fashion. I don't happen 
to believe that the minister's comments are rational or reasonable. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3259 

The minister will know there are demands by the federal government for various departments of the 
Saskatchewan government, including the Attorney General's department, to increase their bilingualism. That 
is not interpretation for the benefit of the Minister of Industry and Commerce. That is total and complete 
bilingualism. And let's not dance around; let's lay the cards where they shall be. If that is the demand and the 
minister says he wants to meet it, fair enough. If that is the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan, fair 
enough. But I don't think we should try to dance around this issue. 
 
The minister will know there not only have been demands, but there will be, as a result of tonight's vote, 
increasing demands by the federal government for various departments with whom the people deal to be 
both English and French because they are the two founding languages. I'm asking the Minister of Industry 
and Commerce (not the minister of no labour) whether or not his department has any plans or has made 
contingency plans or believes he should make contingency plans to produce documents in both French and 
English as a result of this policy? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, Mr. Chairman, we don't have any contingency plans. We haven't given that any 
thought at this time. If there will be some new ideas or new recommendations coming out of the Quebec vote 
this evening, we will abide by the rules the same as anybody else will. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, is the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Regina South is a 
little upset because he only had an hour and fifteen minutes of this questioning tonight and we've had exactly 
four minutes. I hope he's not upset by that problem. Is the minister saying to this Assembly that if the 
Government of Canada states that the Department of Industry and Commerce should produce all documents 
in both French and English, it is the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan that they will comply? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, if that becomes the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan, then the 
Department of Industry and Commerce will comply. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I believe the minister is trying to avoid the question. He has said the Government of 
Saskatchewan would comply with the rules if they were set out by the Government of Canada. I'm asking 
him, if the Government of Canada established the regulation that all documents from the Department of 
Industry and Commerce will be produced bilingually, will the Minister of the Department of Industry and 
Commerce state tonight whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan would comply? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I have said, if the Government of Saskatchewan complies, then the 
Department of Industry and Commerce will comply. If that becomes the policy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan then we will adhere to it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Is the minister attempting to suggest to this Assembly that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has no policy on bilingualism in terms of the Government of Saskatchewan at this point in 
time? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, I have stated on two or three occasions already that we will abide by 
whatever regulations are laid down by the Government of Saskatchewan. If the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs makes the suggestion that we become bilingual in all our statistics, then that's the 
route we will take. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3260 

MR. COLLVER: — What is the policy today of the Government of Saskatchewan with reference to the 
production of documents in both Canada's official languages? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I would suggest the hon. member ask the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs. We 
don't have any laid down policy. We prepare all our documents in the English language and nobody has 
directed us to do anything different. If there is going to be a different policy it has to come from a directive. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Is it the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan that all documents will be 
produced in English? Is that what the minister is saying to me today? As of today all documents will be 
produced in English. Is that correct? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I can't speak for the government at this particular time, Mr. Chairman. I only speak at 
this time for the Department of Industry and Commerce. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I'll take the member for Moosomin. 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member for Nipawin is asking a 
question, of course, to the minister responsible for industry and commerce. The question is very simple and 
the minister should be able to answer that question. Obviously since the minister can't answer the question, I 
will. This government in no way will be able to defend the Saskatchewan people's wishes with regard to 
bilingualism in this province if it happens to be the federal government's decision to have bilingualism in 
this province on a full, grand scale, anymore than, Mr. Deputy Chairman, it was in this government's ability 
to defend the Saskatchewan people's interest with regard to the conversion of the metric system. In fact, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, this government even went along with the federal government wholeheartedly in 
introducing, by way of an order in council, a provision to change acres to hectares, and that's an order in 
council of the provincial government. So I would say to you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, it's highly unlikely (and 
I would say this to the member for Nipawin) that this provincial government would be able to defend 
Saskatchewan rights in any way, shape or form with regard to metric or bilingualism or anything else for that 
matter. And, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that's the very reason we have to get a Progressive Conservative 
government in this province, so we can have a party which is going to defend the rights of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I was under the impression we were here tonight to discuss 
the industry and commerce estimates. Somehow we got off on the tangent of bilingualism, and as long as we 
have may I state this — I am very happy to hear that documents prepared by your department are being 
prepared in English only, for that's your policy. I would ask you this — why? And I say I'm happy to hear 
this because that issue is not of prime importance at this point in time, or a priority. I stated the priorities as I 
see them, of the Department of Industry and Commerce earlier this evening. But I would ask you, Mr. 
Minister, why were the taxpayers' dollars spent this year or last year in printing brochures or literature in 
Japanese, in German and others and at what cost? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I might relate to the hon. gentleman that the brochures we printed 
in German for a German publication cost us nothing. They were done through the German Chamber of 
Commerce. All we did was provide the 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3261 

information for them. The Japanese brochures that we printed, which we did . . . Do we have the cost here? 
We don't have the costs at hand, but I am told it's in the neighbourhood of $1,500. That was done because we 
had an awful lot, and we still get an awful lot, of inquiries from Japan on investment possibilities in 
Saskatchewan in our major industries. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, again I would question you on those two areas. By the way, are those the only 
two brochures which you have printed in other languages, first of all? Secondly, why mention German if you 
didn't do it? If it was done by the Chamber of Commerce, why should you even mention it in estimates? 
Thirdly, $1,500 for the Japanese brochures sounds to me like not too many brochures, because the cost of 
printing a brochure nowadays is very expensive. Also, you stated earlier that you make available these 
brochures in English, and they can be translated anywhere in Canada into other languages; why wasn't it 
done that way? Why wasn't an ordinary brochure translated into Japanese, rather than having something 
printed especially for the Japanese? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we had to send the brochures over there anyway, so why not do it 
in their own native tongue instead of having them get translators? With regard to the German brochures, it 
was totally our input into them but they told us they would print it in their own native tongue if we would 
supply the information, which we did. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — O.K. We'll get off that. But since we are talking about Japan, I understand you visited 
Japan yourself last year on a trade mission of some kind. Do you have a report on that trip, the cost of it? 
And would you table any report you may have? What business did you derive from this trip, and did you 
receive any contracts of any kind? Has any development by the Japanese shown up in Saskatchewan as a 
result of your trip to Japan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the cost of the trip to Japan last year was $21,962.86. The reason 
for the trip was a promotional mission. It was an informational mission. We worked very closely with the 
Canadian Embassy in Japan which arranged various successful meetings with different manufacturers and 
promoters in Japan. 
 
I might say that things in the promotional field with the Japanese don't happen overnight. It takes more 
missions of that kind; it takes more face to face discussions with the Japanese people than one mission, but 
you have to open the door at one point or another. When I'm saying that, might I just give you an example. 
British Columbia sends a mission to Japan about four times a year, and they do that on a continuous basis. 
They have been telling us it takes them at least two to three years to develop a liaison between the Japanese 
people and the British Columbia people. 
 
We are very optimistic about the results of the trip we had to Japan. We have already, from that trip (and 
even in that short span of time) had a couple of delegations here, not directly because we were there but 
because we had suggested to them that they come over here to see what was happening. We are quite 
satisfied with the first mission in that we have opened the door to Japanese investment and Japanese trade in 
Saskatchewan. Having said that I also have to say that just because we were there once, we don't expect to 
close the door. I would be prepared to state at this time that we are going to have to go back to renew our 
acquaintances with those various manufacturers — maybe once or twice more before something definitely 
happens. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3262 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — That was a pretty good job of skating, or saying nothing, Mr. Minister, and I might 
add, a very expensive door to open. You speak of $22,000; I have a series of questions on this so I'll ask 
them one by one. How many people totally, not necessarily from your department only, how large an 
entourage went to Japan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — There were four of us from our department. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would you tell me who they are? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Bryce Baron, Trevor Apperley and Larry Wendelborg were with me. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Are you then saying, as a result of the trip, nothing developed other than two 
delegations coming from Japan to see what Saskatchewan is all about. So far, you have not had any results at 
all in Japanese investments in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. VICKAR: — We have had no direct investments as yet in Saskatchewan from Japan as a result of the 
trip but the inquiries are there. We've had these people over here from Japan. As I said earlier, it just doesn't 
happen overnight. It's going to take some promotion. We feel we're on the right track after seeing, for 
example, the types of promotions British Columbia and Alberta have to do in Japan. We feel we're only at 
the beginning stages. Therefore, we feel that the $21,000 or $22,000 we spent was trivial compared to what 
other provinces are spending in promoting their provinces in Japan. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Earlier in my questioning on this subject I asked you to table the report. Are you 
prepared to do that? I would be curious to know what kinds of inquiries were made. What kind of 
information were you looking for at the time of that trip? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member for 
Nipawin wants a crack at it again, he can do it for the next ten weeks if he wants. But I'd like to be able to 
finish and be permitted to finish. Thank you very much. 
 
To get back to my question, Mr. Minister, what kinds of inquiries were made and what kind of information 
were you seeking? Will you table that report? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we don't have a report as the member sees it. We don't prepare a 
report but we do have the documentation of the various manufacturers we visited. I don't think there's any 
problem in giving you the documentation of the names of the manufacturers we visited and the 
manufacturing associations we were in contact with and the reasons for discussions with them. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Am I to understand you'll be sending this over tonight? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, this doesn't happen overnight. We have to go back and complete the information. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that and I will be looking forward to receiving 
it. 
 
You produced some movies last year. I understand that was done through the Department of Industry and 
Commerce. Who Has Seen the Wind was one of them. Was that not one of your ventures or promotions or 
did you not give a grant to it? Were you involved in any way, shape or form? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, the Department of Industry and Commerce was not involved. The 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3263 

Department of Culture and Youth was involved and SEDCO was involved. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, since SEDCO is part of Industry and Commerce, (I think part of the 
subvotes in here are SEDCO) would you mind answering then what part SEDCO played there? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Although we are not in Crown corporations discussing SEDCO, I can answer the 
question for the hon. member. There's no problem whatsoever. SEDCO advanced $300,000 if I remember 
correctly on behalf of the Department of Culture and Youth to promote Who Has Seen the Wind and has 
since then received in return (I can't remember the figures offhand) some repayment on the loan from Who 
Has Seen the Wind. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Obviously you don't have it with you here tonight. I would be interested in knowing 
what returns you are getting on the movie, what the total cost of it was, the cost to SEDCO . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I guess you're getting questions from both sides here, so could you do that for me please? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, maybe you could get that information from the Department 
of Culture and Youth when their estimates come up because all SEDCO did was act on their behalf. I think 
the figure was $300,000. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Just what do you mean when you say you acted on their behalf? Did they do the 
promotion on it and so on? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think the hon. minister is sitting there from culture and youth. 
Would you like to answer that question? Maybe he can answer the question for you. 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — May I suggest the hon. members ask 
these questions of the Department of Culture and Youth? While the money was loaned directly from 
SEDCO, in fact the negotiations were carried on by my department. It is my officials who know the details. 
Why don't you save those questions and we'll be happy to give you all the information you want and more. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Does that include other movies that were made as well? I don't want to come to the 
Department of Culture and Youth to find out that I've got to go to SEDCO once it's too late. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think the member will find we just participated in one movie and that was it. 
We haven't loaned money to other movies. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, in that case, maybe I'll go back to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. The 
movie Slapshot, were you involved in that one through industry and commerce or SEDCO? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we were not involved in any movie whatsoever. I think the hon. 
Minister of Culture and Youth is absolutely correct. SEDCO was not involved in it. 
 
MR. D. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Deputy Chairman, you say you've provided 
$300,000 for Who Has Seen The Wind. I think the question my colleague is wanting answered is, have you 
put money from SEDCO into other movies? No other  



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3264 

one? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No other one, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Maybe I'm being a little picky on this one, but your report, under communications 
branch, indicates that in addition two television commercials, six radio commercials, a number of printed 
advertisements and exhibits, a 20-minute motion picture film and other projects were completed. Now you 
just said we weren't involved in any movies at all. The report says you were involved in a 20-minute one. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, that is not a movie or a film that we were doing. That was a 
promotional film for the department in itself. It had nothing to do with any commercial enterprise. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, earlier I asked you a question on the European tour. Since some of the 
questions now have taken a different angle I'm going to go back to that one and ask you again, was your 
department or SEDCO involved in any way, shape or form with the Premier's European tour, the Chinese 
trip by the Attorney General or the Minister of Mineral Resources in China as well or Russia? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we were not involved with either one of those trips. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I'll accept that. Now, earlier again in my comments I referred to the economic 
development department, the bill is just being introduced in this House. Will this in any way, shape or form 
affect, work with, co-relate with the Department of Industry and Commerce? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it certainly will; it works very closely with the Department of 
Industry and Commerce and I think it has a place in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Will it eventually take the place of industry and commerce? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Not to my knowledge, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, several years ago your department produced a booklet 
with all the different contacts for people from the United States, other provinces and Europe who were 
coming to look for agriculture, livestock, swine, sheep, horses and so forth. It was a brochure of what was 
available. It was about a 200-page brochure, in English, advertising many of the top producers and the 
availability of special markets for these people. Your department has stopped producing that booklet, and the 
people in the industry are very annoyed at you because it was a good promotional piece which we used to be 
able to pass around the country. I'm wondering if you will reconsider that style of brochure, which had all the 
different industries in it, and which was mainly used to send to other governments and trade corporations and 
places where our cattle and so forth would be promoted for the betterment of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I'm told we discontinued printing that brochure about four years 
ago, primarily because we were no longer promoting livestock in Saskatchewan. That was taken over by the 
Department of Agriculture. So if you're 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3265 

referring to livestock promotion, brochures would now come from the Department of Agriculture. We don't 
have any brochures. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — But even in those days, Mr. Minister, you produced it as industry and commerce, but 
agriculture was doing a lot of work with it. Even in that day it was agriculture's baby, but because of industry 
and commerce bringing funds into the province your people produced that one brochure. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, since we discontinued the brochure we have really had no 
requests to reinstate it. Our department feels that it really has no value. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions which won't take very much time. Can you 
tell me, under the economic development program for disadvantaged persons, what the Melfort Greenhouse 
and Market Garden Co-op is? I see a grant there of $164,000. I'm just curious about that one. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I can give you the details on that. That greenhouse is a 
disadvantaged people's program. It is presently employing about 20 disadvantaged people. It is a greenhouse 
established under the disadvantaged people's program for year-round work. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That's worthwhile, I would have to add. Just a couple more. 
Business activities in the province — when you talk about business activity relating to new start-ups and 
going out of business, do you have the figures for last year, particularly for Regina and Saskatoon? How 
many businesses folded or went bankrupt or into receivership or broke or whatever, and how many started 
up? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — My people tell me they can get you that information. They don't have that information 
along with them. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, so far this evening you have been doing very well in not giving me 
anything. Aren't you prepared for the estimates? I think a question like that would be one your department 
should have ready, tonight. After all, we're talking about industry and commerce in the province. Surely, 
with your five officials with you tonight, somebody there should be able to give you an answer to that, or has 
the answer with him. Why did you bother bringing them if they didn't bring any information with them? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we don't keep a running chart on these types of businesses. The 
city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon have their own charts on the development and the failures of 
businesses. As I said earlier, our department will get the information for you and give it to you. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That's all very well to get the information for me later on. So far I've been accepting 
that tonight. Tell me, what is the function of your department? What is the function of the officials you have 
with you tonight? After all, that is a very important question I just asked. I want to know what kind of 
businesses are not making it in this province, who is coming in and what the net results are. I know the 
answer to the net results will be that there are less who've come in than have gone out. But that is something 
your department should have on hand and ready for these estimates. I can't come back next week or after 
we've closed these estimates tonight and get back to these questions. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3266 

MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I just want to correct one statement the hon. member has made. I 
want to remind him that every business failure or even every business venture that happens in the province of 
Saskatchewan does not necessarily come through the Department of Industry and Commerce. We may know 
of only a very small percentage of the profitable ventures and the failures that happen in the province. 
 
The customers don't come to us for information. They just don't come to us for information . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, but it's not our department that keeps track of bankruptcies. That may be the other 
department. We are saying we can get you that information totally compiled, if you so wish. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You know, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the minister has just confirmed what I said earlier 
tonight. The Department of Industry and Commerce has been sitting on its hands doing absolutely nothing, 
particularly when we're talking about business, industry and commerce in the province of Saskatchewan. 
You don't know! It should be your job to find out what is going on relating to businesses coming in or going 
out of this province. What is the function of your department? I asked that question earlier. If you're 
interested in knowing who is coming in, you could issue bulletins on that every month giving the number of 
new businesses, the number of grants and so on that you have made. Surely you can tell me who has gone 
out. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we can give the hon. member the information on all the inquiries 
that have come through the department and all the businesses that we assist through the course of the year. 
But, as I said earlier, we don't nearly begin to assist all the businesses that come into Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Could we have a bit more quiet please? It's very hard to hear the minister 
respond. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — The minister will be aware that in the last year or so, the bus depot in Melfort moved 
from the Gulf station on the highway to a downtown location. Did the Department of Industry and 
Commerce, to his knowledge, or did he in his capacity, have any influence on that decision whatsoever? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, the Department of Industry and Commerce did not have any influence. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Would the minister be prepared to answer the criticism of the people of the area on the 
movement of the bus depot from the highway to a downtown location, which I understand is owned by, or 
formerly owned by, the Minister of Industry and Commerce (that's what I was told by the people in the area; 
I'm sure the minister will correct me)? Would the minister be prepared to answer the criticism being made in 
his own constituency that business has actually fallen off, as a result of this move of the bus depot? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I think the hon. member is completely out of whack. I don't know where he gets all his 
information. I had no investment in the building prior to it being used as the bus depot. I might say the 
people in my constituency were tickled pink that the bus depot was moved from the rural municipality of 
Star City to the town of Melfort where it belongs. The business has increased twofold and the public in 
Melfort are very happy with the situation, contrary to the information the hon. member has. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3267 

MR. COLLVER: — Is the minister aware of the group in his own constituency which is putting together a 
petition to have the bus depot moved back to its original location, as they felt the service was far superior 
there? As a result of the minister's machinations, would he be prepared to answer this other question? Does 
the Minister of Industry and Commerce own any buildings adjacent to, or businesses adjacent to the bus 
depot in its present location? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, two questions. Number one, he asked, am I aware that there's a 
petition floating around? I might tell the hon. member that he's about two and one-half to three years behind 
time. When we were promoting the bus movement to the downtown area of Melfort, there was a petition 
around to keep it in its present location. There are no petitions around at this particular time. 
 
Second question, do I own any property next to the depot? Absolutely none. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I would like to move into the employment development programs handled by the 
Department of Industry and Commerce. The main reason I want to raise this is that there's been a fair amount 
of money which formerly went into the employment support program in the social services department that 
has been shunted into your department. It's been increased considerably. I'd like to know what you have in 
mind; what programs are you putting forward; who is going to benefit in this area? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Previous to our taking Special ARDA, we administered a small portion of Special 
ARDA. Now we have accepted complete control of Special ARDA and some of ESP along with it. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Could you enlarge a bit on what you are doing with the money? You were pretty brief there. 
Could you enlarge on who is going to benefit from the funds you have in this program? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — The Special ARDA program is geared primarily to native people outside the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Yes, I knew that much before you spoke. But I would like to know which native people you 
are going to be investing this amount of money in. What kinds of programs are you proposing? What are you 
going to do with the money? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, at the outset I would like to remind the hon. member that we have 
only recently taken over the program. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. It's impossible to hear the minister reply. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we have only recently taken over the program of Special ARDA 
and it is pretty difficult for us to have developed a strategy program. However, the Special ARDA program is 
one in which we invite requests from the native people and we are doing that at this time. The program 
varies in the industrial field as the hon. member may know. We are presently working with the native people 
on various types of programs they have approached us for. We don't have a special line of attack at this 
particular time; we are waiting for their input. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, you tell us you've just recently taken over the program. When you developed 
these estimates you must have had some idea, back in September or October, how much money it was going 
to take to fund a specific program. Now you 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3268 

have come up with a budgetary estimate of $3,390,000. You must have had a figure in your mind of 
something you were going to do if you were going to come up with this kind of figure. I think it demands an 
answer, and not just to be shuffled off like you're doing. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, a good portion of the funding in the $3 million which we allocated in our 
budget was moneys that we had previously and the rest of it was transferred to us from the social services 
department. The reason for the transfer was a change in government thinking in the native program so we in 
the Department of Industry and Commerce should be responsible for the total economic package in the 
native development field. As an example of what we're doing, the Melfort greenhouse, the question just 
asked a few moments ago, is possibly one program which would be used in that particular field. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I'm not ready to ask a question. I was just going to ask if the 
Deputy Chairman would mind asking the ministers and the member for Nipawin who want to play kissy-face 
to do it behind the rails so that the rest of us can be interested and concerned about the estimates of the 
Department of Industry and Commerce. Now I can't even hear my seatmate, let alone the minister when he's 
replying to a question. If they are interested in having a little game of kissy-face or whatever it is they're 
trying to do, there's a place for it there or back there. Would you mind instructing them to do that please? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — The member for Regina South makes an excellent point. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — I would certainly appreciate if there is conversation (particularly from 
members who objected that they couldn't be heard, couldn't raise questions themselves) if the members 
concerned would sit by the rail or something like that. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I have a question which I would like to ask you. Was your department 
involved in any way, shape or form with RECON Manufacturing of Calgary re their building a tank plant in 
the Battleford area? I'm not sure where. Was your department in any way, shape or form involved with 
promoting, encouraging, asking or working with this company? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, my people are not aware of that company or that we were 
involved in it at all. I don't think we were. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would you be aware of SEDCO being involved in it in any way, shape or form? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I can't answer that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, this evening because my people from SEDCO 
are not here. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Is your department involved in the purchasing of business locations in the town of 
Swift Current at the present time? I'm referring to the buildings owned by Wilton Motors, Standard Motors, 
Revelstoke and Beaver Lumber. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — We're not, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3269 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would have to just comment that I think the two hours which 
we've spent on industry and commerce tonight have been seriously a waste of time. I can appreciate the 
negative answers when they're not involved; I cannot appreciate the negative answers when they are involved 
but can't come prepared to these estimates with certain facts and information which we on this side would 
like to have. I have to wait to get them. 
 
Hopefully, Mr. Minister, next year when you come for the estimates of industry and commerce you will 
review the questions which were asked of you this year through Hansard so perhaps you'll come prepared 
with some of those answers for us at that time next year. Because frankly, what we've received tonight is a 
big fat zero; two hours and four minutes later that's a little discouraging. I for one do not intend to sit here 
until August or however long this House is going to be sitting. I'd like to get on with the business of this 
legislature so I'm going to leave it at that until next year, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — One question to the minister, and I'm not sure if SEDCO is the right spot. Can we 
handle it under that estimate or can I handle it here? Westank, which produces tanks in the province of 
Saskatchewan, do you have them in your department or does SEDCO have an involvement? I'm not sure 
which? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — That's not our department. SEDCO is involved. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Under the SEDCO vote then will you be prepared later tonight? Will you be prepared 
to answer a question about that? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I'll answer any questions I am able to. If there is any information that I don't know that 
SEDCO can provide, I'll tell the hon. member. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — You'll have your officials here later when we do that SEDCO vote? There's a vote 
here, in the estimates re SEDCO which the opposition has a right to question you on. We have in the past in 
this House and are you suggesting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Never did? Mr. Minister, do you not 
remember the days and days that we spent on SEDCO in this House? Your memory is almost as short as the 
amount of hair you have on the top of your head. You know, we have been at SEDCO in this House, Mr. 
Minister. Are you going to bring your officials so we can ask you about that? It's in the book. Look in the 
book; you'll find it. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the item, Vote 48 is a statutory vote. We have never in this House 
brought the Crown corporations' people in to answer questions and this thing has been going on for year after 
year. We just finished Crown corporations a couple of days ago and there was no reason on earth why the 
questions couldn't have been asked at that particular point in time. As I mentioned earlier, if there is anything 
I can answer when that subvote comes up I'll be glad to answer it but I don't guarantee that I know all the 
answers. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, to pursue the question from the member for Rosthern, will you provide 
the answer later if he has questions on that? Is that what you said? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Well, if that's the way the hon. member wants to ask it or the hon. member can ask me 
the questions personally. I'll be glad to get some information for 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3270 

him. There's no problem. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, to save time, I'll tell you what the question is. Why in the world can I 
buy Westank tanks in Toronto cheaper than I can buy them right where they are manufactured in this 
province? And you people are the people who have a pile of capital involved. It's strange that I can buy our 
products cheaper in Ontario than I can in our own province and you are a major shareholder in that 
corporation. Are you not concerned with the citizens of Saskatchewan? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I can answer that one. That's a very simple question. We don't run Westank's business. 
Good luck to Westank if they can sell them cheaper in Ontario than they can in Saskatchewan to promote 
their business. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well as far as the Department of Industry and Commerce is concerned, you are saying 
to heck with Saskatchewan people. You are more interested in foreign trade in Ontario or where else. To 
heck with Saskatchewan, let them pay the high price. Everybody else gets the bargain subsidized by us. Hey, 
come on, get off the boat. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 

Item 2 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I don't know whether this is the place to ask the question or not but you have an 
advertising budget I would take it? I have two questions on it. Who does your advertising? Who has the 
contract and how much money did you spend last year on it? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, Dunsky Advertising does the total package for industry and 
commerce at a cost of, last year, $115,020. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Have you tendered or submitted tenders for advertising contracts? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — No, our department does not tender it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Don't you agree, Mr. Minister, it might be wise, instead of just giving political 
patronage to Dunsky Advertising as the rest of the departments do, to show a little leadership and call for 
tenders on some of these items which are nothing short of political patronage. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — I think the total advertising package of the government is divided into various 
advertising agencies, and Dunsky Advertising happens to be ours. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I might add that the advertising contracts from all departments 
are divided between two, one being Struthers and the other being Dunsky. And let me tell you, there are a lot 
more than those two agencies in this province. Calling for tenders would be good business, Mr. Minister. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 

Item 4 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3271 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Agreed, Mr. Chairman, but I would like to suggest, if you like, to save a little time, 
that you just read the number and the amount and go with it. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 

Item 6 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A question to the minister on that item. Would you please provide us with a list of 
those loans that were forgiven or would you table the list? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, there's no problem there. You will find them in public accounts if you take the 
trouble to look at them. But we'll get you a list. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
Item 7 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, in this particular estimate, is this a grant or a payment for the fellow 
who crushes the cars and so forth which are hauled to IPSCO? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — This is money we pay out to the 63 different contract areas in the province to pick up 
these cars and bring them to various depots in the province plus the contract to bring them to Regina. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, in respect to the fellow who crushes the cars and so forth or hauls them 
to Regina, was that tendered in the last few years or was it just renewed? I think Curtis or something is the 
name of the company. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Yes, it has been tendered and it's a two-year contract. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Who has the contract? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Curtis Construction. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I understand it was not tendered; it was just offered to him again and 
extended. It wasn't opened to other contracts this time or the time before. You did not tender it, you just 
reopened it for him. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — It was tendered. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, if it was tendered, would the minister care to table the documents on all the 
tenders on that tender? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Again we are prepared to give you the information. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — One more question. These people who pick up cars and haul them to the . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Order, order please! Member for Rosthern. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3272 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, for the 63 depots you referred to, how much subsidy do you pay the 
people who pick up the cars and haul them to the depot? What do you pay them? Secondly, how do you 
award the contract for the individuals who pick up the cars in each local area? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Every one of those contracts is tendered and my people tell me the average cost is about 
$25 per ton. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you agreed to table the tenders the last time around. Would you table 
those tenders? Also, would you send me a copy of who the people were who bid to do the picking up of cars 
in my own constituency? Who was awarded the tender, and which companies or individuals were turned 
down? I want all the tenders. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would suggest that if the hon. member wants to get some 
information on who tendered in his own constituency, he should just pick up the telephone and phone our 
office. They'll be glad to give you the information. I don't think there's any problem. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I would like you to table it; I have a reason. I would like to have some 
names on record and the only way to do it is to have you table it. Rather than get into something else, I 
would like it in a public document as to how some individuals got these contracts because there are a lot of 
questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand once they're under contract to pick up cars from you that they age not allowed to 
pick up the cars and sell them to scrap dealers. Is that correct? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, it is a fact when they are working for Operation Recycle, if they obtain a 
car or the body of a car under the name of Operation Recycle, they cannot sell it to anybody else. What they 
do on their own, outside Operation Recycle, is entirely their own business. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I assume from what you said earlier that you're going to give me copies 
of the tenders. Also, Mr. Minister, I assume when they pick up cars under contract to you, that these 
individuals are not allowed to charge the people they are picking the cars up from, when the cars are to end 
up as property of the government to be recycled. Is that correct? They cannot charge the individual from 
whom they pick up the car an additional $10 or something for taking away the vehicle. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Under Operation Recycle there's no charge to the car owner. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Are you going to give me those tenders I asked for? I'm still waiting for comment. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Well, I suggested that you phone, but we're prepared to table the information for your 
riding if you will give us the boundaries so we can work them into one or three or four of the 63 boundaries 
we have in the tendering process. We don't know the information. We don't know that. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, Mr. Minister, the people who pick them up around Martensville and Warman; 
that's the area I'm looking for. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3273 

Items 8 to 13 agreed. 
 

Item 14 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I would ask the minister what that is. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, that is a request by the auditor. When HRDA (Human Resources 
Development Agency) was disbanded there was nothing on the books to allow us to guarantee the loans 
made back in 1973-74, etc. So, we had to provide for the loans still outstanding under the HRDA program. 
That is the $5,000 we had to put in our budget this year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, What's HRDA? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Human Resources Development Agency. 
 
Item 14 agreed. 
 
Industry and Commerce Vote 19 agreed. 
 
SASKATCHEWAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION — HERITAGE FUND — 

VOTE 48 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: — Is there any discussion? 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, do you want to bring in your SEDCO officials for this 
estimate? We could just table it until later so you could answer some questions. Well, let's get into a fight. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is unfortunate that the Attorney General doesn't spend more time in the House, but that's the 
way it works. Mr. Minister, would you explain the increase in the statutory amount which is over double 
what you had last year? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I said a while ago that we went through Crown corporations. This 
is only a subvote authorizing the moneys to be placed into SEDCO. We don't normally bring SEDCO people 
or any Crown corporation people into the House to be questioned. The opportunities were there during 
Crown corporations; we were in there for three days and the rights were all there. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, would you tell the House what you intend to do with the $44 million 
you are asking for in this estimate? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — SEDCO intends to use it for their operation and development for the year ensuing. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Would you give us a list of the projects that you intend to spend it on? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Chairman, that is the most ridiculous question asked yet. How do we know what 
projects we're going to spend it on? How do we know what applications are going to be made to us during 
the next year? 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3274 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, in Crown corporations you told us that it was not in the public interest. 
Here you say you are not going to say anything? Here we go again. 
 
Vote 48 agreed. 
 

INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE — HERITAGE FUND — VOTE 19 
 

Item 1 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
THE SASKATCHEWAN RESEARCH COUNCIL — ORDINARY EXPENDITURE — VOTE 35 
 

Item 1 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, in concluding the debates on these estimates, I would just like to 
express my appreciation to the officials of the Department of Industry and Commerce and hope that my next 
door neighbour there will still be talking to me after all the work I've put him through tonight, and the work 
he is going to have to provide. I hope they will certainly be reading Hansard so they don't miss anything we 
have asked for tonight. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — CULTURE AND YOUTH — VOTE 7 
 

Item 1 
 
HON. E. B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — I might begin by introducing my staff. 
Sitting on my immediate left is my deputy minister, Liz Dowdeswell; director of administration, Barbara 
Zimmer; Louis Jule, behind me and to my left executive director of cultural activities; and Bill Clarke, 
immediately behind me, executive director of the sport and recreation branch. Sitting at the back is Ron 
Borden who is director of youth employment services; Dean Clark who is director of heritage resources; and 
Dr. Gorden Vichert who is head of the cultural policy secretariat. 
 
MR. G. M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Minister, I would like to begin by welcoming your officials 
here tonight. In all honesty, I had hoped you would have had them in here a little earlier than this. There 
aren't many things to really get at in the Department of Culture and Youth; I don't know if we could get away 
with it tonight. However, I'm not sure we can get it done in the short time left to us. But we'll make every 
attempt. I have some specific questions in certain areas. I have a proposal for you and will call for your 
reaction. In fact, this afternoon I did mention it in an amendment to a motion which was before the House, 
put forward by the member for Regina North-West regarding intervarsity athletics. I know certainly your 
reaction may be that this is in the realm of the Department of Continuing Education, but I believe it should 
be and could be in the culture and youth department under the sport and recreation area. The proposal I 
would like to put forward is that the Government of Saskatchewan come up with a program much like the 
one which has been put very recently in place in British Columbia, an athletic scholarship program for 
resident students in the universities in that province. I suggest that it would be a good thing to put in place 
here. Maybe I could just start from there and elaborate on it a bit, but if you have something in mind in your 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3275 

department I could maybe hear about it now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — We don't have such a program. I'm not sure at this juncture, if it would come 
under my department or the Department of Continuing Education, but I'm not sure that's necessarily so. I 
think it's fair to say in response to the member's proposal that we have not had an opportunity to review it. I 
haven't had an opportunity to discuss it, nor have they had an opportunity to extensively consider it. I think 
what I would do is say to the hon. member, it's something we would be prepared to consider in the next year. 
I think I can go no further than that, since we really haven't had a change to think about it very much. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I would just like to elaborate on what I would propose a little bit, so that you will have 
something on record for your consideration. I would not take too much time in the House for that, but I 
believe athletic scholarships would encourage our young athletes to stay here in Saskatchewan. People with 
promise and potential, as you well know and as everybody knows, are being drained off and are going to the 
United States to colleges that offer athletic scholarships, as very many of them do there. 
 
The Department of Culture and Youth could stem that tide and establish a Saskatchewan youth athletic 
scholarship program. Indeed this program could be funded by money from the heritage fund and make 
Saskatchewan a real leader in athletic programs in North America. 
 
There's another key reason why Saskatchewan should provide athletic scholarships, in my opinion. I really 
believe our society has reached such a high standard of living today, that recreation and leisure-time 
activities are, in the near future, going to be important to Saskatchewan residents. It's not all that long ago 
that people were working seven-day weeks, but today most work five-day weeks and many four-day weeks. I 
believe we have to have the expertise and the competence to manage and develop recreational and leisure 
activity for ourselves. 
 
In reviewing the whole matter of athletic scholarships, I have noted there is enabling legislation. I mentioned 
this earlier today, the enabling legislation within the Canadian Intercollegiate Athletic Union, which the 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, is involved in. There is legislation there to provide for third party 
presentation of scholarships. It has been the view in very many circles in Saskatchewan and in western 
Canada, that people wouldn't be eligible for them because of the laws within the university athletic 
conferences. I don't believe that is the case. 
 
The Government of British Columbia, as I mentioned earlier, has recognized that there is a need to 
encourage and reward excellence in this field, to get good athletes to stay in their province. In that regard, 
Mr. Minister, British Columbia has set up an athletic scholarship fund and awards have already been made 
for the last semester in their universities. They are providing for 550 scholarships of $1,000 each. To be 
eligible for one of these scholarships a student must be in full-time attendance and must be attaining passing 
grades at one of the three B.C. universities. So I would suggest the same thing for our two universities. 
Furthermore, recipients must be Canadian citizens or landed immigrants and must have been residents of 
B.C. for at least one year. I would propose the same situation here. The final condition is that the awards be 
made from the university to the student. 
 
When one examines the calendars of the University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, you can 
find listed scholarships for various disciplines, but under the 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3276 

category of phys ed there are very few awards. I believe a Saskatchewan youth athletic scholarship program 
would be an excellent investment. In terms of the rewards and the participation of the athletes in sports in the 
province, the incentive they provide for other youngsters to remain here and the contribution they make to 
athletes after they graduate, in coaching, administration, organization and other things of that nature, I think 
is well worth the investment. 
 
I believe I have made the point anyway. You have said you would consider it. We could leave it at that. I do 
want to expedite the working of the House and get through these estimates as quickly as possible. 
 
Question, Mr. Minister. I notice it is within the realm of the Department of Culture and Youth that you make 
grants to the Saskatchewan Diamond Jubilee Corporation. I would be interested in your reasoning as a 
government, or within your department, in creating this as a Crown corporation, as you had the structure 
within the Department of Culture and Youth. The structure was there when you came up with the concept of 
developing a diamond jubilee corporation. The structure is there within your department. With some 
additional staff and the funding within that department, I believe you could have carried on the Celebrate 
Saskatchewan activities and had all of the activities, the expenditures and everything relating to Celebrate 
Saskatchewan, under legislative review, rather than in the realm of a Crown corporation, which seems to be 
the case with the government in all cases. Would you mind responding? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would say to the member that it was a marginal call, either the department or a 
Crown corporation. We agonized over it for a while, before it was administered. The decision was 
fortunately made when I became a minister, but the decision was considered for some time. I think the 
thinking was that they wanted Celebrate Saskatchewan to be something the people did for themselves. They 
wanted Celebrate Saskatchewan to be a program whereby people were inspired to organize their own 
celebration, not a program whereby something was organized for them to enjoy. 
 
I think it was felt it would be a little easier to pursue that philosophy and get people to do it for themselves if 
it weren't a line department, if it were a Crown corporation. I think it was just an attempt to put the thing at 
some distance from the government, to reinforce the notion that this was something people had to do for 
themselves, not something the government was going to do for them. That was the thinking behind it. I'll 
admit it would have worked well either way. We could have run it out of the department. I don't think it 
would have been a whole lot less successful; I'm not sure it would have been much more successful. But that 
was the thinking behind it when it was done. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — You have just admitted, Mr. Minister, that it was a judgment call and it could very well 
have been administered by your department. I was going to say I perhaps have more confidence in your 
department than your colleagues, or the Premier, or whoever made this decision. Certainly if it was a 
judgment call, I don't see what would be so inspiring to the people of Saskatchewan about the concept of a 
Crown corporation. Crown corporations don't do any more for the people of a community that is honouring 
those who broke the land and built the church and built the school and did all of those things which are so 
important to Celebrate Saskatchewan, and which we all believe in. But what is so inspiring about the fact it 
is under the auspices of a Crown corporation? I just can't buy your explanation; you will have to do a little 
better than that. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3277 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — If I seemed to suggest to the hon. member that there is something inspiring about 
a Crown corporation, then I did not make myself clear. The attempt, in setting up this program, was to put 
some distance between the program and the government. We did not want to be in the position of having the 
provincial government organize a celebration for the people. In an attempt to put some distance between the 
government and the program, we set it up as a Crown corporation. Perhaps that's another way of explaining 
it. It was an attempt to put some distance between the program and the government so the people would see 
that this was not a provincial government program, but a celebration they themselves were largely 
responsible for. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Then I can be assured, Mr. Minister, when . . . Would you like to add something? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would like to introduce the executive director of Celebrate Saskatchewan, who 
is sitting immediately to my right and behind me, Frank Bogdasavich. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Welcome sir. 
 
Mr. Minister, with that explanation we can be assured then that when Celebrate Saskatchewan is under 
review in Crown corporations next year the stock answer, that it's not in the public interest, will not enter 
into discussions about that Crown corporation. Would that be fair game? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well I can assure the members you won't hear that uttered from my lips about 
Celebrate Saskatchewan. That may be in part because I'm not the minister responsible; but I'm sure the Hon. 
Ed Tchorzewski, who is responsible, will be prepared to disclose the information about the program. 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the minister's reply to the member for 
Meadow Lake, that a Crown corporation in some way sets Celebrate Saskatchewan farther from the 
government than his department, is absolute nonsense, absolute and total nonsense. How a Crown 
corporation can set that function, which it is set out to perform, further away from government than his own 
department is beyond me. 
 
I suppose maybe what he is doing, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is attempting to follow the philosophy of the 
government with regard to all Crown corporations: they in some way, although created by the government, 
are not part of the government and in fact have nothing to do with the government. And that's why, when you 
take a count of civil servants, it doesn't include Crown corporations. That's why, when you take into account 
and look at the expenditures of government, they don't include Crown corporations. So I suppose, it's in that 
vein and in that way of thinking that the minister feels, in response to the questioning from the member for 
Meadow Lake, that a Crown corporation for Celebrate Saskatchewan is going to set the people in that 
celebration further away from government. And I say it's absolute nonsense. Your department could have 
declared Celebrate Saskatchewan; your department could have handled Celebrate Saskatchewan and could 
have given all the local autonomy and freedom to the local people in the province of Saskatchewan to put 
together their own programs without forming a Crown corporation. There isn't a person in Saskatchewan 
who doesn't agree with me on that. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3278 

Now, Mr. Minister, I will ask you this specific question. When discussions were under way (and they must 
have been) as to whether or not your department would handle Celebrate Saskatchewan, or whether or not a 
Crown corporation would be formed to handle it, what was your personal viewpoint as minister responsible 
for culture and youth regarding a Crown corporation? Were you in favour of your department handling it, or 
were you in favour of a Crown corporation taking charge of Celebrate Saskatchewan activities and putting it 
under another minister? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — As I indicated to the member for Meadow Lake, the decision was made before I 
became Minister of Culture and Youth. But let me say I support the decision that was eventually taken. I said 
when we began that I don't think the celebrations would have been much different had it been handled by the 
Department of Culture and Youth. But the effort to set the celebrations off from government and set them 
apart as something different, something the people did for themselves, was a worth-while endeavour. You 
may argue that a Crown corporation doesn't serve the purpose. But I certainly support the goal that the 
celebrations be a certain distance from government. I support the goal. I think the Crown corporation may 
have lent something to it. I agree with the hon. member that it wasn't the reason for the success of the 
program. But I don't think the program would have been much different had it been handled by the 
Department of Culture and Youth. 
 
I said in the beginning it was a marginal call but I think probably the correct one was made, if you want my 
personal view. 
 
MR. D. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Are you tell me, Mr. Minister, you don't feel the 
Department of Culture and Youth, the recreational boards and the regional co-ordinators spread throughout 
this province could handle Celebrate Saskatchewan? Are you telling me and admitting that by removing it 
further from government there would have been a danger if it would have been handled under your 
department? Is that what you're trying to tell us? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I certainly didn't indicate to the hon. members that I didn't think my department 
could handle it competently. What I was trying to indicate to the members opposite was that the existing 
staff of Celebrate Saskatchewan has done a very competent job of administering the program. I don't think it 
would have been done much more competently by my department. It was competently done where it was. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Explain to me what you mean by further removed from government. It's better out there 
further removed from government. That's the statement I heard you say a minute or two ago. What's the basis 
behind that? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, what we sought to avoid was the provincial government organizing a 
program which they would place before the people. I think all hon. members will agree upon the goal. You 
may not agree upon whether or not a Crown corporation contributed to it, but I think if you think about it, 
you'll agree with the goal. 
 
What we sought to do was not organize a program for them. What we sought to do was to set up some 
machinery whereby they might organize their own celebration — a celebration which would not be 
particularly a Government of Saskatchewan celebration but a province of Saskatchewan celebration. The 
decision was made, which I support, that it could be as well done and probably better done, by a Crown 
corporation which is some distance from the executive arm of the government. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3279 

Again, I say to the hon. members that I don't think the program would have been much different if the 
department had organized it. I think it probably would have turned out very much the same. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — It probably would have been quite a saving to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan had it been 
done through your department. I agree with you 100 per cent about having local input and having the local 
people organize their programs. But isn't that what is taking place in recreation, through the recreation 
boards and under directors in your department now? Couldn't that have been accomplished with Celebrate 
Saskatchewan in the same manner, where everything was in place? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, that's largely the way in which the department works — creating an 
atmosphere in which people can organize their own leisure activities, sports and cultural activities. That's 
largely right. I think, however, the Crown corporation which isn't part of the executive arm of government is 
more likely to be seen by people as something that is somehow, different from a department of government 
and something they have to organize for themselves. 
 
MR. G. M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Minister, I would agree with my colleague for Indian 
Head-Wolseley regarding the . . . I said at the outset I have confidence your department can handle that and I 
was glad at least you said the same thing. Certainly that is the case all across the province, so I don't have a 
great number of problems with the way your department is operating. The reason I like the way the 
department is operating in the regions is because of this local input. When you have the regional games and 
so on they're not programs which are set out before the people. People in communities have a lot of input 
into what's happening. 
 
I believe the same as you do that Celebrate Saskatchewan could operate the same way and I believe very 
strongly it should have been within that structure. I believe we could have had similar programs with less 
money being spent; although when it comes under review we'll see how much. I don't disagree that the 
people who are running the program, from what we've seen up to this stage, have done a reasonably good job 
of presenting Celebrate Saskatchewan. But they could have done the same job (the same people if you will) 
under the Department of Culture and Youth within a structure already established. I think it's a point which 
should be considered. It's too late now, but your government certainly made a . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I sincerely hope that I'm minister in charge of this department on our hundredth 
anniversary, and I'll be pleased to take the member's views into consideration at that point in time. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — They say governments will change after 20 years or so and certainly you may well be 
back into government by then. 
 
Mr. Minister, during the estimates of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources, the minister in 
charge pointed out that the students hired under his department for summer help in the provincial parks and 
so on should be members of the union and paid at union rates. What is your position regarding that as it 
would affect your youth employment service program which provides for people to be employed by the 
municipalities in the lower priority projects? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The program we administer provides a subsidy to other 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 

 
3280 

institutions, largely municipalities. The subsidy is $200 a month. There's no stipulation or requirement that 
anyone be a member of any particular union or anything else. So there's no stipulation in this program that 
anyone be a member of a union. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I realize that. I know how the program works. What I just said is the students who can't 
find a job in the elite group (which will be employed in the provincial parks under the other minister who 
advocates they should be paid at union rates) will then be working in projects in municipalities in very 
similar types of work. Have you received any pressure from municipalities regarding the grants or requesting 
increases so they can pay these people at a more competitive rate? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I'm told by the officials we have a very high demand for the program. I have 
received no representations and I'm informed by them that they have received no representations from 
municipalities that the subsidy is inadequate. It may well be, but they haven't said so to us. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — We may be premature in that this is a brand new thing announced by the Minister of 
Tourism and Renewable Resources. So what I would ask you is how you react to what I'm suggesting here, 
that it could present a problem for students who are seeking this summer employment? Could that present a 
problem, do you think? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I'm not sure I get the thrust of the member's question. To put it in simple 
language, I don't understand what you asked. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — The minister of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources has stated that he 
believes students working for his department of government in the summer should be paid at union rates and 
shouldn't be exempt from union membership and so on, so that would escalate their wages for the summer 
employment. 
 
Now, let us look at student X who does not get a job in the provincial parks or under the auspices of the 
Department of Tourism, but who will then go to the municipality and get jobs under the projects that are 
funded by municipalities where they hire students under the YES program with that subsidy. Do you not 
believe there will now be pressure on the YES program to increase your subsidy to the municipality so the 
municipality can compete, at least to some degree, with the kind of employment other government agencies 
are giving? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Surely there is. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, I think I have. Thank you, member for Moosomin. I doubt there's likely to 
be pressure on the municipalities to pay higher wages to students they hire under this program, for that 
reason. I think students realize that different jobs pay differently and there's not a whole lot of rationale to the 
payment. Some jobs pay well and don't demand much; other jobs demand a great deal and pay poorly. I think 
students would realize that. I do not believe students would feel that because industry and commerce pays 
one wage, municipalities should meet that. I'm not sure there's likely to be pressure come for that reason. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I'm not sure that's the case either, but I believe that could very well be the case when 
students, who are looking for that summer employment and who work for governments at whatever level — 
certainly we know students are pleased to get summer employment and many of them have difficulty getting 
that employment. 



 
May 20, 2014 

 
 

 

 
3281 

However, if one of your departments in this same House, in estimates, is saying that students should have a 
wage which would enable them to continue their studies next year, it's a little more difficult for them to do 
that under the program that's now being provided. 
 
I also notice, and what really brought this question on, your youth employment services is down in the staff, 
down in the amount of money being allotted or estimated for this expenditure next year. I wonder, does this 
indicate a de-emphasis of that program? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No. We have eliminated a portion of the program and that is the youth vocational 
services. The counselling services which the member will probably be familiar with, within high schools, we 
felt was properly a function of the Department of Education and/or the school boards, but not really the 
Department of Culture and Youth. We eliminated the program this year. 
 
I'm informed the Department of Education has launched its own career development education program, so 
they are picking up the slack. Yes, the Department of Education. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Minister, regarding the youth employment, YES, (it's had lots of 
other names in the past, ESP and so forth) what is the final day of application for municipalities and in what 
order do you handle the requests, in order of receipt or how? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The latest date by which the applications can be submitted is March 15. We 
attempt to meet all of the requests given to us. In the event we can't, there are more applications than there is 
money, then we reduce the amount of the subsidy, so we meet all of the requests to some degree. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, the question is, say some small town had a person on youth employment 
services last year, who applied for a position again for this year. They of course have budgeted, assuming 
they're going to get it, because they have had it for the last two or three years. Is there any guarantee to them 
that because they've had it they will continue to get it if there are sufficient moneys? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don't know how the member defines a small community. I'm informed by the 
officials that any community of less than 800 people . . . oh, I'm sorry. Any grant of less than $800, if they 
received it last year they will receive it this year — they're grandfathered in. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I have more questions on this so I'd better just leave it til tomorrow. 
Call it 10 o'clock. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 
 


