






















































Hansard: March 31, 1980


(1300) 1301 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 31, 1980 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN VOTE 26 (continued) 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I’d like to call the committee back to order. We’re dealing with the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . for a minute. We’re not 
totally familiar with DNS, but we have listened to the debates, I think, for five years. We’ve heard 
innuendoes and accusations — maybe some half truths, maybe some full truths — over the years; some 
of our members, and also some of the third party which used to be in the House, accusing DNS of 
somewhat less than a good management in northern Saskatchewan. I think, like most of the members of 
this legislature, we are all respected and elected a little bit on integrity and honesty in our various 
constituencies, and for the life of me I cannot figure out why the government member would leave a 
minister hung up the way they’re leaving this minister hung up here tonight — something which was 
caused by the former minister of DNS, who was a part of the mismanagement of DNS since its 
inception. How the members on that side — after Judge Ted Noble made a statement — how you can 
honestly sit there and not go along in supporting this motion calling for a judicial inquiry. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Is that why you fired him, Ted? 
 
MR. LARTER: — I can’t believe . . . I know there are going to be many NDP supporters throughout 
the province, in our constituencies, who are going to just shake their heads in disbelieve that you won’t 
let this completely out in the open and clear these people. You are casting a shadow on every member of 
DNS by not going along with this. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LARTER: — There are many hundreds of dedicated employees working for DNS and we know, 
from talking to these people over the past few years, they don’t want to be part of anything shady. And 
they know there’s shadiness going on, whether it’s intentional or not intentional. It’s still a very badly 
run Department of Northern Saskatchewan. And it’s not just the people of the North we want to answer 
to. We want to answer to all the people of Saskatchewan because . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LARTER: — . . . because our tax dollars are going into the North and I’m sure that as well as the 
people of the North, the people of the South don’t want to be part of anything that is other than straight 
honest government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will be very, very disappointed if the backbenchers don’t get up and urge not only the 
minister of DNS, but also the Attorney General, to reverse their position on this issue. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I want to hear from Elwood. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1302 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I just wish to detract a little bit from the direction the 
debate has taken on the opposite side of the House and introduce a few facts to the debate, unreasonable 
as that may seem to members opposite, as unconcerned as they are about the facts. I’d like to point out 
that on Friday I said the matters which led to an investigation and subsequently to charges occurred in 
1976. I did not say that an investigation occurred in 1976. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Boy, you said it. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, I didn’t On page 1239, referring to what the member for Thunder 
Creek claimed the judge said, I said and I quote: 
 

The member for Thunder Creek errs when he says the judge says something is happening. That 
is not what the judge said. He said, was at the time of the matter which resulted in charges being 
laid against several people — was. The date, the member knows, was 1976. 
 

Mr. Chairman, the dates re important because of the innuendoes and allegations made by the member for 
Thunder Creek. I also read into the record today (and I think for a change the member for Thunder 
Creek was here for most of the day) that August 1976 was when the program, which resulted in the 
events, which resulted in the investigation, began. In September and October 1976 payments were made 
by CMHC for work at Cumberland House. Then in February 1977 the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan began an internal investigation. It wasn’t until the department asked in May 1977 that the 
RCMP became involved in the investigations and it was not until the fall of 1978 that charges are laid. I 
think it’s important to recognize it was the fall of 1978 when charges were laid. 
 
The member referred, if I remember correctly, to a grant made to Howard Thompson in the spring of 
1978. Four charges had been laid. I want to say to him that that grant was part of a program — a 
program that the opposition has had an opportunity to examine in DNS estimates and in public accounts 
for at least five years. The program is entitled the fish transportation and price support subsidies in 
program. It has in it a total amount of $500,000, which goes to a total of over 1,200 fishermen and is 
distributed on the basis on the amount of their catch of certain species. 
 
Howard Thompson was, in 1977, a fisherman on Ile-a-la-Crosse Lake in addition to being a contractor. 
That year he caught 31,865 ponds of northern pike which were eligible for the fish support subsidy and 
he caught an additional 975 pounds of other species which were not eligible for the price support 
subsidy but were eligible for the transport subsidy. First, 31,865 pounds of northern pike at 2 cents a 
pound for a total of $637.30. Total catch, including the 975 pounds ineligible for price support subsidy 
was 32,840 pounds at the transport subsidy of 2.5 cents a pound for a total of $821. Together the total is 
$1,458.30. These grants are shown and are included under the estimates and in the budget and in the 
public accounts are economic development grants. 
 
Whether or not a fisherman was under investigation for something or other would not make any 
difference in whether or not he was eligible for these grants because at the end of the year the total 
production of each fisherman is added up and that total production times whatever the subsidy is, goes 
out to him in a cheque. No application is required. And to suggest that a fisherman under investigation is 
not eligible for final payments for his catch is equivalent to suggesting that a farmer under investigation 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1303 

should not get his final payments from the wheat board. That’s nonsense. That’s absolute nonsense. At 
the time of the payment, he had not been charged. Although the members don’t believe it, I do believe 
that our system of justice is correct when it says an individual is innocent until proven guilty . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
What I said was that the events which led to the investigation occurred in 1976 and that’s when they did 
occur. I did not say any charges were laid in 1976. I said the events, which led to the charges, occurred 
in 1976. The charges were laid in the fall of 1978 (which I remind members I read into the record this 
afternoon). That they insist on refusing to deal with matters such as this particular grant which are 
matters for consideration in the estimates, which are matters included in the estimates proposed by the 
departments of this House. They insist on taking that grant, tying it to a judge’s decision, which occurred 
two years later, and saying, oh there’s a connection; that’s evidence of graft and corruption. But the 
member refuses — the member dares not pick up the challenge of the Attorney General and place on 
iota of evidence of graft and corruption. He accused the entire department of graft and corruption .He 
says it is rampant throughout the department and yet has not one shred of evidence to support his 
statements. He dared not take up the challenge of the Attorney General. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, and I continue to say, this entire exercise by the PCs is a smokescreen; a 
smokescreen to remove from scrutiny their own ineptitude, their own inability to do the research 
necessary to really examine the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. It was exemplified, most 
recently, by their leader, Grant Devine, this afternoon in Prince Albert. Their leader in Prince Albert 
claiming the budget for the department was $61 million a year. 
 
Now, it doesn’t take a great deal of intelligence to open this book to find out what the estimates of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan are. I say, that’s an example on the part of leader of this Devine 
research group as the quality of research they are capable f doing and that reflects on the credibility. 
They continue what has to be done for an outstanding example of record-breaking shameful 
performance for an opposition in any legislature in this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope the member across will mind their manners a 
little bit and listen for a change. 
 
Mr. Chairman, today, this afternoon in particular, six different times, once from the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan, five times from the Attorney General, I have heard an accusation from that side of the 
House, from those members, accusing us of wanting to deny certain individuals their rights. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there isn’t a member on that side of the House who should have the gall to talk about 
denial of the rights and freedoms of the individual. Not one single member should open his mouth on 
that side to talk about the rights or freedoms of an individual. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there is hardly a piece of legislation in this province passed by that government which 
hasn’t and doesn’t, in one way or another, deny rights and freedoms of an individual. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1304 

Mr. Chairman, I could talk about just about every act we have in this province, but let’s just talk about a 
few. What about labor legislation in this province? What about The Trade Union Act? Mr. Chairman, 
what about The Expropriation Act — the amendments to that act which were passed in this Assembly 
last year? Mr. Chairman, let’s talk about The Natural Products Marketing Act this government has 
passed in this province where they will fine or put a farmer in jail before they give him an opportunity to 
defend himself. Mr. Chairman, let’s talk about the telecommunications act, the way it stands and the 
way they want to amend it this year. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let’s even talk about, as the member for Wilkie has talked about in this House already 
this year, the rights of the individual. What about the rights of handicapped? He has been asking you to 
come up with a solution and an answer under the motor vehicles act. And what about the human rights 
commission in this province, Mr. Chairman? They want to talk about the rights of the individual. They 
have a lot of nerve and a lot of gall to talk about them. Even further than that, in every case, Mr. 
Chairman, when we talk bout rights when charged under those acts, the individual has no right to appeal 
to a higher court because it denied him the opportunity under the acts I am referring to. 
 
So, those people sitting across there should never, ever talk about anyone denying the rights and 
freedoms of any individual in this province, because those rights, those freedoms have been denied 
every individual in this province by this government. They have done a marvellous job today of 
deflecting attention from the issue that’s before the House, before this committee. They haven’t at any 
time defended their position the way they should have tried to defend it. The Attorney General has 
attempted tin many cases, in many ways to change, to deflect, to misinterpret or misrepresent what was 
. . . in fact, just let me point to the motion itself. 
 
The Attorney General has all afternoon referred to the motion the way it’s been presented in this House. 
Well, if the Attorney General had been here Friday he would have known that the motion itself reads 
(and I will read it for him, because obviously he hasn’t taken the time to read it): 
 

That this Assembly . . . urge the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately commence a 
public judicial inquiry; that the public judicial inquiry be chaired by Mr. Justice Noble, into the 
operations of, and administration of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Where, in that motion, may I ask, does it refer to the individual we’re talking about? Because although 
the motion was written differently, it was agreed by the members on this side, when the Chairman last 
Friday suggested that the motion was not in order, that there was a preamble and if the preamble was 
eliminated he would accept the motion. It was agreed. So the motion does not refer to the individual at 
all, Mr. Attorney General. Had you been here Friday or had you read what was in Hansard and done 
your homework on it you would have known differently. 
 
The Minister of Northern Saskatchewan keeps trying to justify his position by talking about dates. Mr. 
Minister, the member for Thunder Creek asked you several times this afternoon to answer the 
$1,450-some payment to the member in 1977-78 public accounts. Tonight you tried to justify those 
payments. You didn’t make any mention of those payments this afternoon. You made no attempt to tell 
this opposition what the payments were for, because you thought this afternoon had nothing to do 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1305 

with timing. By your own admission tonight you talk about the year being 1976. You refer to the 
paragraph where the date the member knows was 1976, but further down as self-declared well-informed 
expert on this case you will know that the individual from the department who was involved was 
dismissed in 1976. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Different individual. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, where before that are we talking about a different individual? You show 
me in that Hansard where you were talking about a different individual than the one the member for 
Thunder Creek was talking about. It isn’t there. It is a figment of your own imagination. Are you trying 
to tell me now that the case did not start until 1977 or 1978, that you had nothing, that you had made no 
inquiries into it in 1976 when you are referring to it? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that’s what 
you said Friday. Get your facts straight. Once you have your facts straight and once you stop trying to 
mislead the members of this House, perhaps then we’ll have some credibility; perhaps we’ll be able to 
believe some of the statements you’re making. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I may suggest to the members of this House the way this motion reads (and I wish the 
Attorney General would take note of the way the motion reads) it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
We have repeatedly said in this House that we do not want to discuss the four individuals not brought to 
trial yet or the one who has been charged. We are talking about the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan; we’re talking about the mess the department is in; we’re talking about the potential fraud 
and the potential mess that the whole department is in. That’s why we want a judicial inquiry and if any 
member votes against that motion they’d be derelict in their duties. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Chairman, there are just a few comments I want 
to make on this. First of all to the minister who was so busy this afternoon telling us what questions we 
should be asking. I would say to you, Mr. Minister, the sooner you get on with giving a few of the 
answers that my colleagues have been asking for, the sooner we will be able to progress in this House. 
After all, our job is to ask the questions. Your job is to supply the answer and we are waiting for your 
answers at this point in time. 
 
And to the Attorney General — I heard the Attorney General talk about, time after time, childish 
behaviour. I would like to remind you, Mr. Attorney General, that the first one to start the childish 
comments in this Chamber this afternoon was the man sitting right opposite who said to my colleague, 
will you shut up and sit down. Those were the first comments of a childish nature that were uttered in 
here today. 
 
We want to find out something about the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Judge Noble has said that 
there was a bureaucracy which has run amuck. The Attorney General takes great exception to this 
statement. That’s what I am interested in, Mr. Minister, and you can give me the answers for these 
questions. I understand that at one time you were an employee of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. I want to know if you were a part of that bureaucracy which was running amuck. I 
haven’t heard in this House yet how long you worked for that department, when you were let go and the 
reason fro your dismissal. I’d like the answers for that now. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I worked for the department from approximately March 
1972 until June 1973. I was let go because I was insubordinate not because I engaged in dirty tactics like 
the members opposite. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1306 

MR. TAYLOR: — That’s fine. Insubordinate is quite a wide-ranging term. Would you go a little 
further and tell us about your insubordination to the department? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, Mr. Chairman, I will not. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — That’s just typical of the kinds of responses. You said you were insubordinate. I am 
asking you to tell me in what you were. Why don’t you tell us this? Come on. Answer the questions. 
You told me a few minutes ago you would. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, again I must point out to members of the House how childish and 
absolutely lacking in substance this questioning is. The member has told the minister 1972 to 1973. I 
believe the rules of the House on estimates are that we are dealing with the year’s perspective and 
generally thought to be the year retroactive the most immediate prior to this year. This gentleman wants 
to go back to 1972-73. I ask again, Mr. Chairman, what relevance has this to the issue of the 
department’s spending estimates? I repeat again, this is indeed a very poorly researched caucus and very 
childish indeed. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I can’t believe what I’m hearing. This man is the minister of that department now 
and he was let go for insubordination. You say it has nothing to do with it; I can’t understand that. And 
also it is my understanding that on subvote 1 we can ask wide-ranging questions and we are not held to 
the year under review. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I think that the point raised by the Attorney General is a good one. I ask you to 
try to confine your remarks to questions under the year under review, last year, the motion that’s before 
us. I think that the questions of an individual member and what he was doing in 1973 aren’t really 
particularly germane to this committee. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — When you are talking about year under review, you are referring to the Crown 
corporations. Would you mind telling me when and where the rule is that says we have to discuss and 
stick with the year of the estimates that are being discussed in this assembly tonight? Because the 
estimates we are discussing are the estimate for the year 1980-81 and for the last two days the members 
opposite have been talking about a case that goes back to 1975,1976, 1977, 1978, 1979. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I said in my remarks that the thing we are really discussion here is this 
motion. When we deal with this motion, we can move on. Pardon? We are dealing with the estimates of 
the department. We generally deal with this year’s estimates, how they relate to last year. I have not 
been ruling it particularly out of order. I think that on this particular motion what we should be dealing 
with is this motion and if you can relate it to the motion, fine. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, what’s that got to do with the year? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I’m not going to go into a long explanation. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t see this when on the other side of the House they’re talking 
back to 1975 and 1976 and all of a sudden, the ruling is we should be on this year under review and this 
man was an employee of that department. It’s stated by a judge that the department was running amuck. 
He was part of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and I want to know why he was let go. I want 
to know what your reasons were, why you were put out of that department. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1307 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What are you doing back in it now? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I’ve already ruled that question out of order. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few comments I’d like to add to this debate. We are only 
asking, not for that much, just to have the true facts forward. We’re asking for an inquiry. The Attorney 
General happens to think it’s a big joke. I’ll tell you what’s the biggest joke. The performance the 
Attorney General put on in this chamber this afternoon could have aired on Sesame Street and the kids 
would have enjoyed it. But the parents, the taxpayers, would not appreciate it. The people of 
Saskatchewan want the facts. We want the facts. 
 
We’re just talking about the motion, O.K., and I’ll go back to what I had stated the other day. Justice 
Ted Noble said, in passing sentence, he would have sent — and the one think I will not do in this 
Chamber is bring up names as the Attorney General did this afternoon — Mr. X to jail were it not for the 
involvement of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in the fraud. Now, Mr. Attorney General, 
nowhere in this House, at no time did we bring the names forward. You brought them forward. You 
started going in the back alleys of politics again. You started doing the number on the people. It wasn’t 
the PC Party. You’re at fault. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, and Mr. Chairman, and especially, Mr. Minister, what do you think gave your 
department the right to break federal regulations? And just so that you don’t say I’m reaching for pies in 
the sky, I’ll quote Justice Ted Noble again, “broke regulations.” Noble also said the department broke 
federal regulations by paying for the work before it was completed, and I would like to stop right there. 
 
Never in a business, and this Saskatchewan government should be starting to be run like a business, do 
you pay for a job before it’s done. He questioned why cheques made out jointly to the Cumberland 
House owners and Mr. X were cashed without the homeowner’s signature. Now, Mr. Chairman, we’re 
talking about making out cheques, cashing cheques without the authority of the people to whom the 
cheques pertained. We’re asking for an inquiry. We’re presenting our case and the Attorney General is 
trying to skate on the facts and change the direction of where our debate is going. You know that for a 
fact, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
My colleague from Regina said about the rights of people, Mr. Attorney General, that we’re concerned 
about all the people of Saskatchewan, even the handicapped people, who, Mr. Attorney General, I don’t 
think you’re concerned about and you know what I’m talking about. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member for Thunder Creek was very kind to you, I think, this afternoon when he 
talked about what was out in the pasture. I want to make a little comment to make the Attorney General 
smile again, because he knows his government is buried on this situation. Well, the Indian people of 
Saskatchewan, the very fine Indian people of Saskatchewan, who the PC Party happens to believe in and 
their rights, have a word for it, Mr. Attorney General. It is tatashame and that is just what we are getting 
from this government, a government which is trying to hide the facts and keep the people of 
Saskatchewan from finding out. Mr. Chairman, I would like to read the motion: 
 

That the committee urge the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1308 

commence a public judicial inquiry, chaired by Mr. Justice Noble (a man who has already been 
reviewing the facts) into the operation and administration of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Attorney General, I have heard you stand up in this House and spout off that the PCs are on a witch 
hunt. Do you know who is on a witch hunt in this House? It is the Attorney General; that is the fellow 
who is on the witch hunt. 
 
Then it was brought up this afternoon, Mr. Chairman, about the PCs trying to get off the issue; we were 
trying to change the topic. It wasn’t the PC government which runs the shoe box administration in 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan; it’s the present NDP government. What does surprise me, Mr. 
Chairman, is when a former employee is let go or fired from DNS is elected (and how he got elected is 
beyond me) and is now the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I would like to know who started this 
corruption? Was this his to start and now he wants to skate out of it? No one wants to give us the 
answers; yet the Attorney General is ready to stand up in the House and come down on the members, the 
PC members, and drag their names through the dirt, through the back alleys of politics. The Attorney 
General knows what I am talking about. But yet when the lights and the cameras are rolling, the 
Attorney General is performing. I tell you this, Mr. Attorney General, you are ready to throw dirt on the 
PCs and our new leader, Grant Devine. I will tell you one thing, he does believe in God and the family; I 
wonder if you can say the same thing. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we are not asking for too much; we are only asking for a public inquiry to get the snakes 
from underneath the rocks in DNS. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the hon. member for Thunder Creek, while he is 
about ready to get up to speak, would be kind enough to give the House the full particulars of his 
allegation this afternoon that there was graft and corruption in the department? I wonder if he is 
prepared to give the evidence upon which he bases that statement, before the House? He has had the 
supper hour to consider this. This is a very serious allegation, for that matter repeated in an indirect way, 
although I dismiss his as being not serious, by the member for Wilkie when he talked about corruption. I 
do want to ask the hon. member for Thunder Creek if he would be kind enough to indicate to us where 
the graft and the corruption is located in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan/ 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Act four, scene three. Well, I think as I commented from my seat as my 
colleague for Wilkie was making reference to the Attorney General on Sesame Street, I think I indicated 
kids are a little smarter than that. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, you are the one who has had two hours and so has the minister over there had two 
hours. And honestly if all I could do in two hours, with access to all those officials, all those people up 
in La Ronge, all those telephone calls which I am sure went to La Ronge in those two hours, I would do 
one of two things: I would (a) fire my officials making those calls and giving me advice, or (b) I would 
resign. Obviously you haven’t done either. That is the best that you could come up with in two hours. 
Then the Attorney General got up and said, where is your evidence? 
 
Well, Mr. Attorney General, if you would like to me to step outside this House and make this statement, 
same statement that I made in the Assembly, that if you hold an independent public inquiry there will be 
graft and corruption exposed in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, (you bet it’ll be exposed and 
if it’s not exposed I’ll resign my seat), I’ll say it. I think they’ll quote me anyway so I don’t think it’s 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1309 

necessary. You better believe it because that explanation of the $1,500 was the most pathetic, horrible, 
ridiculous explanation I have ever had the misfortune to hear. In fact, it was so bad I know now why the 
Minister of the Environment, the former member of the DNS, fired this minister. I would have fired him 
too with a performance like that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — . . . his explanation as to why this guy was paid $23,000 — that one, my 
goodness, that one. Then the minister takes out his Hansard and he points bravely to page 1239 and talks 
about how he’s misquoted. Honestly the member knows the date. This is the minister talking. He says — 
the date the member knows was 1976. What more can we say. And, Mr. Attorney General, do you want 
to hear the chapter and verse? Do you want to hear the evidence. You hold that judicial public inquiry 
and you’ll have all the evidence you want. Except there’s only one problem, you people will have to call 
an election and you’ll be out there. You won’t be the one who is doing it. You won’t be the one who is 
doing any prosecution. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to know where the former deputy minister is, the present member for Regina 
Lakeview. He’s the guy who was there in 1975. I noticed it in some of the public accounts I’ve had 
occasion to peruse. I have been interested in some of his comments as he explained things like a 
$600,000 overpayment in Buffalo Narrows. How 50 per cent of the population in one town — I’m not 
sure of the town — had access to an overpayment of 50 per cent. That was in the 1975 public accounts. I 
would like to know where he’s been in this debate. He knows quite a bit about the DNS. He comes in., 
he makes some comments from his seat and then he sneaks out. I’d like to know where the former 
minister — the minister who was in charge when all this business, when the whole thing blew up, the 
one who fired the present minister — I’d like to know where he’s been. I’d like to know when he’s 
going to get up to debate. I’d like to see where the rest of the artillery is. I’ not really interested in 
hearing about the small fry from Regina North-West or you know. . . I’d like to know where the normal 
heavy artillery is. Why they are not inhere backing up a minister who is being hung out to dry. I’ll tell 
you why they’re not here, because they know you’re in trouble in this one. They know doggone well 
we’re dead right and you’re dead wrong. You can rail as you want. You can play your Sesame Street 
performance all you want — but not only on this side, everybody over there knows full well that if you 
call that judicial independent public inquiry you boys are game over, because there’s a horror story in 
the DNS. There’s such a horror story there your 45 seats aren’t worth the powder to blow them up. 
You’re gone. It was an independent public inquiry and that’s why you won’t do it. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, you can get up and you can make all your assertion for evidence and Ill repeat it 
again. If you want me to go outside, I’ll say it. We have done this bit about walking outside once this 
week and nothing came out of that one. I don’t think much would come of that but let me tell you, you 
can call that thing if what I say isn’t true I’ll resign my seat. On the other hand, if it is true, let’s see you 
resign yours. Let’s see you pick one up for a change. Let me see if you’ve got the guts to call it, and you 
won’t call it. You won’t call it because you know darn well what’s there. The Minister of the 
Environment knows what’s there. That’s why he’s not getting up in this debate. The present minister — 
he knows what’s there and that’s why he’s going in circles. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, you’re feeling a little sheepish today because the Chairman pulled you into a bad 
one. You had something rehearsed and the Chairman blew it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! There’s no question whatsoever to the Chairman on the 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1310 

rulings in this House. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, it is respectfully withdrawn. Respectfully. The Attorney General 
blew it. You had to stand up and you recited some names. You blew it the moment you did and the 
moment you did it you knew you’d blown it. Because you know darn well what everyone of those four 
people are coming to trial . . . their defence lawyer is going to be screaming prejudice! They’re going to 
be screaming in advance that their . . . Nonetheless, Mr. Attorney General, you know darn well it’s 
going to affect something and you blew it there. You don’t need to be an expert on law to know it. And 
now we’ve had to listen to some of these performances because you blew on in your official capacity as 
the chief legal officer. 
 
I want to say to this government again, and I want to say to that minister over there, you know what’s 
there — it’s a horror story. You haven’t got the guts to call an independent judicial inquiry because you 
know you’re done if you do. The only way you’ll do it, if we ever do force one, is if it’s rigged. That’s 
the only way you’ll do it, and I doubt if you’ll do it then. But to do it independently, to get in a chief 
justice and give him the proper powers in accordance with the British parliamentary tradition — you’re 
not going to do it, 44 seats or not. You’re done if you do it. That’s why you won’t and that’s why the 
Attorney General is trying to deflect it. And that’s why this new rookie minister stayed in his chair for 
the past two hours this afternoon. And honestly, when we talk about $1,500 in ’77, $23,000 in ’76 — 
with that amount of time and that many people consulting you, that many phone calls to La Ronge — 
I’m sure that’s the best you could come up with. If that isn’t a bureaucracy running amuck — Mr. 
Justice Noble was right on. He was completely right on it’s almost scary. It’s almost scary. 
 
And now I want to hear from the former minister who was the minister in charge. I’d like to see him get 
up on his feet and talk to this. I’d like to see the former deputy who was there. I want to see the member 
for Regina Wascana perhaps sneak from the back room and take his sat and have him get up. He’s not a 
bureaucrat. No, he can talk. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Lakeview. Lakeview. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Alright, Regina Lakeview, excuse me. Pardon me, excuse me. I want to see that 
minister, that supposedly highly-rated minister that’s whispered to be the successor to the Premier. I 
want to see him get up on his feet. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Coax him a bit. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Yeah, you know we never see him. We’ve heard a lot of rhetoric about how 
great he is. He gets up on some simple questions, but let’s hear him get up. He was there. They’re not 
going to get up. They’re not going to get up because every one of them over there knows that they’re in 
trouble on this one. You know what’s there if you call it. You know exactly what’s there if you call it. 
You haven’t got the guts to call it. What more can I say? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make a couple of points as result to the hon. member 
for Thunder Creek. Yes, I’m going to challenge him to say what he said — outside the legislature. And 
this is a challenge which I will take up on — to hear his words exactly outside the House. I also say to 
the member of this House that it’s incumbent upon every member who makes an allegation of 
criminality — that is what graft and corruption implies, allegation. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1311 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What about fraud? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — And fraud. The same thing, that’s criminology. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I’ll stand with Mr. Justice Noble any day. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’m saying to you, Mr. Chairman, I’m saying to that man, talk about guts. You 
phony up the facts if you’ve got the guts. You tell us what your facts are. Don’t get up and make 
sweeping statements, trying to bring in all kinds of people. You get in here and you tell us what the facts 
are. And I want to tell the hon. member what I said this afternoon, that when criminal charges are being 
involved, the proper way to do this relates to the criminal investigation, the police the judge and the 
decisions. If, after that, a public inquiry is warranted and evidence of which, you say will be there, is or 
isn’t produced, your words are going to be on this record. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You bet. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Yes, you bet. I say to you, not one of you has the decency or the guts or the 
honesty to get up to give us one single shred of evidence of the kind of blanket accusations you’re 
making. The member for Estevan got up earlier today and said we’re casting a shadow on every 
employee. Who’s casting a shadow on every employee? Who’s casting it? Who presented this motion? 
Whop resented this motion after all of these speeches about the cases? Who presented it? I’ll tell you 
what the motion says. On page 1257 the motion says: 
 

I would like to move, seconded by the member for Thunder Creek: 
 
That this Assembly being advised through a report of a judgment in the Court of Queen’s Bench 
that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan actively and passively co-operated in a fraud . . . 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. State your point of order. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General is intentionally misleading this House by 
quoting that motion now. That motion, as was stated after, was a preamble to the motion and was 
withdrawn by this side. What is the motion as it stands on the books today? What is it, Mr. Attorney 
General? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think that’s a question of debate. He’s merely saying what he thinks. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I was saying in my remarks and I repeat again this motion I was 
about to read was placed on the order paper on Friday. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not the preamble? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, no. They don’t want the preamble now. It was placed on the order paper 
Friday precisely for the reason I say. Look at the Friday debate and read it. I have read everything about 
the Friday debate. Since the hon. member for Kindersley got up and started to put his Canadian Press 
story together (which by the way I might add is what the member for Wilkie today interchangeably 
referred to as the judgment by Mr. Justice Noble and it is not, it’s a Canadian Press report) . . . If you 
read the report on 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1312 

Friday, all of the speeches, it culminates with the very last piece of business — that motion which has 
been presented. It’s true the Chairman says drop the preamble. The preamble may or may not have been 
dropped. But that does not detract from my proposition. My proposition is that the motion is rooted and 
predicated in the Thompson case of which the Canadian Press has made mention and rooted in the 
allegations of malicious and active participation in the fraud operation. And you know it. If anybody is 
intentionally misleading the House, it’s the hon. member opposite and not myself. I want to tell the hon. 
members opposite that when you people don’t have the guts to stand up and give us facts; when the 
member for Thunder Creek, this so-called self-styled fighter who stands on principles of man, doesn’t 
have any facts whatsoever to put before this legislature, I say shame on you and shame on the PC 
opposition opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You’re the one. The record will show tomorrow. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, You’ll have an opportunity to respond. You’re out of order. Call 
on the Attorney General. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying that tomorrow . . . Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry, do I have 
the floor? Mr. Chairman, I am saying tomorrow when the transcript of what the hon. member for 
Thunder Creek is printed, I’ll guarantee the hon. member for Thunder Creek made an accusation about 
the employees. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I’ll say it outside the House; sue me! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You say it. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I’ll say it. You can count on it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You say it outside the House and I want you to tell me . . . 
 
MR. THATCHER: — And I want you to sue me tomorrow. Personally, not the government, 
personally. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member opposite, you repeat outside 
those allegations, you show the press the degree of facts which you put in there. I tell you it will be a 
joke, just like you guys are laughing here. You people are treating this as a joke. The fact is you are 
playing this cavalierly with four or five people in court. You are absolutely treating it in the most 
cavalier way. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, to the members of this House, I have been around for 13 years. Yes, I have been 
and I have seen some arguments and some debates — even the shoe box debate, so-called — and I have 
never seen the kind of despicable performance of an opposition I have seen here tonight in this kind of 
an operation. Not once! I have never seen, Mr. Chairman, repeated yelling from opposite the floor, as I 
just did from the Rosthern, trying to shout me down, pure and simple; as the member for Thunder Creek 
has been doing all afternoon; as all of them have been doing, standing and pounding paper. I have never 
seen it like this before, Mr. Chairman. Why? Because the Royal Canadian Mounted Police has been in 
here doing a full job . . . Oh, the hon. member for Indian Head says, here we go again. You tell us what 
you would have better than the RCMP; you tell us what you would have better than the courts of 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1313 

Saskatchewan; you tell us what your alternatives are. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I would like to caution the members to try and keep a little bit of 
decorum as we are going on here, and let the Attorney General finish his remarks at a sensible noise 
level and then we’ll call on the other side of the House. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, this is the kind of thing, on Friday, which I think is despicable. 
The member for Wilkie says: Mr. Minister, do you have any control in that department? — and if you 
are not willing to discuss and support the issue right now and leave the personalities out of it — we are 
not bringing the personalities into it; we are bringing in the corruption in DNS. That kind of a word — 
corruption. 
 
The member for Kindersley likes to think of himself as some sort of a new modern reformer in rules and 
regulations. What have you told your caucus about words like this? What have you told the member for 
Thunder Creek about corruption and graft? Where is your sense of fairness and decency in that regard? I 
ask you, where is it? Where is your legal training, when an accusation is made against a government or a 
minister, or an official, as has been made repeatedly? Where is your sense of fair play and decency that 
the facts be set forward? 
 
I challenge the member for Thunder Creek; I challenge him for the sixth time to lay before this House; I 
challenge the member for yet the seventh time, to tell this House what evidence he has and the details of 
his evidence. And if he won’t tell me, I ask him to go down to the assistant commissioner of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police and tell him. If you don’t want to tell me, the Attorney General of the 
government, I challenge you and I will ask you on Wednesday or any other day whether you have done 
that to the RCMP. You give, any one of you in the caucus, the information you have, which allows you 
to draw the conclusions like the member for Wilkie has done, draw or which allows you to the kind of 
conclusions and sweeping allegations you have; you lay it all out on the table to the assistant 
commissioner of the RCMP. Will you do that for me? Will you do that? Will any of you get up and tell 
me you will do that? Don’t trust me or the government? All right, you tell the assistant commissioner of 
the RCMP. Will you tell me you are going to do that? Will any of you get up when I take my chair, right 
now, and tell me you will take your evidence to the RCMP and then let it go through the operation? 
 
I ask the member for Kindersley. You are a lawyer; you are a fair-minded person in that caucus — at 
least you present yourself to be that way. Will you tell the RCMP all you know in this matter? Will you 
do that? 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I wonder if the Attorney General would take the question back, I think perhaps we 
are getting off the subject. Now, the Attorney General makes all this to-do about the RCMP and the 
evidence it has brought before the court. My question t the Attorney General is basically this: the 
evidence obtained by the RCMP was advanced in the Crowns case in this particular trial, but I suggest to 
the Attorney General the evidence that involved the judge making about DNS was not the evidence of 
the Crown. Quite the contrary, it was the evidence called by the defence, several witnesses. That 
prompted the judge to make the comments about the department. It had nothing to do with the charge 
before the House. 
 
Now I say to you, is that the evidence advanced by the RCMP, or is that the evidence advanced by 
former employees of DNS or former contractors with DNS. Is the RCMP 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1314 

involved in that? The RCMP obviously advanced the evidence to prove the crime. But we’re not dealing 
with the crime in this particular case. We are dealing with what the court said. I think we go back to a 
man defrauding the Crown of about $3,000. The judge said, I would have sent that man to jail but 
instead of doing that I will give him a $250 fine and restitution. The reason was not the evidence 
advanced by the Crown but the evidence advanced by the defence — which is our evidence. 
 
I am saying there’s a lot of evidence our there, maybe. That’s the stuff we had better address. I say to the 
Attorney General, don’t get it off the subject. Don’t put up our man of straw (the RCMP or whoever it 
might be). The question is, there has been a serious accusation made by a judge. That accusation has 
been that the department is in a lot of trouble. I think when that accusation is made we have to give some 
serious thought to investigating it. You say, now what evidence have you got here, what evidence have 
you got there? That’s what the inquiry is for — to find that stuff. That’s what we want to find. So, Is ay 
to the Attorney General, would you not agree the point advanced by the judge is not the evidence of the 
RCMP but the evidence of the defence? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to speak on this point. First of all, I have not had a chance, 
and so far as I now my department has not had a chance yet, to review the transcript. I am advised it is 
being typed and being prepared. In due course we will have an opportunity to examine the transcript. 
 
I don’t know whether or not the judge’s comments were based on the evidence of defence witnesses. 
The hon. member may or may not know that. The hon. member asked from his seat would it make a 
difference? The answer is, it may make a difference. I know of cases in other areas where a judge, 
having heard all of the evidence, will make a comment and then say to the Department of the Attorney 
General, but I want you to get the police or somebody else to investigate this aspect of the evidence 
tendered. Now that may be the case with respect to the evidence of the defence. But that was not the 
directive, so much as we can tell, by the judge. There was no coupling of that by the judge with a 
directive to the Department of the Attorney General or the police to carry out further investigations. And 
you have to strip down and that’s exactly what happens. 
 
The department is checking the transcript to see exactly what the evidence was and what words are 
made by the judge. The member has had this happen to him., I’m sure, where the judge will say in the 
course of a hearing. I find the accused guilty but I want this investigated or I find the accused innocent 
but I want this investigated because there’s something about the evidence that doesn’t take place. Of 
course, the hon. member, if he denies that, is absolutely not being fair about this, because that’s the fact. 
 
I come back again to the point I tried to make this afternoon which is germane to your point. The judge’s 
comments are stripped into two categories. There is the one category which implies, if not suggests 
strongly, criminality. That’s the one part. That has got to be determined by the police judicial process. 
The other part is an observation the judge has made based on one case of a bureaucracy running amuck. 
I say that is not evidence enough to warrant a judicial inquiry . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you 
give me the evidence. When we set up a judicial inquiry. There are two arguments against the judicial 
inquiry at this time. There are four others who are coming up for trial. They are related in some way or 
other to the circumstances. those can’t be denied. And you can’t substitute the criminal judicial process 
by a public hearing process in that regard. That’s point number one. 
 
Point number two — on the other issue, which is the question of running amuck, you’d 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1315 

have to have more evidence. There needs to be more evidence; that’s all there is to it. That’s why I keep 
on saying to the member for Thunder Creek, give us the evidence. When we set up the inquiry into 
wilderness camps (the wild-haired accusation from the member for Qu’Appelle on wilderness camps) 
there were no criminal charges to be laid. The investigation had been completed and they had been 
dismissed. Therefore, the public inquiry was set up to look into the operations of the wilderness camps. 
And on that basis a public inquiry can go ahead. 
 
Now, there may very well be a public inquiry when this matter is completed. I don’t know. We’ll see 
what evidence and transcripts and other comments may or may not be made. But to set it up at this time 
is irresponsible — I repeat that argument — irresponsible. I simply say to the hon. member for Thunder 
Creek. I am pleased to note that he has made his offer in perpetuity to resign in case the public inquiry 
does not substantiate his comments of graft and corruption. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — You know, Mr. Chairman, we’ve had a rather shocking 
misstatement of legal procedure from someone who supposedly should know better — the only way 
we’re going to have an inquiry is if the judge had said, I think particular matters should have been 
investigated. As if in every criminal trial that goes down the chute the judge says, oh, I think this are 
should be pursued. You know better. I think what you’ve done is a discredit to yourself and your office 
with the politics in your statement and your assessment of the judicial process. Never in my life have I 
heard an Attorney General trying to politicize a judgment of the Court of Queen’s Bench of a judgment 
of a court of this province. Never have I seen a political interpretation being placed on a judgment. 
That’s precisely what you’re doing and I think it’s a shameful act that you’re perpetrating tonight. 
 
You take a look, and don’t try to be too political with this, Mr. Attorney General. You know full well 
you have a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench saying that Thompson perpetrated the fraud with the 
provincial department’s passive and active co-operative. It’s a pretty shocking statement; I think you 
know that. How do you have an allegation of criminality against a department? Do you know how 
wide-ranging that is? Do you think the judge is irresponsible, that he is going to taint several hundred 
people with a brush of criminality? And you sluff that off? What kind of an Attorney General are you 
that you take that so lightly? I ask you to look back again, see the statement and see what that judge said. 
How you can, in all good conscience, take that lightly and loosely and glibly is beyond me. I’ll tell you, 
you’re bringing the judicial process into discredit with your approach, and I think as well you’re brining 
our office into discredit, because you have been up here for four hours today trying to defend the actions 
of a department when in fact, as the officer of the Crown responsible for the enforcement and 
administration of justice in this province, your response should have been that you’re considering an 
inquiry. That is the proper response for the office you hold. 
 
I’m going to make a suggestion. You’ve attempted to politicise the statements of a judge of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. Let’s see if you’re astute enough and, I suggest, man enough to try and let the Minister 
of Northern Saskatchewan start to defend his department. I think you’ve dragged this down often 
enough. The fact is a very serious charge has been laid against the department. I think its’ the first time 
in Canadian history where a department is charged with passive and active co-operation in a fraud. Not 
individuals, not name names; you‘re the one who named the names today and you have the audacity to 
stand up to try and politicise this statement. I suggest to you if you were honorable in your position and 
took seriously in this issue your position as being the officer of the cabinet responsible for the 
administration of justice you would have 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1316 

called for an inquiry as soon as this came across your desk. That is your proper course of action. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that using the yardstick of the member for 
Qu’Appelle, I would acknowledge politicisation because I will never ever follow his yardstick in the 
administration of justice. I can say to the member for Qu’Appelle, thankfully it doesn’t look like he’ll 
ever have a chance to apply his peculiar brand of justice to the Department of the Attorney General. 
Because, Mr. Chairman, what the hon. member here would do is throw out the window the rights of four 
people. 
 
I just asked this person, this same person who sought to lecture me on how to conduct the office, to read 
back his words of Friday last on the evidence of the four people on the cases which are tied up here. I 
could go on to these to read these into the record. That’s how much respect that lawyer and that MLA 
has for the rights of four people who are tied into this operation. 
 
You want to tell me about politicalization? You want to have a judicial inquiry when supposedly the 
statement in the CP release said the judge has indicated there is an act of criminality to commit fraud, 
leading Thompson to commit fraud? The way to handle that is by way of a public inquiry? That’s what 
an Attorney General should do? That’s your position? I tell you that is not my position and you can 
categorize that as politicalization but it is not my position; it should not be my position; and I am 
shocked it is your position. 
 
My position is if people are accused of criminality the criminal law system will look after them. We 
have the finest criminal law system in the world; we have the finest police force in the RCMP; we have 
the finest prosecutorial system in western Canada, if not Canada. If this allegation says people should be 
charged, if there are officials who have led Thompson or other people to commit fraud, the approach is 
to take that to the criminal courts so that person has his day in court and not so you can make cheap 
political statements at his expense and at my expense and at the Minister for of Northern 
Saskatchewan’s expense. That is the position I take and you say that’s politicalization. You can call it 
whatever you want but I tell you my position is that the Department of the Attorney General will look at 
that transcript and if it warrants further investigation and charges those will be fully pursued. If after all 
the charges are finished there needs to be a public inquiry that will be fully pursued. But I tell the hon. 
member I will not ever agree to a situation where a public inquiry is set up on the unsubstantiated 
allegations by you, the member for Thunder Creek, the member for Kindersley, unsubstantiated charges 
you don’t have the guts to table in this House. You don’t have the guts and you don’t have the facts. 
 
The Justice Noble cases are before the courts. I tell the hon. member they are before the courts. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s over with and you know it. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — The hon. member says it’s over with. I tell the hon. member, I repeat again, I 
challenge you, you give me the facts to back that up. You give me the facts or you go outside that House 
and you say that outside the House one more time. I ask the hon. member to do that; I ask all of you to 
do that because you all have no respect for the 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1317 

judicial system. None of you know how it operates or if you do are basically thwarting respect for the 
system. You are carrying on an attack when you ought not to be. I tell you it is in line with what the 
member for Regina South said the other night in the case of the Department of Labour estimates. 
 
Now, I say to the hon. members opposite, there are court cases . . . What was it? You urged the Minister 
of Labour to interfere in the semi-judicial process . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, you did, the 
semi-judicial process of The Trade Union Act. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I did not. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — You did so. The record is clear. And that is the same in the case of your 
colleagues, the member for Qu’Appelle and the member for Thunder Creek, who are indirectly saying 
the same thing. 
 
I’m saying to you again, what more can be done? The RCMP have had access to all the files in the 
investigation. Five people ware facing the criminal laws, one of who has already gone through. There 
may be an appeal; there may not be an appeal. Four more have a right to their day in court; for more 
have a right to mount their defences; four more have a right to be able to say whatever they’ve got to say 
legally, without a political environment or without a public judicial inquiry which is not a legal process. 
That is of a different category. 
 
Sure it is not unreasonable to say the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan had done all he can do. Surely 
the position has got to be that’s the only fair and proper way for it to be done. Anything less than that, I 
say, indicates the PC opposition is acting in the highest degree of irresponsibility without an 
understanding of how the due process of law works and in my judgement regrettably, offers nothing to 
the people of Saskatchewan but mud, mud and more mud. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would just like to say to the Attorney General . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s the worst I’ve ever heard you, honest. 
 
MR. LANE: — . . . very, very interesting and very pointed. The Attorney General refers to three or four 
other people only he has named, but very pointedly ignores the allegation against the department. He 
very pointedly ignores the allegation and he admits it. The reason of course, is you don’t want a judicial 
inquiry into the department because you’ve been spending time here today stonewalling and stopping 
the opposition from attempting to question the minister on the operation of the department, which is 
precisely what estimates are all about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. I’m taking your comments. 
You very pointedly said, in due course, whenever the investigation against the other people, whom only 
the Attorney General has named . . . But he very politely ignores any questioning of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan which is under a pretty severe cloud as a result of the statements of a judge of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench. And that is something the Attorney General, for some strange and 
unfathomable reason, seems to ignore — the strange and some strange and unfathomable reason the 
Attorney General doesn’t want an investigation into the expenditures and operation of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. I wonder why. Well, I hate, Mr. Attorney General . . . we know he is irrelevant 
to the process, but the member for Moose Jaw North says, continue on with estimates. He’s missed a lot 
of debate over the last couple of days when we have been attempting to question the minister. He seems 
to have missed it. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1318 

I must say though, the minister has answered for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan as well as 
could the member for Moose Jaw North, which indicates the sorry state of the situation. I would just like 
to say though, to the Attorney General, if you have nothing to hide on the DNS, if you don’t subscribe to 
the views of Mr. Justice Noble, if you accept him as being factual, if you don’t believe, if you don’t 
accept — then why not have a judicial inquiry? Let it vindicate the DNS now so it can get on with its 
work. Let it go ahead. I’m sure they will co-operate; I know they will co-operate. 
 
Judicial inquiry, as you well know, doesn’t have anything to do — we’ve managed to debate here for 
just about two days without mentioning these four other people. The opposition has managed to do it. 
The only one who seems to have brought them in is yourself. I say if you really believe that Mr. Justice 
Noble is in error, you don’t’ agree, you don’t’ like what he says and you think he’s wrong — let’s get on 
with the inquiry. Let’s give the minister responsible for DNS a chance to give his evidence. Let’s give 
the former minister a chance to give his evidence. Give them their day in court. Let them do that before 
the judicial inquiry. You’re satisfied with the actions of the other judicial inquires you’ve set up. You 
just said you were. Why do you fear this one? I suggest to you that you really have no alternative if 
you’re going back to your position and your responsibility as the officer responsible for the 
administration of justice. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make one point. I do not fear a judicial inquiry. But I 
repeat again to the member opposite that when there are four cases outstanding the call for the judicial 
inquiry on the motion, which I read and the member for Regina South took such umbrage at, would be 
wrong and an inappropriate thing to do. After the cases are out, a full inquiry or a full discussion of this 
matter may very well be warranted. I don’t think there is any argument about that. But to do that now, I 
think is irresponsible. One last point I want to say to the member for Qu’Appelle, not to provoke him 
even further, this is the kind of thing that I do not object to. Here is page 1245 of Friday’s debate: 
 

MR. LANE: — Let me remind the minister that in fact this matter is concluded (referring to the 
one case). 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — And here’s the word in the sentence that I find is bad. 
 

One the evidence of one case alone (and not these words if it’s an accurate reporting) the judge 
has found an act of co-operation in a scam, in a fraud by your department. 
 

MR. ROMANOW: — I didn’t know that that was what the judge had found . . . the transcript of the 
judge’s remarks aren’t down yet. I don’t even think that’s what the judge has implied in this regard. 
Well maybe there is an implication —actively assisted him. That’s fine. That may be. All right, it may 
be a point of implication. But the member for Qu’Appelle has gone from implication to a finding of fact. 
He has said: “the judge has found an act of co-operation in a scam in a fraud by your department.” He 
works on that basis to continue the argument for the need of an inquiry. I simply say that that is wrong. 
It is factually wrong and it’s a smear. That’s the kind of generalized smear, which does nobody any good 
let alone the member for Qu’Appelle of the PC opposition. I really say, fellows, you’ve got to try to get 
it. It’s a smear on the whole process. Talk about politicizing the judgment I mean again let’s see what 
the judgment says. But I’ll be awfully surprised if the judge has found that conclusion. If there is a 
finding of that conclusion to any officer or officers of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, I can 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1319 

assure this House the department will take appropriate criminal action. That’s where a scam . . . not an 
inquiry, an appropriate criminal action. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How about the rest of them? Are you going to leave a doubt on all of them? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — If you have any evidence of anybody we’ve overlooked or the judge has 
overlooked, please tell the assistant commissioner of the RCMP. Tell him. We’ll take the action. The 
police will be in on that. Surely you can trust the RCMP. Surely we can trust the judicial system. 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, I say to the press corps, I wonder what they 
think of today’s activities. it’s another sad day in Saskatchewan. It is. Why is it, Mr. Chairman, that 
when something comes up on the government side that is dirty, that is not right, they reverse it on us all 
the time. They try to say we are the bad ones. Why have we not got the right? Why are you, Mr. 
Attorney General, taking our right away from us? If I was the Attorney General, I would be calling this 
inquiry myself. I would want to clear it up. I can’t believe it. I also feel sorry for the Attorney General. 
We have 15 people here jumping to try to speak. The poor Attorney General has to speak for 43 robots 
over there. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And one minister. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — How do you know, Mr. Attorney General? If you had called this inquiry it might 
clear those people. Those gentlemen sitting behind the minister you’re down on them right now. I am 
saying if maybe he called an inquiry, he might prove the innocence of these people. And what about the 
Minister of the Environment, the past minister of northern affairs. Maybe it would clear all the 
statements against him. Mr. Attorney General, I say to you what have you got against us asking for 
facts? You reverse it on the member for Thunder Creek. You said, come up with your facts. WE want 
them from you. What do you think we are calling an inquiry for? If we knew what the facts were to ask, 
we wouldn’t be calling for one. We would go to the press and go out there and tell them. I am telling 
you right now when he goes out to make the statement tonight he has another member from Arm River 
standing right beside him. I’m sure there will be 13 or more. Are you telling us you, as the Attorney 
General of this province in addition to all the things you have taken over in this province, have now 
decided you are going to take over the judges of the court and tell the people of Saskatchewan the judges 
are all wrong and you, the Attorney General, are right? 
 
I’ve always understood it is the Attorney General’s duty to see justice is done. In my opinion, justice has 
been done. But Mr. Attorney General, it would appear the only time justice should be done for a public 
issue is if it doesn’t affect the government. Well, I want to throw a challenge out to you,. Mr. Attorney 
General, now. Stand up and say you will or you’ll not agree with the inquiry. You’ve always said to me, 
I admire the man from Arm River, he’s a good fellow. I say the same thing, I admire you. You are a 
man. Yes he is; he’s a man. He has to be or he wouldn’t be elected and in this House tonight. But now 
you’ve got the chance to prove whether you are a man or not. Stand up, say you will go with this 
inquiry, if you do not, I have to make this remark to you, Mr. Attorney General, my regard for you as a 
man won’t be the same as it is as I’m standing here right now. Yes he did; he always said this. I admire 
this man. I want him to stand up and say we will have an inquiry or not. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, we have listened to the Attorney General bobbing up 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1320 

and down since the minister in charge of DNS decided he was going to go into semi-retirement and 
turned the situation over to the Attorney General. I have been sort of amused on this side as I recall 
some of the more shall we say vociferous debates we’ve had over the years, because when you people 
have something going for you, the front benches are up. You know, the heckling, and the desk 
thumping, and your heavy artillery is up, and you guys can come on pretty heavy when you think you 
have a cause going. But watching you since Friday, you sit there like a group of bumps on a log. You 
see the minister who created all the problems — he has a lot to say from his seat in the front benches. 
But as far as getting up and taking part in the debate, as far as getting up and telling us why he fired the 
present minister when was an employee — no. But he’s got quite a bit to say from his seat — quite a bit 
of heckling. 
 
And the minister himself — I’m trying to recall; there must be a case which escapes me — never before 
have I seen a minister, when his departmental estimates are up, stay in his chair the way this one has. 
Instead, we witness the spectacle of the chief law enforcement officer in the province attempting to turn 
this into a courtroom. We’ve heard him put forward his challenges and he’s received his challenges, and 
I think he’s received more than he’s put out. 
 
He’s taken exception to virtually everything from this side, and the reason he’s taken exception is pure 
and simple. You’re losing on this one. You know you’re losing on it. You guys know you’re losing on it 
and everybody out there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and there is the same minister again who hasn’t 
the guts to get up but he’s got a lot to say from his chair — the one who created all the problems in the 
DNS going right back to 1972. He’s got a lot to say from his chair but hasn’t the guts to get up, just as 
the Attorney General hasn’t the guts to call a judicial public inquiry. And why won’t he call it? Because 
your 44 seats go down to about 14. That’s why you won’t call it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Justice Noble has referred to fraud, perpetrated fraud, with passive and active 
co-operative. The Attorney General refers to that as unsubstantiated allegations. We have a situation 
where a federal justice has heard evidence in a trial where a great deal of the testimony has come from 
people either directly or indirectly related to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. He heard the 
testimony for however long that trial went on and after he heard it, he went so far as to say, I’d send you 
to jail, I would send you to jail if it weren’t for the active and passive co-operation of members of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan in perpetrating this fraud. That’s what the Attorney General 
terms as unsubstantiated allegations. 
 
In fact this same individual, by the minister’s admission, was viewed with suspicion by the department 
as early as 1975. In fact according to the minister on Friday on page 1239 of Hansard, in 1976 he was 
under investigation and in 1977 actively charged. Despite that, in 1976 the department saw fit to give 
this individual some $23,500 in payment and year later they chose to give him almost $1,500 in grants. 
But of course in the Attorney General’s terminology, that is a completely unsubstantiated allegation. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, I’m not completely sure what it is I’m supposed to say outside the Assembly but 
perhaps it is words to this effect: if you ever have the nerve, if your government has the nerve to call an 
independent judicial inquiry and if, as a result of that inquiry, there is not — well, if the findings of 
Justice Noble are not confirmed pertaining to fraud and graft and corruption, yes, I will resign my seat. 
If that is what you want me to say outside of this Assembly, out in the corridors, I will be happy to say 
it. I don’t know whether these fellows really want me to say it in the corridors. If you find that so 
dramatic, Mr. Attorney General, after I say it out there, if it is that dramatic, I trust 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1321 

you are going to sue me tomorrow. I trust that I can presume I will be hearing from somebody that you 
are going to sue me as a result of saying it.’ 
 
I will repeat once again — you people haven’t the guts to call that inquiry. You won’t call it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, we are hearing from that minister again, that minister who hasn’t the 
nerve to get up. He has a lot to say from his seat, but he hasn’t the nerve to get up — the one who is 
sitting in front of the present minister, who doesn’t get up on his feet, who has turned over the 
responsibility of his department to the Attorney General. 
 
Somehow, I wonder if we are seeing a practice which is going to become common when a minister gets 
into a little bit of trouble to can’t handle his department. Is the Attorney General going to take over the 
estimates throughout this entire committee of finance? 
 
Mr. Attorney General, I say to you again, you haven’t the nerve; you haven’t the nerve and if you have, 
blow me out of the water. I challenge you! If it is not there, blow me out of the water. But do you know 
who is going to get blown out of the water if you call it? You boys are gone. That is why you won’t do 
it. You know the horror story that is down there. I want to hear from you other guys over there. I want to 
hear from that minister, the former minister. I want to hear what he has to say. I want you to call in the 
member for Regina Lakeview, the deputy minister in 1975. He was here a little bit earlier. I want to hear 
from the member for Regina Lakeview who was the deputy minister. I would like to hear his version of 
what happened. I would like to hear it from the Premier. 
 
The Premier was in for a little while on Friday and then, boy did he get out of here in a hurry. I would 
like to hear from the Provincial Secretary. He was in here a little bit earlier. The Provincial Secretary 
was here; he is one of your heavyweights. Why hasn’t he got into it? 
 
You know we have heard a lot of comments from the member for Moose Jaw North. Why don’t you get 
into this? Why don’t you stand up and let us hear your version about it? We have heard some real great 
speeches from you; we have heard some real dandies from you; we really don’t need one of your 
classics from here. We would like to hear from anybody. We are sick of hearing from the Attorney 
General. We are sick of hearing about his threats. We are sick of hearing . . . 
 
MR. LANE: — Tell him ministers usually took their own estimates through, in the old days. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — My colleague for Qu’Appelle is suggesting that in the old days, the 
old-fashioned days, a minister used to take his own estimates through the House. 
 
Mr. Attorney General, once again, we challenge you to call an inquiry, but you won’t. We challenge 
you! No guts. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I wonder if the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan would permit a couple of 
questions? 
 
Question one is this. Do you accept, as Minster of Northern Saskatchewan all the statements of the 
Attorney General today, and do you accept his statements as being the same as your statements? 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1322 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — If the member would wish to refer to which specific statements of the 
many made today, I will answer his question. Which statements specifically is he referring to? 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I take it that there are only some that you would agree with and some you wouldn’t 
agree with. Is that what you are saying? 
 
I will be quite specific, Mr. Minister. The Attorney General I think has said quite clearly that there may 
well be reasons for a public inquiry. Do you agree there may well be reasons for a public inquiry on this 
matter? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I don’t think that’s what the Attorney General said. He said that when all 
the cases have been heard and when all the evidence is in, that at that time it may very well be that there 
is sufficient evidence to make the decision whether or not there should be a public inquiry. We don’t 
know what the decision will be until all the evidence is in, and I agree all the evidence should be in 
before that decision is made. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Do you agree that a public inquiry is clearly a possibility in this particular case? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t think anybody said it was clearly a possibility. 
What was said that it was impossible to determine until all the evidence is in whether or not a public 
inquiry would be warranted, and at that time it should be possible on the basis of the evidence to clearly 
decide whether or not a public inquiry is warranted. But in the meantime, the related matters are before 
the courts and the rights of four individuals to a fair trial are at stake . . . 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Now what you are basically telling me, though, is that it is possible we can have a 
judicial inquiry into this depending what happens. Now you have left that option open, haven’t you? 
That option is open — is that not right? The judicial inquiry option is clearly open in your mind? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I think, Mr. Chairman, such a decision will be made on the basis of the 
facts, and all the facts are not in. It’s clearly always an option on a variety of matters, should the 
evidence and the facts warrant it, to have a public inquiry, a judicial inquiry. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, if I could just continue in that particular line of questioning. Does 
the minister responsible for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan agree there can be specific 
circumstances whereupon a department of government can come under the scrutiny of a judicial 
inquiry? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Well, I think there are other situations: the trumped up torture camps 
situation, where there were no individuals before the courts and where it was agreed that a public inquiry 
would be held. I think it’s entirely possible that evidence, the complete evidence after all the matters 
before the courts have been dealt with, will give us an indication as to whether or not a public inquiry is 
warranted. But I think we don’t have that evidence and we don’t have those facts at this point. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I was not referring to this specific case necessarily. I was 
asking simply this question — in your opinion, is it possible in your mind as the minister responsible for 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, for 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1323 

your department in particular, since you are minister of that particular department, is it possible there 
could be circumstances that would require a judicial inquiry to your department? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, the member refers to some hypothetical situation, some 
hypothetical set of circumstances, and I can only say that at this point the facts that are available and the 
evidence that is available do not warrant a public inquiry. I can’t answer his hypothetical question that 
when all the facts are available I think that such a decision can be made — and if he insists on dealing in 
hypothetical situation, he can get no specific answer. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Then, Mr. Chairman, I would direct the same question to the Attorney General. 
Is it possible for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan as a department to come under the scrutiny 
of a judicial inquiry for a set of circumstances? — and yes they are hypothetical. But is that a 
possibility? Can that happen? Are there the legal provisions for that type of judicial inquiry? That’s all I 
want to know. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, we did have a judicial inquiry related to the unfounded charges 
relating to northern camps under DNS. That’s an example of a judicial inquiry. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Then, Mr. Chairman, I would take it the minister responsible for the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan and of course the Attorney General would disagree with their Premier, a 
Rhodes scholar, who in his comments on this very matter states the allegation or comment by the judge 
is that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan was involved. Obviously the department as an entity is 
involved only, and can be involved only, by its employees. Departments don’t exist so far as doing 
business except by their employees. Accordingly, what the judge is saying is that employees of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan were involved. Obviously the Premier, in his comments, 
disagrees entirely with the Attorney General’s comments and your comments in reply to my question. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, Mr. Chairman, I think if the member would complete reading the 
statement he would find there is no disagreement. If he would recollect what I said this afternoon, I said 
it should be noted one of the persons charged was employed by the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan at the time the events which led to charges being laid occurred. That person is still 
awaiting trial, even though charges have been laid. It’s reasonable to take the position the passive and 
active co-operative by DNS which was alleged by Justice Noble could very well refer to the alleged 
involvement of the person still awaiting trial. You can’t deal with the alleged involvement of the 
department without dealing with the alleged involvement of individuals employed by the department. 
 
Consequently, it’s likewise reasonable to take the position the matter is still before the courts. I think 
that’s perfectly consistent with what the Premier said. He said, you can’t deal with the department. How 
can the department act except through its individual employees? If one or more of those individual 
employees, or X employees, are facing criminal charges still before the courts, it’s impossible to talk 
about the involvement of the department without prejudicing the case of those former employees or 
employee. I think the position is perfectly consistent. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I understand what the Premier was saying with regard to our 
discussing this matter in relation to the employees, about how it was difficult to 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1324 

discuss one or two or three employees, or rather how to discuss all of those departments without 
referring to one or two or three employees of those departments. I understand what the Premier was 
saying in that regard. But I also detect very clearly in his remarks that he was attempting to remove the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and if he could remove the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, he could remove any department of government because they in fact, as separate entity, 
were nothing more than employees. Therefore they could not be charged with anything or held 
accountable to anything or held accountable to anything. That’s the way I read the Premier’s remarks. I 
leave that with anyone to peruse the remarks of the Premier, in particular on page 1255 in Hansard. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest to you, your department and you in particular as the head, are responsible for 
those employees. If those employees are involved in matters that are not just matters with respect to 
northern Saskatchewan then I feel it’s incumbent upon your department and you as minister to answer to 
those charges. If you cannot answer to those charges, then you have responsibility to resign in this 
House. You have that responsibility. You have the former minister of Northern Saskatchewan sitting 
right in front of you and he has refused, absolutely refused, to say one word on this debate since its very 
beginning, although he has consistently had lots of to say from his seat without standing and taking his 
place. Mr. Chairman, I feel it’s absolutely incumbent upon the former minister of northern 
Saskatchewan to come to the aid of the now Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, to assist him in 
answering these particular questions, we, as an opposition, are asking. Now would the former minister 
of Northern Saskatchewan please stand up on his feet and address himself to this particular issue? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, the member misinterprets, perhaps accidentally, what the 
Premier was saying. His point was that it was the opposition which was claiming one could separate the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan from the individuals employed by the department. The 
opposition takes the position that they don’t want to discuss the department. The point made by the 
Premier and the point I made today, is you can’t discuss the department without discussing those 
individuals. Those individuals who were employed or an individual who was employed, and has had 
charges brought against him is awaiting trial. To discuss that matter before the trials have been 
completed would prejudice the right of those individuals to a fair trial. 
 
The department, as I outlined today, acted responsibly when, as soon as problems and complaints with 
regard to the RAP in Cumberland House and allegations of wrongdoing were brought to the attention of 
the department, it conduced an investigation. As a result of that internal investigation they requested the 
Attorney General to ask the RCMP to carry out an investigation. The RCMP did that and after having 
full access to all the information brought criminal charges against five individuals. I think the 
department has acted responsibility. The record is not yet complete. And I think that position is perfectly 
consistent with what the Premier has to say. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I’d like to direct a minor question to the Minister. Mr. Minister, would you 
agree that some years ago if the Americans had accepted your logic when the Watergate crisis was on, if 
they had accepted the logic you are putting forward on behalf of the Premier, would you agree President 
Nixon would probably still be president today? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I can’t answer that question, Mr. Chairman. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1325 

MR. THATCHER: — Tell me what the difference was. Are you trying to say that had they gone in that 
way, the way you are suggesting (you have to assume individuals are the department) there would have 
been no Watergate and Nixon, if he had lived that long, would still be the president, wouldn’t he? Your 
logic does not hold up. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I have a lot of trouble figuring out how the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan would be able to answer for affairs of the United States government. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They both have the same power. And it’s an analogy. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, at least don’t expect him to answer the question. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, we’re down to the crunch point of view on it now. We’re going 
to let this come to a vote. Your logic doesn’t hold up. You’ve done a rotten job in here today. The way 
you’ve turned over the responsibility for your department to the Attorney General and let him speak for 
you and let him orchestrate you. The final insult had to be, I suppose, for you anyway, when you looked 
to the Attorney General for direction before you answered the question about five minutes ago. The 
performance has been bad. It’s been a disgrace. 
 
I want to repeat, you people know what’s down there in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
You’re going to vote against us; you’re going to stonewall it; you’re going to sandbag this judicial 
inquiry because you know what’s there. You know what it will do. You know what kind of a horror 
story is there. And the two individuals who maybe know better than anyone else are the one who sits in 
the front row, one who has quite a bit to say from his chair, and the other is the Deputy who just sat 
down — he’s had quite a bit to say from his chair too. Those two, better than anyone else in this 
Assembly, know what’s there. They know what kind of a horror story is there. Yes, we’re going to let it 
come to a vote. You are going to outvote us and there’s going to be no judicial inquiry. And we know 
why. Let’s hope that the people of Saskatchewan will know why too. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s right. They will. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think ever, at least in my recollection 
of legislatures in this province, has an opposition asked so many questions on the same subject and got 
so few answers. Obviously, Mr. Chairman, the response by the Attorney General and the response by the 
Minister of Northern Saskatchewan are clear indications of their guilt in this whole matter and of their 
reluctance to let us have a public inquiry into matters affecting northern residents through the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I feel that’s a very fair position for us to take. 
 
There are a couple of points that I want to clear up. The Attorney General made reference to the 
opposition’s position with regard to the judicial system, with regard to the RCMP. I would make this 
comment — I have a brother who is one of the commanding officers of the RCMP in Toronto. 
Naturally, I have a high degree of respect fort the RCMP; naturally I have a high degree of respect for 
our judicial system. Certainly, I would not have called for nor would our opposition have called for a 
judicial inquiry into this matter had we not had faith in the judicial system. Mr. Chairman, the Attorney 
General, again in making comments with respect to our supposed lack of respect for the judicial system, 
should refer himself to his own party leader’s statements, the Premier of the province where he said in 
opening his 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1326 

comments upon questioning on this subject. While we would obviously be interested in the judge’s 
views on whether or not the administration of a particular agency was good or bad . . . Well, I might just 
stop there. He said they would be interested; that means you the government would be interested in the 
judge’s views on whether or not the administration of a particular agency was good or bad. I take it right 
there that your Premier would be interested in having a judicial inquiry. I mean he said it. That’s what he 
says here. If he said he wasn’t, then yes, he’s very inconsistent in his remarks. He says, “I am sure the 
judge would be the last to hold himself out as in any sense an expert in that particular area.” Well, I 
suggest that he is very subtly taking a crack at Judge Noble as to what his comments are.” 
 
Well, I’ll reply to the Government Whip and I’ll tell you that your Premier’s remarks are in Hansard. 
You’d do well to read something once in a while. It would be nice to see you have enough intelligence 
to stand on your feet and speak on the matters that come before this House. All you have ever had time 
to do since the day I came into this legislature is sit over there and make your wisecracks across to this 
side of the House, a completely useless contribution to this legislature, completely useless. That’s 
correct, I agree, Mr. Chairman, that you should call those members into order. 
 
So, those are the Premier’s remarks, not entirely disagreeing with what we are asking for he said he 
would like to hear what the judge’s comments were, although on the other hand he questioned whether 
his comments would be worth anything or not. 
 
I would like to clear up another point as well. The Attorney General, earlier today, in his tirade on the 
opposition, was suggesting that in fact we knew about this all along and it was all orchestrated and 
planned to be a political move to gain political points in some way or another. I challenge the Attorney 
General to make those comments anywhere he likes and repeat them because I in fact as critic for 
northern Saskatchewan did not know of this particular case when I started out on my estimates on 
Friday. I did not have any idea whatsoever with regard to the opposition’s position on an inquiry. It was 
well laid out as of March 3. I quoted it today out of the Hansard for the clarification of the Attorney 
General. I’ll lay it out one more time and date it back even further as it goes back to March 3. It’s on the 
front page of the Melville Advance, among other papers, and it continues on the back page. What does it 
say in concluding? March 3 — you just take notice of that; we have it here: 
 

In closing Birkbeck said he strongly urged a full-scale public inquiry into all operations of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan as soon as possible. 
 

That was March 3 so, you know, we had the idea. We wanted the inquiry so we could clear up a lot of 
matters in northern Saskatchewan, before we got into this debate today, before we got into it on Friday. 
That I feel, Mr. Chairman, very clearly points out the Attorney General is completely false in his 
statements in the House today in that regard. So, Mr. Chairman, with those few comments I would 
conclude by saying once more we have every right and reason to call for a judicial inquiry, a public 
inquiry into the operations of northern Saskatchewan. The complete reluctance of your government and 
you as minister responsible to northern Saskatchewan, the complete reluctance of the former minister of 
northern Saskatchewan to say anything on the matter, leads me to conclude you’re guilty of something, 
that there’s something wrong in northern Saskatchewan. I have to conclude that. If there isn’t then it’s 
incumbent upon you as minister and this government to order a public inquiry. Mr. Chairman, obviously 
there is no use in asking any further. Those are my remarks. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1327 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 14 
 

Berntson 
Thatcher 
Birkbeck 
Larter 
Lane 

Taylor 
Rousseau 
Pickering 
Garner 
Muirhead 

Katzman 
Duncan 
Andrew 
McLeod

 
NAYS — 30 

 
Blakeney 
Pepper 
Bowerman 
Romanow 
Robbins 
Baker 
Skoberg 
McArthur 
Gross 
MacMurchy 

Mostoway 
Banda 
Kaeding 
Hammersmith 
Dyck 
MacAuley 
Feschuk 
Byers 
Rolfes 
Tchorzewski 

Cody 
Matsalla 
Lusney 
Prebble 
Johnson 
Thompson 
Engel 
Lingenfelter 
White 
Solomon

 
Debate continues on Item 1 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, before we got into the subject of the government’s involvement in 
the unfortunate situation with respect to northern Saskatchewan, I was in the process of outlining policy 
directives that we as an opposition feel are warranted in northern Saskatchewan. We want to take those 
policy initiatives to northern Saskatchewan residents and we intend to do so over the course of the next 
year in consultation with people who live in northern Saskatchewan. We want to know what their 
feelings are with respect to these policy directives (if I may refer to them), what their position is toward 
those directives. If there are any agreements on those policies then we want to adopt them, certainly as a 
party, and present them here in the legislature to you as minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan. 
We would hope that changes would be forthcoming 
 
As I have said there are many things about to happen in northern Saskatchewan. Unfortunately it would 
appear that maybe too many things already have. But I was talking about potential that exists in northern 
Saskatchewan. I feel this government (and we as an opposition want to work with government if you 
will allow that; we think it is incumbent upon you in terms of respecting the parliamentary system) can 
work toward developing the potential that exists for northern Saskatchewan and therefore allow the 
northern Saskatchewan residents to be the benefactors of that great potential. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1328 

In order to do that, I think we need to have some understanding of all of the many factors that affect the 
development of that policy — a policy of maximizing and developing the economic potential that lies 
there. There is of course more uncertainly facing the world economy in 1980 than at any other time 
since World War II. For the first time in nearly 40 years forecasts can no longer be based primarily on 
financial and economic criteria. The international arena has so deteriorated in the last year that political 
factor and the potential for military conflict are as important in predicting world economies as are 
inflation, growth, unemployment or foreign exchange. Those are some of the factors on an international 
basis that are going to affect our development as a province here in Saskatchewan and of course our 
development in northern Saskatchewan — outside factors we are going to have to contend with. 
 
Many economist fear governments and central bankers will go too far with their interest-rate war and 
with competitive currency revaluations. Central bankers and government officials always think they can 
manage the economy despite a very sorry record. Those are some of the facts that exist. Governments 
have a tendency to feel they are at all times in control of economies and unfortunately as history has 
shown, many, many times they in fact do not have control over the destiny of particular economies 
whether they be provincial or federal, whether they relate to this country or other countries. A country’s 
economic potential and its base, the sound foundation it must work off, are determined by international 
factors now more than they ever were in our history. I think that is something. Mr. Minister, that you 
and I in looking at the development in northern Saskatchewan are going to have to take into 
consideration, we’re going to have to recognize those particular factors. An expected slowdown in world 
trade also clouds that economic outlook. 
 
We’ll go a little further to say much strain that develops among the major industrialized countries 
depends to a great extent on how sharply their economies slow. I don’t need to tell you how the OPEC 
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) nations have had a drastic effect on our economy as a 
nation and, of course, kicking it back to our economy as a province. I only draw those observations for 
the benefit, at this particular time, of northern Saskatchewan residents. I think those are the kinds of 
things that unless we can have that kind of vision rather than looking it in a narrow scale just from this 
Legislative Assembly here . . . We must look at those other factors in the international markets, the 
different international economies as they affect development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
That would bring you of course to uranium development. There have always been many charges made 
by your side of the House, Mr. Minister, and by your Attorney General in particular. And of course, the 
media is always anxious. They know what the government’s position is. The government’s position (and 
I will restate of course what your government’s position is) . . . 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — What is your position? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, well that’s right. Now there’s the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland who 
makes the comment, what is your position? Well, I don’t mind. I’m glad he asked because I’m going to 
give you our position tonight. Now with kind respect for the member for Kindersley I am going to get 
into that. The government’s position clearly is to invest multitudes of taxpayer’s dollars in uranium 
development. That has been done. You have taken the position you’re going to develop uranium in 
Saskatchewan at 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1329 

any cost. When I say any cost, that cost is to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. You’re also going to do 
that with your blinkers on to the international economies I speak of, the international markets that affect 
whether or not you should proceed with uranium development. 
 
Our position very clearly has been stated. That position is not that complicated for anyone to understand, 
even your side of the House It is simply this: we, as an opposition, and then you have to take that further 
to say we, as a government, feeling very strongly at this point in time we do not want further tax dollars 
invested in uranium development in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re on the record as having said 
that. I think that’s reasonable position at this point in time. We say that, of course, on the basis that we 
not have any understanding at this point in time where we’re secure, where we feel comfortable going to 
our constituents and saying yes, uranium development is safe to proceed with, we have all of the 
answers and all the controls in place. 
 
I wish, Mr. Chairman, I had remembered and I did forget. I was going to bring a copy of Maclean’s 
magazine into the Assembly so I could quote a few lines out of that, but I would just bring it to the 
member’s attention. There was an article in Maclean’s (I believe it was the last edition) where it was 
clearly outlining the government’s position. It was saying the province of Saskatchewan, in other words 
the Government of Saskatchewan, has some of the regulatory measures in place for the control of 
nuclear hazards and uranium development hazards. That was what the article stated. I would very much 
like to know on what basis the writer made those comments. I would like to know on what basis your 
government makes those comments with respect to safety standards you have in place, supposedly, for 
future uranium development. We have asked those questions. We have got those answers. We’ve asked 
for them to be tabled here in the legislature. We have asked the Premier of this province to table his 
market studies for uranium. We do not have those tabled in the legislature. That’s what I was talking 
about when I was talking about the development of northern Saskatchewan. How many tax dollars 
should we invest in northern Saskatchewan to develop the potential there, whether it be resources in the 
non-renewable or renewable sector. 
 
Mr. Chairman, those were the comments I was making. That is what I was talking about. Now, I 
remember very clearly the Premier when I asked him a question. Mr. Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan, one day when you were not in the house, whether in fact you shared his views. He stood 
and said, yes of course, more or less you shared his views. In other words, he as the Premier and you 
people over there as the government would not proceed with any development of any description 
without of course having the approval of the ministers. Now, he may have included the ministers but he 
did not include the backbenchers, obviously. The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland does not agree with 
the Premier and his desire to go ahead and develop uranium, and invest taxpayers’ dollars. He does not 
agree with that. Now, he’s made many speeches in this legislature but he will not come right out and say 
there’s a position required on his behalf to force your government and his government to stop future 
uranium development. That has not been his position. 
 
I find that interesting, that we as an opposition are being charged by the government, being charged by 
the media to give our position on uranium, when in fact one of our own members, one of your 
backbench members, is not prepared to stand and give his firm position on uranium development, except 
to stand and give us that long list of dangers involved with uranium and nuclear development. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1330 

I would expect that if that member for Saskatoon-Sutherland has such great sources of information with 
respect to uranium, your government must have just a massive source of information by which to base 
its judgment on proceeding with uranium development in the province of Saskatchewan, with the 
investment of $300 million and a proposed $0.5 billion of taxpayers money into the development of 
uranium. Mr. Chairman, if that’s the government’s position, and our position conversely is to say, no 
more tax dollars going into uranium development until such time as this government tables in the 
legislature: (1) its studies on safety for development of uranium, (2) its market studies to insure that once 
it has been ascertained it’s safe to proceed with uranium development that in fact there are going to be 
markets for uranium — and that follows, certainly it follows. That makes sense to me and it should 
make sense to you as minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s take it a little further. What is our position? First, we said, no tax dollars. As a government, we 
would undertake to proceed and find out from whatever sources, although I don’t know what all the 
sources are. That’s why we’ve asked the Premier, what are your sources? What is the information 
you’ve based your development on? Table it so we can review it. We as a government would proceed to 
do that and once we were very secure in our position, that, (1) it was in fact safe, (2) there were markets 
then we would be prepared — not as a government involved directly in the business — at that time to 
let, yes, the private entrepreneur, the private sector, develop uranium. Now you will argue that. You will 
argue that and I don’t’ blame you. That’s your position and I respect your position on development of 
resources as a government. You feel, as a government it’s best to proceed in that way. We have felt — 
and I think we have a right to our position — very sincerely that we would like to see the private sector 
develop resources. We feel very confident, Mr. Minister, the proper tax schedules could be put in place 
as you have done in Bill No. 47. You didn’t take over the oil industry back in 1975, that you could put 
proper tax regulations in place that would give a good return to the province of Saskatchewan without 
massive investments of tax dollars into the resource sector. 
 
So, it follows, Mr. Minister, and I find it interesting to note that our government would still sit there and 
say, what is your position with regard to uranium? You should know what our position would be. 
 
1. Once those two factors had been very clearly concluded and we were agreed on them, to let the 
private sector develop uranium and we, as a government, would be a regulatory body. 
 
2. We, of course, would put the proper, not only incentives for them to develop, but tax regulations in, to 
return a reasonable share of the resources to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I say, reasonable, I say a share which would be the maximum we could tax those private 
companies without having to go out of business. No, if they were not prepared to accept that tax 
regulation we would put in place and they said no, we won’t develop uranium if you aren’t going to let 
us make any more money than that, then I suppose, if that were the case after having agreed it was safe 
to mine uranium, after having agreed that in fact there was a potential there for marketing uranium on a 
long-run basis, we would be forced into a position of having to mine uranium as a government in the 
same way you are proposing — either in a partnership with the private sector or as a sole operator, as 
you do in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1331 

Those would be the positions we would have to take. I think those make sense. I put forth a pretty 
reasonable position. I put forth a fair position. It is a position the opposition, our party, believe at this 
point in time. It is certainly subject to change as we, on this side, feel we can change. If we see we have 
gone down the wrong road it is not beyond us to say, whoa, we’ve gone down the wrong road here. We 
are going to back up and we are going to take another run at this and we are going to look at a clear s 
avenue. We leave that right and that option open. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t find that difficult at all, as an MLA, as a critic for northern Saskatchewan. We on 
this side of the House don’t find it difficult in our critical position on something and a month or two 
down the road, if conditions change, change our position. It would be nice if you, as a government — 
not only nice, but it would very beneficial to the taxpayers of this province — would place yourselves, 
as a government, in that flexible position so you could bend with the wishes and the desires of the 
Saskatchewan people return a maximum potential of the resources that exist here in this province to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what I am saying is I have put forth to you a fair and reasonable 
position on behalf of the opposition on uranium. You have been asking for this. You have been saying, 
what is your position? Well, you have our position. And not only that, you should have known what our 
position would be. And if you think it is a sell-out . . . The white knight speaks up and he say, it sure it. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I say it is not a sell-out. The province of Alberta can make arrangements with the 
private sector. I don’t like to use province-by-province comparisons. I rarely do. I don’t go for the 
argument that much — Alberta this or Ontario that. I rarely do. I don’t go for the argument that much — 
Alberta this or Ontario that. I say we live in Saskatchewan and we have a responsibility to the taxpayers 
of this province, not Alberta, not Ontario, not Manitoba. And if there were an NDP province I would 
say, not that NDP province either. There isn’t one fortunately. I say they have put money away in their 
heritage fund that we can’t imagine here, in Saskatchewan. I have said many times that this province, in 
my view, has more potential than the province of Alberta and we have not capitalized on it either by 
working with the private sector or as a government. We have not capitalized that tremendous potential 
that exists here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would ask, Mr. Chairman, at this point if the minister would respond. And, at the risk of getting into 
another long debate, I would ask him to leave as much politics out of it as he can. I left the politics out 
of it when I started out on my estimates. I have, in getting back to the real estimates here after having 
had an unfortunate interruption (I say unfortunate, on your part, certainly not ours) and I would ask that 
you reply in a responsible way. Don’t come back at me with politics because if you want to play that 
game we’ll be here all night and we won’t get anywhere. 
 
But I would like you to reply. If you can see some measure of responsibility in terms of our position as 
an opposition in regard to uranium development the question of maximizing the economic potential that 
exists in northern Saskatchewan, and if you can see anywhere at all where you and I could work 
together, maybe you and I could sit down to discuss some of these matters and together come to a better 
understanding so that the residents of northern Saskatchewan will benefit in a real way from a 
responsible legislature. And that’s our right here, that you and I are part of. So, Mr. Chairman, I’ll take 
my place and just allow the minister to respond. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1332 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member for Moosomin again in his totally 
objective and non-partisan way suggests that the opposition is willing to put forward some specific 
alternatives and that he’s prepared to discuss those with me. I repeat that I’m always prepared to sit 
down and discuss those with anyone who has specific positive alternatives. But I want to comment first 
on some of the matters he dealt with and then I want to come back specifically to the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan and that department’s involvement in matters related to uranium development in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, he wants to know specifically what the environmental and worker health and safety 
measures are. I would advise him in case no one has previously that there exists in the library of this 
legislature a copy of the surface lease for the Amok mine at Cluff Lake. It has the environmental 
protection measures and the worker health and safety measures spelled out in it and the conditions under 
which the company must operate to retain its surface lease. 
 
He seems to take the position that for the government, with the heritage fund, to invest through Crown 
corporations in resource development is something with which he disagrees. That’s not surprising. 
That’s the position the opposition took when the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan got involved in 
the potash industry. Presumably, by his line of argument, that should have been left in the hands of the 
corporations who at that time wouldn’t pay their taxes. The corporations were largely foreign-owned 
and presumably, taking his line of argument, it would be more acceptable to him to have private 
corporations owning the entire industry and, I remind him, mainly foreign-owned corporations not 
paying their taxes — although he says he would work out a deal and they would pay them. So let’s say 
they would pay them. But that would still leave in last year’s operations alone, $78 million — the profits 
of the Potash Corporations of Saskatchewan — that would go out of the country. And, if I understand 
his proposals, he would apply the same logic to development of the uranium industry. Well, I can only 
say, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, I recall reading the debates in this House, and the position of 
the Conservative Party with regard to the investment in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I recall 
listening to their position in a 1978 provincial election. We’ve heard them talking about buying empty 
holes in the ground; those empty holes in the ground that have now paid all their taxes and royalties to 
the people of Saskatchewan; those empty holes in the ground, that returned a profit of $78 million to the 
people of Saskatchewan — they said was a bad investment. We said it was a good investment. And we 
say the investment in the uranium industry is a good investment. We can, through the Crown 
corporations, work with the private sector to the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan, to the 
particular benefit of the people of northern Saskatchewan, whether that be through joint ventures or 
through the royalty system. 
 
He holds out as a model, and his leader has held out as a model, Alberta. I remind the hon. member if we 
were to apply the same royalty structure to oil that Alberta does, we would accept approximately $200 
million a year less. We would leave an extra $200 million in the hands of the oil companies. That seems 
to be the position he advances. I can’t agree with that position. 
 
He talks about the heritage fund and how they would operate the heritage fund. He refers to Alberta, 
which presumably means they would, in oil alone, put $200 million a year less into the heritage fun. I 
can’t help but recall the position of the members opposite and of the Conservative Party when the 
decision of the Supreme Court was 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1333 

handed down. Their position then was the government is too greedy. The government was taking too 
much money on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The government was putting too much money 
into this heritage fund. Their position now, Mr. Chairman, seems to be the government isn’t greedy 
enough. 
 
On the one hand, they’re out completely distorting the resource policies of this government, and on the 
other hand saying they would collect more. He objects to the participation of this government in the 
potash industry, in the oil industry through SaskOil and the uranium industry through the Saskatchewan 
Mining and Development Corporation. He holds out as a model the government of Alberta. Presumably 
he is equally opposed to their participation in Syncrude and is equally opposed to their ownership of an 
airline in Alberta and another airline in Manitoba. That’s his model. I say there is too much lack of 
consistency in his position. He has attempted to lay out a position on uranium, a position which really 
means it should be left entirely to the private sector. It should be left entirely to the friends that the party 
opposite may have such as Denison Mines, those great protectors of the public interest. I say that’s not a 
credible position. I say we can do both. The public sector can be involved in the industry. That does give 
us a window on the industry. There’s room for the private sector, and there’s room for joint ventures. I 
would point particularly to the mine at Cluff Lake, which is owned 80 per cent by Amok, 20 per cent by 
the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. The proposed mine at Key Lake — Key Lake 
Mining Corporation — is owned 50 per cent by the provincial Crown corporation, SMDC; one-third by 
Uranerz and one-sixth by the federal Crown corporation, Eldorado. 
 
He talks about benefits for all the people of Saskatchewan but again the problem is that there are no 
specifics. There’s a generalized argument that the party opposite, in government, would do all good 
things to see that benefits accrue to all people in Saskatchewan and in particular the people of the North. 
I want to refer to something specific to benefit the people of the North and that is the utilization of the 
surface lease with Amok at Cluff Lake. The major features of this lease will be used as a base-line 
model for future surface lease agreements and they include such things as northern employment features 
— at least 50 per cent northern employees by 1982. However, as a result of that position by the 
Government of Saskatchewan the company has already exceeded 50 per cent minimum. 
 
The other feature that is of specific benefit to northern communities and has resulted in access to 
employment at that mine that wouldn’t otherwise be available to a lot of people, was the establishment 
of a computer program so that people from northern communities can live at home and work at the 
mine. So they spend seven days on the job and return to their home for seven days. There are five 
commuter pick-up points in the northern administration district. The agreement provides for 
employment of northerners at all levels; provides for a scholarship program for northern students to 
attend universities and technical institutes; provides for apprenticeship enrolment where applicable. It 
provides for a monitoring committee to review all aspects of agreement fulfilment. 
 
Goods and services features of the agreement provide preferences for northern businesses and 
Saskatchewan businesses. The company produces a business development plan in consultation with the 
monitoring committee. It establishes a northern bidders’ list for tendering of items that can be contracted 
locally. Contracts are broken down to sizes that can be handled by local and Saskatchewan firms. It has 
established an information and liaison system. 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1334 

The preparation of future surface leases, should other mines come on stream, will follow this general 
model and the Department of Northern Saskatchewan established a manpower secretariat in June of 
1979 to assure that northern mining development will bring maximum benefits to northern people. The 
secretariat conducts manpower planning and developments to see the maximum direct economic 
benefits and employment accrue to northern residents. The secretariat negotiates, monitors and 
co-ordinates provincial involvement in employment agreements with the mining industry. 
 
I just want to relay to the member that it is projected that in 1980, 400 jobs in exploration will be created 
for northern people; 200 jobs in mine and mill construction; 1,165 jobs in mine and mill operation; 300 
jobs in road construction related to uranium mining development — a total of 2,065 jobs for northern 
people. Those are just the direct mine and mill related jobs. A great deal of other employment is created 
by spinoff benefits and the developments of northern businesses. At Amok, of heavy equipment 
operators, 95 per cent are northerners, 100 per cent of the trainees are northerners; the clerical staff, 100 
per cent are northerners; certified nursing assistants, 100 per cent are northerners; personnel officers on 
the site, 100 per cent are northerners; ore samplers, 100 per cent are northerners. I think, Mr. Chairman, 
that’s an example of very specific direct benefits accruing to northern people as a result of this 
government’s policy on uranium development and the participation of northern people in that 
development. 
 
The member refers for his model to Alberta and I can only repeat the results of a week before last when 
the native outreach program in Alberta held their annual meeting. They gave an award for the employer 
who had the best record employing native people. The award went to Alberta Gas Trunk, a company 
which has a total of 1,700 employees. Out of those 1,700 employees, 78 were native people — 4.5 per 
cent, and that’s the best performance. That merited a major banquet and an award. Amok has over 50 
per cent and It’s only one of the companies in northern Saskatchewan which as over 50 per cent of its 
employees being native northerners. That comes as a result of direct action on the part of this 
government. Now, the minister responsible for native affairs in Alberta was at that native outreach 
conference and he said, we don’t believe in direct action to assure native people get the jobs. We believe 
in the ripple effect. We believe that when a development comes into place, it’s like dropping a little 
pebble in the water; all the waves rippled out from it; all the people are caught up in the benefit that 
accrue from this ripple effect. That’s fine theoretically except the results are only 4.5 per cent (with the 
best employer) benefited and were caught up in the benefits of those ripples. 
 
I have to say to the hon. member if you are saying, don’t use Alberta, don’t compare us to those guys, if 
you are saying we have a different approach, I would be interested in hearing what your specific 
proposals are to assure northern people, particularly northern people of native ancestry who make up 
two-thirds of the population in the North, would be assured of the jobs, would be assured of the business 
opportunities, would be assured of the spinoff benefits from the development using your model. I would 
be interested in the specifics of that. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the minister responsible for northern 
Saskatchewan. I want to first make it clear we on this side of the House have some concern, I think 
understandably, with the massive amounts of money, taxpayers’ money, being invested into resource 
development. Taking a look at that, $2.6 billion in to the potash industry and $300 million into the 
uranium industry, taking a look at those massive investments of taxpayers’ dollars which are mortgaging 
future 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1335 

generations here in the province of Saskatchewan and taking that amount of money and relating it to a 
return on that particular investment, when you talk about the amount of money that is going into say the 
heritage fund from resource development, it should be noted that the former premier of Saskatchewan, 
Ross Thatcher, when he left office, left more money in the liquor board fund than there is in the heritage 
fund. I have to question naturally the amount of money accruing to Saskatchewan people in relation to 
the amount of money which is invested in resource development supposedly to be a front. We’re going 
to use the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to fight multinationals. Now, I can understand we need to have, 
and I appreciate the government’s concern, a measure of control on foreign investments, whether it be in 
the resource sector or the land base of wherever that investment of foreign money may be. 
 
Of course, it’s also noted your government was very quick to move down to the United States to borrow 
money from those terrible Americans to buy into the resource sector. That was what was done by your 
government. When the first annual report came out of PCS it did not show the interest on that borrowing 
as an expense. It did not show the difference in the Canadian and American dollar at that time. 
Borrowings that are still continuing on markets, foreign currencies that are declining. It should be 
understood, and talked earlier this evening, about the long-range implications of the international 
economic market. 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — What does that have to do with the 
estimates that we have? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, what I am saying is unfortunately far above the head of the Minister of the 
Environment, so, Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate it if he would just retain his remarks while I try to 
put forth a position on behalf of the opposition with respect to the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan estimates. 
 
Mr. Chairman, those are factors that have to be considered. Say a government were to borrow a lot of 
money from a country whose currency was low, and over a period of 5 or 10 or 15 years (keeping in 
mind that governments borrow money on quite a long-range basis) were that country’s economy to 
improve and the value of their particular currency to increase, then in fact you might be called upon to 
pay back not the original sum but two or three or four or five times the amount of money you have 
borrowed. Those are long-range economic factors, that kind of scare me with my understanding of 
economic matters, which affect the development of resources in this province and in particular, as we’re 
discussing DNS, the development of uranium in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
All I have said, very simply, is that I am concerned for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who have been 
called upon by your government to invest massive amounts of money to buy back non-renewable 
resources that are already theirs. That certainly, Mr. Chairman, I feel is a reasonable position to take. 
The minister put forth the argument that we need to be more specific in how we would proceed with 
policies to allow northern Saskatchewan residents to maximize their benefits from the potential resource 
development, whether it be renewable or non-renewable. Certainly, Mr. Minister, you would have to 
consider the kinds of jobs available, 10 years down the road. You would have to put in place programs 
to educate northern residents for those particular kinds of jobs which would be upcoming with future 
development. Certainly that would be a position of the opposition. When you say northern 
Saskatchewan residents are getting great benefits from this future development, I have to question that. I 
think I have some reasonable argument in that particular regard when I look at a 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1336 

news clipping, and I would draw it to the minister’s attention, “La Loche awaits word on meeting with 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan.” I’m going to make comment on this. Possibly the minister 
could tell me if in fact at this point in time he has gone up there and had a meeting with the people or he 
hasn’t. But it says —and this is taken from the Star-Phoenix: 
 

The mayor of this community, La Loche, which is plagued by an 80 per cent jobless rate, is still 
waiting to hear whether cabinet ministers will meet here to discuss northern unemployment. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

Gordon Balon, a Prince Albert lawyer who acts for the local community authority, said about 
150 people came from neighboring communities and Indian reserves on Monday to meet with 
the assistant deputy minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and Fred Thompson, 
NDP MLA for Athabasca. 
 

Now, here we have a town with an 80 per cent jobless rate which is concerned, and what do you do? 
What does your government do? It sends the member for Athabasca to meet with these people, when 
they in fact want to meet with your department, when they want to meet with a cabinet minister. 
 
So, yes, we as an opposition have some concern whether or not you are going to be sincere when you 
say you want to give northerners those jobs. Certainly that is our position and we will agree with you if 
that is your position. We will agree, in any way we can, to help bring it about. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the article goes on to say: 
 

The promised government sawmill will only employ 25 people in the mill and another 25 in the 
bush, said Balon. This will not meet the needs of the 2,600 people in the La Loche area, three 
quarters of whom are under 16 years of age. They are not anti-nuclear; it is just things are not as 
rosy up here as the southern press make them out to be. 
 
These people don’t want welfare. Most of the people are Chipewyan and they are a very proud 
people and they want to work. Meanwhile in Regina the Minister, Mr. Hammersmith, said he 
was not aware the people of La Loche wanted to meet with cabinet ministers. As far as he knew 
the Monday meeting was solely to discuss a feasibility study for a sawmill. 
 

Now, I find it interesting to note that minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan did not know these 
people wanted a meeting with him. Well, maybe there is some explanation for it and I am sure there is 
and the minister is going to get up to give us an explanation. If there is a reasonable explanation, then I 
can accept that. But this is taken from one article alone, just one, and there are others. I am not going to 
waste the time of the Assembly in going through a whole array of press clippings which point to the 
irresponsibility in many areas, Mr. Minister, you have been placed in — not placed in, I think you have 
moved into it of your own volition, obviously. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when you talk about northern jobs, northern employment, 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1337 

northerners being able to benefit from northern resource development, I have to question whether you 
are sincere about that. I have to question that, Mr. Minister, when I see many reports to the contrary. 
And you ask us, what would our position be? 
 
If I were the minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan I certainly would have my officials make it 
very clear to me where I was supposed to be and where the needs were. I would be there to meet with 
those people and to tell them precisely what our position would be as a government. 
 
So I would work, Mr. Minister, as a minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, as a 
Progressive Conservative government would, to ensure through regulations or whatever means you 
could employ as a government . . . I have to say I have never been part of government, I don’t know 
what the mechanism would be, but we certainly would enshrine regulations, and firm regulations. We 
would guarantee jobs for northern Saskatchewan residents in the industries that would be operating in 
their own part of the province. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, that’s very important. I think that we have to remove the term jack pine curtain, if 
you like, the northern administration district boundaries. If I were a northern Saskatchewan resident I 
would want to think that I was part of Saskatchewan and not just part of a particular part of 
Saskatchewan that more or less wasn’t part of the rest of Saskatchewan. I suggest that it might be in the 
interest of northern Saskatchewan to remove that boundary as I have suggested and allow a normal local 
government autonomy to grow and proceed in northern Saskatchewan. Then southern Saskatchewan can 
grow into that great potential that exists in northern Saskatchewan and they in northern Saskatchewan 
can feel a part of this whole province and be a part of its potential and grow with it. So, Mr. Minister, I 
think on every count so far you have asked me for specifics and I have replied with specifics exactly 
what we would do as a government, what I would do as a minister responsible for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I am grateful that the member finally moved out of 
international arena to consideration of the DNS estimates and the policies and programs of DNS. I was a 
little concerned for a while that he might be on another tack to avoid discussing the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to begin first of all with the last matter that he raised, the matter of the Star-Phoenix report 
on La Loche. I have to assume that is the source of much of his information and his primary research 
source, the one article in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. I would like to relay to the member and to the 
House that on March 3 in Buffalo Narrows I met with the Mayor of La Loche, Leonard Larson. We 
agreed that on March 17 at a meeting which he would call specifically to discuss forestry development 
and particularly a sawmill, Mr. Alwarid, the assistant deputy minister responsible for economic 
development, resource development and municipal services, would be in attendance, the MLA for 
Athabasca would be in attendance, and one person from my office would be in attendance. That was 
agreed to between Mr. Larson and myself two weeks before the March 17 meeting referred to in the 
article. 
 
Prior to that I had met on two separate occasions in La Loche with Mayor Larson and his council and we 
had discussed many of these matters. The meeting of March 17 did take place. The entire discussion, 
regardless of what the Star-Phoenix article may say, surrounded the development of identification of 
forestry potential and the possible development of further forestry activities. I might remind the member 
or inform the member that there does exist in La Loche an operation called the Metis Co-op, which is 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1338 

a post cutting and marketing operation that was assisted many years to get established and started by the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
At the meeting on March 17, it was suggested by the local community authority and Mayor Larson and 
agreed to by the department, that they would like to hire their own forestry consultant to study the 
forestry development potential on their behalf and to work out the feasibility and the details of 
establishing a sawmill in the area. They have since been allocated a grant of $40,000 to hire the forestry 
consultant, they will hire the person and he will be their employee. In addition, they were informed at 
that meeting that under joint federal-provincial funding through the special ARDA program an 
application that they had put together with the assistance of the department some weeks earlier 
requesting a full-time economic industrial community-development worker for their local government 
had been approved and that they would proceed with recruiting that person and putting him on staff. 
That’s what happened at the meeting. That’s what the meeting was about. 
 
I should say, in addition to that I talked to the Mayor of La Loche on the phone on the night of March 
17. He was entirely satisfied and happy with the meeting. I talked to him again just this past Saturday 
night. He informed me that they had completed the community planning study they had done with 
funding from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. They had hired their community planning 
consultants and they have developed their long-term community plan. 
 
The member referred to some other matters, but I want to relate that to him lest he retain the impression 
that the department has somehow not been involved with the community of La Loche over the last few 
years. In 1975-76, there was an airstrip upgrading program at a cost of $48,000, employing mostly local 
people. In 1975-76, the sewer and water system was completed at a cost of $975, 945; there were 8 more 
connections done that year at a cost of $12,021; 30 connections plus 13 fire hydrants in 1976-77 at a cost 
of $50,000. Street construction from 1973-77: total cost $37,403. A well in the Poplar Point subdivision 
in 1975-76: $8,000. Internal power distribution system in the community extended between 1974 and 
1977 at a cost of $26,449. Ten trailer sites developed between 1974-75 at a cost of $66,411. Northern 
housing compound completed 1976-77: $66,307. Five-room prefab multiplex school installed at Poplar 
Point 1974-77: $43,625. Thirteen teacherages completed 1975-76: a total of $174,174. Sewer extended 
to main school 1975-76: $9,000. School renovated in 1976-77, multipurpose gymnasium auditorium in 
1975: $757,000. New school consisting of industrial arts, home economics, business and typing, science 
and resource centre and 12 classrooms: a matter of over $700,000. Fire hall completed in ’77: total 
funding from DNS $90,000. 
 
Construction will commence in approximately two weeks on the 1979-80 allocation consisting of 10 
housing units. Work is presently under way with a firm of consultants on the preliminary design for 
10-suite senior citizens’ apartment which should materialize in early spring of 1980. All of this is at the 
request of, and under direction from, and with the co-operation of the local government; and all of this 
employing in the majority, northern native residents of that community. 
 
The member went on to refer to a lack of training for northern people. I want to relate to him the training 
programs that will be delivered in the coming fiscal year: truck driver training: Green Lake 8 trainees, 
Beauval 8 trainees, Pinehouse 10, Buffalo Narrows 12, La Ronge 12, the east side 12 trainees; heavy 
duty equipment operation: on the Dillon road 24 trainees, Key Lake 30 trainees; and it goes on, Mr. 
Chairman, into training for 



 
March 31, 1980 

 

 
1339 

mill operators, training for welders, for auto mechanics, for heavy duty mechanics, for commercial 
cooks, pilots, carpenters, wood harvesting, small business management, community health workers, 
preventive maintenance, sewer and water training, municipal equipment operators, firefighter training, 
typing, accounting, business machine operating, diamond drillers, conservation officer training and 
construction trades training. 
 
I say all this in response to his suggestion that there was nothing happening in the area of training and in 
the area of employment. I’m pleased to hear his comments on training and on education, because I’m 
sure he will be pleased that in these estimates there is provision for an increase in spending of 27 per 
cent for adult and vocational training, an increase of 16 per cent for operations of the K to 12 schools, 
and an increase of 31.8 per cent in spending for school construction. I take it from his comments those 
are the kinds of ideas he was proposing and the kind of ideas he would support. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to direct a question to the Attorney General, as it’s 
getting about that time of the night. I would like to ask the Attorney General if he feels his comments 
today in referring to the names of the other people who will be coming before the courts will in anyway 
affect the decision which will be rendered in their particular cases. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe anything like this should have any effect. The 
names are all public record. If anything should affect the decision of the cases it will be the unfortunate 
tactic of the PC Party in raising this thing for two days in the style and tenor which has done them and 
this parliament a great disgrace. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 


	LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN
	March 31, 1980
	EVENING SESSION

