






















































Hansard: April 28, 1980


 2317 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 28, 1980 

 
EVENING SESSION 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — FINANCE 
VOTE 11 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, I have three or four questions to ask the 
minister. It won’t take very long if he will answer them instead of beating around the bush like he did 
the last two times we have been together here. 
 
Will you admit, Mr. Minister, what is written in last year’s budget, that the last minister could not 
balance the budget? It had to be a deficit budget because there would have been less money for 
municipalities, schools and hospitals and would have meant higher taxes for our senior citizens and 
higher costs for farmers. Will you admit this, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Chairman, certainly there is always an 
option available in any budget to reduce services or increase funding or provide a deficit. The 
government, inputting together the budget, made some judgements as to where there was a particular 
need to provide major injections of money. That was certainly done in the area of health. We have paid a 
great deal of attention to municipalities over the last number of years as we do this year. 
 
Just to inform the member, in the 1970s we increased operating grants to municipalities by over 400 per 
cent. In addition, we sought to provide a major source of revenue linked to economic growth for our 
municipalities and therefore we introduced revenue sharing. 
 
Since the program was introduced, operating grants to urban and rural municipalities have more than 
doubled from $41.3 million in 1977 to almost $83 million in 1980. I think this is a pretty impressive 
commitment to municipalities when you see that kind of an increase of funding. 
 
You cannot take (especially with revenue sharing) one particular budget year in isolation without 
considering the steps which have been taken over a period of time to meet the needs of municipalities 
from the point of view of funding as well as providing funding in a different form in an unconditional 
revenue sharing basis. We established this in consultation and discussion with municipalities; we 
implemented it and brought it to its final conclusion with the establishment of the escalator. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just asked a simple (this is what is going to take the time) 
yes or no question about last year’s budget. And you didn’t answer it; you took it right into this year’s 
budget. Will you admit then that the reason we have a balanced budget will be the reason why these 
municipalities, hospitals and schools are short of money now? Because they have all been cut. It is a 
simple as that; they have been cut. 
 
Our Craik municipality was cut $26,000 and you just kept giving us a figure that they had been raised. 
But they haven’t. He can come and explain to our municipality (there are 11 municipalities in my 
constituency) why they have to raise their mills so they can balance their budget. Who is right, you or 
them? Something is wrong. In our 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2318 

municipality, we have to go from 68 mills to 84 mills or else we have to shut our machinery down. 
 
We argued about it the other day being a deterrent fee on medicare. You don’t call it a deterrent fee, Mr. 
Minister, when hospitals have to put mills on to cover their budget. It is a deterrent fee and you won’t 
admit it. Well, I want an answer, a straightforward answer. Please don’t beat around the bush or we will 
be here all night. I want to go home right now. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the member’s question about whether 
municipality funding has been cut, the simple answer is no. It has not been cut. As a result of the kinds 
of increases we provided in funding, the average mill rate increase for urban municipalities in 1968 was 
only 1.6 mills; in 1978 and 1979 only 1.3 mills. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, you’ll have to write a letter personally and sign it yourself to my 11 
municipalities to prove it to them. Put it in writing for them. Will you do that? Because they don’t 
believe you. I can tell you the secretary-treasurer from our R.M. came right in here the day they got the 
letter from revenue sharing and said we’d been cut $26,000. Now, who’s right — you or our municipal 
secretaries who get these letters from the revenue sharing? Now, do we have to leave this until we get it 
rural affairs? Because once we get to him, he can’t do anything about the bucks. You’re the man to do 
something about the bucks. Are you going to do anything about it or not? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure some municipalities have some concerns about 
which they will have been in communication with the minister and the Department of Municipal Affairs, 
which is the appropriate jurisdiction and appropriate department for liaisons with our municipalities be 
they rural or urban. Therefore, it will depend on which department they contact accordingly. 
 
The budget which has been established and announced and presented to this legislature, Mr. Chairman, 
is clear. It outlines what has happened over a number of years as we tried to achieve a certain objective 
in providing substantial new moneys to municipalities, which we did, and the member opposite will not 
argue that. It establishes this year a funding which has been increased according to the revenue sharing 
escalator, which has been agreed to by the Departments of Municipal Affairs, Rural and Urban and by 
the various municipal associations. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, we’re not going to get any place because I don’t know what you just said. 
I don’t know. And it can’t be proven to me because figures are figures. They’ve been cut, and if 11 
municipalities in Arm River have been cut back, what about the whole of Saskatchewan? You can’t tell 
me in the 44 seats sitting over there that you don’t have the same complaint. You have to. 
 
I’ll drop it then because we’re not getting any place and we’ll have to see if we can’t soften the Minister 
of Municipal Affairs (Rural) and go after him. We can’t get any place with you. You just won’t admit it. 
 
Will you give me an answer on this one? Do you admit that our farmers, construction businesses, and 
small businesses are in trouble in this province? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, certainly there are problems in sectors in our economy, in 
particular the construction industry because of the slow down in housing 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2319 

construction, but this is happening not only in Saskatchewan, but throughout Canada and North 
America. There are interest rate pressures on our farmers and small businessmen as a result of, what I 
have said and continue to say is wrong, federal government policy on high interest rates, which track the 
high interest rate policy of the United States. We don’t agree with that. We have urged the federal 
government to change its position on this, both the former Conservative government and the present 
Liberal government in Ottawa. They have chosen not to follow our advice. 
 
I’m rather pleased to see that the Hon. Eugene Whelan, the Minister of Agriculture, was indicating last 
Thursday he hopes to propose through the federal cabinet next week (I suspect he means this week) 
some steps to provide some relief to farmers. Obviously, he has been listening to our Minister of 
Agriculture who, on behalf of this government, has been pressing in no uncertain terms and very 
convincingly the need for the federal government to take certain kinds of actions. We will continue to do 
that. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I have one more question. What are you going to do about this situation? We 
have a situation in this province where people are suffering. Never mind away from this province; it’s 
right here. I have people coming tome in my constituency who are absolutely beat and what are they 
going to do for finances? They are going to lose some of their land. They are going to lose their small 
businesses. We have them going broke day after day. We have a man in Davidson who is going broke 
and has been in business for 30-some years. He’s going broke. They say, we have no choice. We have to 
sell a quarter section to the land bank or we’re done. This is happening all over Saskatchewan. Is there 
something you’re going to do about it? Hospitals can’t balance their budgets; municipalities can’t 
balance their budgets; school can’t balance their budgets. They have to go and put more taxes on our 
schools. In every place in this province the school tax has been raised. The mills have been raised. I just 
want one final answer from you. What are you going to do about it? 
 
We’ve been here last Friday, the week before, and today and all you’ve done is the same thing. You just 
skirted around. Finally, for the first time you admit there is a little problem in the municipalities. You 
know it’s there. You people know, as sure as I’m standing here, why this budget got balanced. It got 
balanced on the backs of the municipalities, the senior citizens’ homes, the hospitals and the schools. 
You know it and won’t admit it. Now, I want to know what you’re going to do about it? I want a direct 
answer about what can be done, what you’re going to do, or we’re going to sit here all night. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the member raises hospitals. I don’t know how he concludes 
there has not been a very major increase of funding to our hospital systems of almost 14 per cent. That is 
more, I might say, than is happening in most other provinces in Canada that I am aware of. We have in 
place now, in the various departments of our government, programs to provide assistance to a wide 
sector of our population. We have a FarmStart program which this year has been substantially increased 
and has been of great benefit to our agricultural community. In fact, I heard a resort this evening on the 
news that the demand for services from FarmStart is very substantially increasing. I’m pleased to hear 
that because that’s what the program is for. It’s there. It provides money to our farmers at substantially 
reduced interest rates. 
 
We have this year, again, the farm cost reduction program which provides for our farmers $15.6 million 
in return from the provincial treasury to assist them. We introduced last year, which will pay out this 
year, the mortgage interest tax credit which 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2320 

will pay, when people fill out their income tax, $18 million to Saskatchewan citizens. This is a very 
substantial contribution to meet the increasing costs they’re having. As well, we have in the Department 
of Industry the small business interest abatement program which is of considerable assistance to many of 
our small businesses across Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, I will admit what you said is correct. Whatever it is, whatever 
figure you gave, is not enough or there wouldn’t be all these squabbling people. If there’s a 14 per cent 
increase here and more here and something there, tell me why. Why does Outlook hospital have to put 
seven mills on to balance their budget? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Raise money. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Deterrent fees. There’s the Minister of Highways. I want him recorded. He said, 
raise money. There’s a deterrent fee. Put the Minister of Highways on the record right now saying, go 
raise money. There’s your deterrent fee, right there. 
 
Now I want to ask the Minister of Finance one more question. Are you putting deterrent fees on 
medicare by telling the people they have to put their taxes up to cover their hospital bills? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Why? It’s a simple question. Why is it? What do you call deterrent fees? Free 
medicare is free medicare, isn’t it? If it was free, they wouldn’t have to do it The Minister of Health 
knows I brought a group from Outlook in here last year arguing over their bed census, so they raised it 
one. We thanked them so much. What did they do? They cut the staff by one nurse and offset the same 
amount. We didn’t gain a thing in three years of arguing. That’s deterrent fees. You people are too 
ridiculously  . . Well, I can’t use the words or I’ll probably get heaved out of here. I’ll tell you it’s 
ridiculous that you won’t admit there’s deterrent fees on our medicare in this province. I haven’t got 
another word to say to you, because you can’t get answers from you. I’m through. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Minister, the member for Arm River just asked about the 
rural affairs revenue sharing plan. Would the minister provide us with a list of all the rural municipalities 
which received decreases and those — well, a list of all funding to these rural municipalities in the 
province along with a comparative list from last year. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. I don’t think this is this minister’s responsibility. I think you can 
ask in general terms, but specific items, no. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, just to help the member  . . I agree with your ruling and I 
am glad you made it, because I was going to ask about that. I can certainly indicate in general terms to 
the member that the funding for rural revenue sharing has increased from $32 million in 1979-80 to 
$34,483,200 in 1981, which is an increase that is in line with the revenue sharing escalator which was 
put in place this year. I might add it was an increase which the president of the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural municipalities indicated was really in line with what they were expecting. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — For the minister’s information, I can read. I saw that in there. What I asked you 
for was a list; however, I will abide by the Chairman’s ruling that I will get the 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2321 

list from the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural). It is obvious that, if as the member for Arm River 
indicated, some of his municipalities have dropped by some $20,000 then surely there must have been 
some which have increased, to show an increase like you are showing in the estimates of rural affairs. 
 
I would like to ask a question not relevant to finance, Mr. Chairman, and it is, Mr. Minister, are you 
bringing in your other estimates right after this? The reason I am asking is, if you are I will wait for 
these questions from here — the public service commission. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that was normally the practice; the minister brings 
in all his departments. I think the request was made to the members opposite, if that would be okay, if 
they are willing to do that, fine; if they want to wait and do the Department of Co-ops, that is okay with 
me; but I leave it to the member opposite to indicate which he wishes. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That is fine, if we will do it right after finance. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — May I ask a question of the Minister of Finance? Mr. 
Minister, I would hope that I am in order with this particular question. If I am not, I am sure you will 
make the correction. 
 
What amount of money have you allotted for the purchase of executive jets for government use in any 
department? Have you budgeted any money whatsoever? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That is something, Mr. Chairman, the member would best ask the 
Department of Revenue, Supply and Services, or government services. The Department of Revenue, 
Supply and Services is where those details would be available. I am not familiar with the specifics of 
various departments. I am not aware of any money set aside for the purchase of aircraft, and I have to 
leave it at that. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Would it be revenue or would it be government services? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Sorry, I wasn’t clear. It is the Department of Revenue, Supply and 
Services. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — O.K., thank you. Now, the second question is, of course, related. If one were to 
have an executive jet, of course one would have to have a landing strip. Are there any funds allotted by 
your offices to any department for the construction of an airstrip? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — None that I am aware of, Mr. Chairman, but if there were specific questions 
related to the building and the maintenance of airstrips it would be best directed to the Department of 
Highways. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — That’s all I need. Thanks. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — One final comment that I’d like to make with reference to the Department of 
Finance, Mr. Chairman, and then we will move on to another department. Mr. Minister, I intended to 
comment on this at the beginning of the estimates and it slipped my mind but I’ll do it now. Very 
simply, this budget speech is a piece of propaganda that you print once a year. I have some suggestions 
for you because all you have in here is fairly well rhetoric, propaganda, a little bragging,  



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2322 

boasting and so on. We used to get a little more information than you’re supplying now. For example, 
there was a time, Mr. Minister, when the estimated budgetary cash outflows pie would show 11 or 13 (I 
think it was 13 if I go back about four years or three years) different pieces of that pie. In other words, 
13 areas were shown in which you were spending money; now, we get five. It’s very difficult to 
understand what you’re doing, very difficult to know. For example, your interest isn’t shown on here. 
Grants to local authorities and other third parties and payments to or on behalf of individuals — frankly, 
it’s a bit ridiculous. Let’s go back to the system you had prior to (I think it was) two years ago when you 
changed it to this. I will comment on one thing which I’m pleased to see and that is the estimated 
composition of assets; continue with that. It’s the first time you’ve shown that breakdown; it’s in the 
heritage fund. However, a little truth in that might help a little bit. 
 
Maybe just go back over your budget speeches from two or three years ago and just improve a little bit. 
Give us a little bit less of the bragging and boasting that you have in there and a little more facts and 
information. Mr. Chairman, number one is agreed. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I think the minister wanted to comment. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, not in any major sense. Certainly we try to provide as much 
information as we can. In many ways, there’s more information provided in the budget now than there 
used to be in the past. There used to be a breakdown in charts on those pies department by department. 
We’d break it down according to categories because the estimates provide breakdowns department by 
department. We’d break it down according to categories because the estimates provide breakdowns 
department by department. It’s not a big point but any suggestions that the member might have by which 
we might be able to improve the information, I’d be most pleased to get. We’ll look at it and see whether 
it’s appropriate and whether it can make the budget speech even a better document than it has been in 
the past. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, just one final comment and I would also refer you to the chart on 
page 49. How about updating that one a little bit? You’re so far behind on that one that those figures no 
longer apply and that information on that page. Mr. Minister, is really false information. I agree you 
clarify it at the bottom and you indicate that some of that information dates back to 1974 but it’s not 
everyone who reads every word. So let’s get updated on it and get some information inhere that means 
something in some of those charts. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A question on that particular subvote. Counselling for the investment (for 
example we asked a question in question period today of SGI investments), is that the department which 
handles that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes it is, Mr. Chairman. And just on the side, can I make a suggestion for 
both sides of the House? Mr. Chairman, rather than going through item by item can we just do the 
summary? Is that O.K. with the member opposite? Of the final figure under each subvote by  . . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I agree. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is that agreed then if we proceed in that manner? 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2323 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I agree. Well, then could the minister provide me with a reasonably detailed 
account of that $302,380 in other expenses? Give me a breakdown of what those expenses are please. 
You can send it to me. There is no hurry. I don’t need it now. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, indeed we can, Mr. Chairman. It’s quite handy. As soon as we get it 
put together we’ll get it over. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Item 3 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you how many 
people would you have under other personal services; in other words, temporary help? How many would 
you have as temporary help who have been with your department longer than one year that are listed 
under other personal services? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — You were under the subvote no. 3 comptroller’s office. I am informed there 
is none longer than a year. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I’m not only asking it on that vote. I don’t want to ask it on every 
vote. I want to know how many temporary help or help that’s listed as temporary you have in the 
Department of Finance? We have run across this every year with every department. They have people 
hidden who are temporary help. Some of them have been on longer than three years. I know that these 
people resent being employed this way. I want to know how many people you are sheltering this way? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer to the member’s question is that there 
aren’t any because the public service commission regulations. The Public Service Commission Act and 
the agreement with the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association have within them certain 
criteria which define the length of employment that can be maintained in a temporary or a casual 
category. As far as my staff is able to indicate in the Department of Finance, there are no people who are 
employed beyond those regulations and those agreements. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us when these rules were changed? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The people in this department won’t know when all the regulations change. 
We’d better deal with that under the public service commission. But to our knowledge there has not 
been a recent change to the regulations that we are aware of. In order to be more precise in answering 
the member I would suggest he wait until the public service commission estimates are here whether they 
are on Wednesday, later today or on Thursday. I will be able to provide him an answer more 
intelligently than I can now. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister would provide me with a detailed 
accounting of that expenditure as well as the other expenses in the subvote. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — What subvote? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Subvote 3, a detailed accounting of both the personal services and other 
expenses. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2324 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I can read it to you. Do you want me to do that or just send it over to you? 
O.K., we’ll send it over. May I make a suggestion which may help the member opposite? If he wants a 
breakdown for all the subvotes where it may be relevant, we’ll put them all together and get them to 
you. That is the breakdown of all the other expenses, all right? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Just one question. How detailed is the breakdown you’re going to offer, for 
example on subvote 3? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We have the breakdown for subvote 2, investment and financial services 
branch. I will send it over so the member will be able to get an indication of how detailed the breakdown 
is. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, if we could just delay for a couple of minutes, I want to have a 
look at the document the minister is sending over. Mr. Minister, will you be providing the same kind of 
information on subvote 3? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Indeed, I can do it for subvote 3. We’ll do it for whichever subvotes you 
might want. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, if I may have subvote 3, other personal services, that is the one I 
would like to have a fast look at if I could have a copy of it right away. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll carryon provided I can come back to this one if there is 
something I am not happy with in it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Agreed to return to subvote 3 then. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Did you say you were going to send the breakdown for all the subvotes? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We can send over whichever ones you want. Do you want that one? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Please. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Items 6 and 7 agreed. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, that amount of $10,000 annoys me more than anything else. I 
don’t think in a budget you should have an amount shown as 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2325 

unforeseen or unprovided for. That really rankles and annoys me to no end. I don’t know why you have 
it there. I would like to see it removed. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told that essentially all that is is dormant court moneys. The provision, 
apparently, must be there for use. I know it is not a significant amount of money, but apparently the 
people, who work with it and work with the legislation and the likes of that, feel it is a requirement 
which we must maintain. Certainly, as one who agrees as much with efficiency as the member opposite 
when it comes to trying to read long documents, if it were possible to do away with it I would be one of 
the first to look at that, but I am told that at least for as far as we are able to know we should keep it in 
place. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, one final question. I notice you have dropped it by $2,000 this 
year. What were your actual expenses on that item last year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — In 1978-79, which are the latest figures available, because the books for 
1979-80 are not complete, the actual expenditures were $2,862. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The minister has made my point. If you are only going to spend $2,800 why did 
you have $12,000 there last year and $10,000 this Year? Frankly, that kind of budgeting is not very 
professional. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, what can I say? It is as accurate as can be. It is necessary to 
have the provision in place. In 1978-79 the expenditure was $2,862; in 1974-75 it was $10,866. It is not 
something you can, with precision, estimate or project, so we try, in the department, to put in a figure 
which seems appropriate but which may fluctuate. In 1978-79 it was as I said; in 1979-80 it may be 
different. We do not know ahead of time, because of the nature of the expenditure which it is. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — My colleague just whispered to me, and he makes a very good point: a good 
example of what zero-based budgeting could do for you is under that item. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
Item 10 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, very quickly and very briefly, if you can, Mr. Minister, what is 
that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the provision is there because of various tax remissions that 
are provided sometimes. The figure is determined on the basis of the kinds of expenditures necessary in 
the previous year. Then it is pretty well what is allocated in the following year. They were remissions. 
Remissions for newlyweds are an example of the kinds of remissions that are provided. E&H tax is  . . 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Why newlyweds? What’s  . . 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The member opposite and I got married too early in time. There was a 
program that used to exist for $50 remission to newlyweds. The program no longer exists, but it’s an 
example of the kinds of remissions that from time to time are 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2326 

made. 
 
Item 10 agreed. 
 
Item 11 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, two questions. Who are you bonding? Is it every official of the 
government or just your department? Secondly, who is the carrier for this bond? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, all government employees are bonded. They’re bonded with 
a basic amount of $20,000 coverage per position. In some cases (I guess that would depend on the nature 
of the job) that amount will be greater. I’m told it’s a requirement under The Public Officials Act. The 
bonding agency is SGI. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That leads me to two more questions. You say all public employees. Why do you 
have officials on your subvote? Secondly, have you shopped for insurance other than with SGI? And 
why is SGI charging you another $1,000 for the same coverage this year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Nothing unusual about the word ‘official.’ That’s public employee. That’s 
straightforward. It follows the wording of The Public Officials Act. On the question of whether there has 
been shopping, the answer is no, there has not been. SGI has been used for a long time. It’s been 
providing an excellent service and we’re quite satisfied with what is done through that means. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What is your experience on claims on that bond? Is the premium $12,000 or 
$13,000, or is that a ball park figure that you are using? What is the exact premium being charged by 
SGI? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The increase, Mr. Chairman, I am informed, is as a result of adding some 
special coverage to the situation beyond what existed last year. It’s based on the number of employees at 
the basic coverage of 0.003 cents per $100. The additional coverage costs 5 cents per $100. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You didn’t answer the other part of my question. I’ll add another one to it now 
and that is, what was the additional coverage? The first part of my question I think you forgot. It was, 
how was the experience? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I may have forgotten the other question, but on the one of the experience 
my officials tell me they can’t tell you precisely because they don’t have it with them here. We can get it 
for you. We can certainly without any hesitation assure the member the premium has been beyond what 
the cost or the payout has had to be as far as they can recall. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That being the case, you should be getting a reduction in your premiums. Maybe 
it’s time you should start shopping around for a better rate. The other part of my question was, what’s 
the 5 cents per $100 you’re referring to additional coverage. What is that additional coverage? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — First of all, we have had reductions for the information of the member’s 
opposite. We’ve had reductions in the premium. The increase in what you see here is as a result of 
increased coverage we have provided in certain cases. It is thought in some particular jobs, as people 
who deal with and issue bonds and the likes of that, 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2327 

that the coverage needs to be greater than the basic coverage provided. As a result of that, because of 
this increased coverage in certain job positions, you see an increase indicated in the subvote. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — First of all, I asked you how much the premium was. Is that the premium, 
$13,000? Is it? It’s exactly $13,000. Would the minister table the policy SGI provides? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — First of all, let me make sure my answer on that rate is clear. It is estimated 
at $13,000. That’s what the figure is here for the premiums. I don’t think it’s been the practice to table 
the policies or agreements. I can take that under advisement to see whether I am wrong in that. As far as 
I know that has not been the normal policy. 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Chairman, a question to the minister. Mr. Minister, you have 
your officials with you tonight, the officials who make judgments on your borrowings. I would like to 
know whose decision it is, your officials or a political decision, on not approaching the Government of 
Alberta, through their heritage fund, to borrow money. I would like to know, is it the officials or you? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, it’s simply a government decision. We are able to arrange 
our financing on as good terms in other Canadian markets and outside, if necessary, as we can get in 
Alberta. We have not seen the need to go to Alberta. The Alberta Heritage Fund provides money to 
provinces at the best provincial rates. It has lent money at that rate. We happen to have the best 
provincial rate. We could not, therefore, get a better deal borrowing from the Alberta Heritage Fund than 
we could elsewhere. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I don’t really know where the newspaper picked up the article in 
which they mentioned that if they were to borrow money from the heritage fund in Alberta, something 
like $590 million (your 1980 borrowings) they would only save $8 million or $9 million. Is that 
attributed to your department in any way? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I didn’t get the full question, and I was waiting for it to be indicated to me. 
I don’t know where that newspaper source came from. I am not familiar with it having come from my 
officials. I can’t speak for a newspaper article and I don’t intend to pretend to. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the minister if he agrees with that figure of $9 
million as a saving on the $590 million, based on the interest rate and everything else, and if he doesn’t 
agree with it, why not? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, no, I do not agree with that statement. Second, I 
provided information, (which I don’t have here because I sent it over to the member for Thunder Creek a 
day or two days after he asked the same questions) which indicated the rates we were getting were better 
than even the province of Ontario for 1979. So, I think that in itself substantially indicates we could not 
get a better deal with Alberta. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I think you should check the records. I think you will find you are 
contradicting yourself, that the rate is a little better. So therefore the $9 million is an actual saving, and 
rather than debate or argue at this point, I suggest to you that you check the records when the question 
was asked before in this House. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2328 

I want to go back to my line of questioning. You said you will take under advisement whether or not you 
should table the document. I ask you, are you not the minister and is it not your responsibility? Do you 
not make the decisions? Whom will you be seeking advice from? You are losing me when you say 
you’ll take it under advisement. I understood that a minister ran his own department, that no one else did 
it for you. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, it is just as in the case of an individual We have agreements 
with individuals or with companies and SGI is a Crown corporation is not appropriate for the 
government to table those kinds of agreements for the same reasons you would not in any other 
department. So I am saying to the member, that is the way I view it, and I think that is the correct view 
to take. Certainly, I will give it consideration beyond that to see whether or not I am correct, but until I 
change my mind after reviewing it. I will maintain that position. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, maybe I could inform the minister how insurance is bought and how it 
works. Obviously, the government or the Crown corporation lack experience in knowing how to shop 
for insurance policies, whether they be group life or general insurance or bonding or bonds or whatever. 
It is common practice in that field, Mr. Minister, for any insurance company, if it is going to provide a 
bid (a quote) on an insurance policy, to get from the insured the policy that was in place at the time he’s 
submitting his proposal. It is also common practice for any insurer to supply all information to all 
insurance companies so they are bidding and quoting on an exactly identical type of insurance. So your 
idea, your comment, your excuse that you’re using that it’s a document that should be kept from the eyes 
of competition (that’s not the word you used but it’s the meaning you used) is nonsense. This is common 
practice in any kind of insurance purchasing by any insurer. The insurance companies work on that 
basis. The only way they can quote is by knowing exactly the kind of coverage they’re quoting on. 
 
I’d like you to reconsider your answer and ask you again to table that document. There’s no reason why 
that should be confidential information. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve made my point. I’ve given the member, the critic 
finance, my answer and it stands. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to just say to the minister you may have made your point 
but you didn’t hear mine. 
 
Item 11 agreed. 
 
Item 12 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like the minister to supply me, along with the other documents 
that you’re going to send over, a list of what you anticipate those refunds to be and perhaps a list of what 
they were in the last year you have. In fact, I’d like it for ’79-’80. You’ll have it. You won’t have it 
tonight but you can send it to me at your convenience. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No problem. My officials will be putting it together and giving us a copy. 
Maybe I can even get it to you yet this evening. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Wait. You say you can get it to me this evening. I asked you a  



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2329 

question a little while ago on the ’79-’80. You said you couldn’t provide that information. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Sorry. When the books are closed on ’79-’80, we’ll be able to get it to you. 
 
Item 12 agreed. 
 
Items 13 and 14 agreed. 
 
Item 15 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I want to draw to members’ attention that this is not a vote to be agreed on. This 
is statutory. If there are any questions, you are at liberty to ask the questions on it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, the only question I have on it is why is it the same amount as last 
year? With everything else going up, why is this one standing? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m told it’s only for the existing people who are now and presently in the 
plan. The major portion of  . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Is that the old plan? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I was off on something else. But on subvote 15, the 
actual expenditures, I am told, are not expected for 1979-80 to reach the $4.2 million which was there. 
There was an overestimate. Therefore, it is thought that for 1980-81 the expenditure as indicated will be 
sufficient. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Do you have any indication at all of what you expect it to be for 1979-80? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I don’t know precisely but it will probably be less than $4 million. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, just to go back to these detailed accounts sent over to me, I am 
not sure whether you just are not finished sending them, but the one I asked for, the other personal 
services under item 3 (you gave me other expenses under item 5 and item 3 but not the other personal 
services)  . . I do have a question on one here, but I will wait until I hear from you on the other question. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, we can provide information under other personal services 
broken down according to person-months  . . (inaudible interjection)  . . Sorry? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I thought you said mutts. I couldn’t figure our what was mutts. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, person-months. The reason it is person-months is because we do not 
have, nor can you have, a precise number saying you are going to have X number of casuals, X number 
of temporaries because that will fluctuate and change throughout the year. So we certainly can get a 
breakdown for you on the number of person-months there and we will provide that. It will take a little 
longer to put together. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2330 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — One final question on that. Perhaps the minister would supply me with the 
history of the 1979-80 information of the list of the names, the amounts, the services and everything else 
on the actual at some future date. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, we will undertake to provide to the member opposite a 
breakdown for the past year when it is completed. We have the breakdown of number of person-months, 
narrowing it down to numbers of casuals, for how many months, numbers of people in there and so on. 
We will get that to you; that will take some time. We can provide the kind of job it is. The names change 
constantly and continuously. I am not sure whether we can provide that for the member opposite. But all 
the other information (it will take a little while to put together because it is a fairly hefty chunk of work), 
we will work on and get it to the member. If the House is still sitting, I will hand it over to him. If not, I 
will see that he gets it mailed to him. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — In looking at the breakdown of the other expenses for the comptroller’s office in 
subvote 3, I notice an item that says $208,150 for office equipment rental. Now, that to me is an 
astronomical amount of money for equipment rental. Now are we talking computers? Exactly what have 
you got up there? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, that is exactly what it is; I am told it is rental of computer equipment. 
By far the largest substance of it is computer equipment. There will be some other moderate items such 
as word processing equipment; indeed, I am told, from time to time even some typewriters, but the 
biggest portion is computer equipment rental. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Could you advise me as to whom you are renting it from? Perhaps another 
question on that is, have you again asked for proposals or quotations or tenders? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — All the rentals are from IBM. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You didn’t answer my question. Did you tender for it or call tenders on it? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told, Mr. Chairman, that the equipment has been rented with IBM for 
something like 10 years. Looking around this group of people, I am not sure whether any of them were 
there at that time. They are a pretty young bunch of fellows. There, obviously, was a cost study analysis 
made at the time and it continues. The service has been good and we are satisfied with it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, if it is 10 years ago, how long is this contract for? Is there no termination 
clause on that contract? Is it a lifetime contract? Is it a rental purchase agreement that you have? Could 
you provide us, perhaps, with a few more details than what you have given us already? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I guess I should have added that we first started renting the IBM equipment 
about 10 years ago. I am told they are renewed periodically. Depending on the equipment the nature of 
it, that renewal is done at different intervals; some will be three years, some will be five-year intervals. 
So that process of renewing and reassessing is an ongoing process. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — When you are renewing, are you getting new equipment or are you renewing on 
the old equipment? Is it being changed as you are renewing? 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2331 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Obviously, the equipment is being updated. Indeed, some equipment from 
time to time is updated as the need arises and as new equipment comes on the market. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Just one final comment on it and we will move on. But you know you just said 
one minute ago that it has been 10 years since you have been under this contract and that is over $2 
million that you have spent on rental of equipment. First of all, you might have saved some money by 
buying it, but I don’t know that and I would not want to accuse you of that yet. However, when you are 
spending that kind of money (the taxpayers’ money) suggest, perhaps, it may be time for you to look 
around for some prices and call for tenders on some of these items. Just buying and buying without 
knowing is a little costly. 
 
Item 15 agreed. 
 
Item 16 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I hear the perennial complaint from employers all over the province, that their 
compensation costs are going up. Yours are going down. Are you by any chance subsidizing your costs 
through some of the employers of this province or the businesses? Why are all the businesses pretty well 
finding an increase in this?  . . (inaudible interjection)  . . Well, it is true from the information I am 
getting. Yours are down. Now perhaps you cold give me a little explanation on that. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, there is a decrease in the rates because of an actual decrease 
in accidents in 1979, in a substantial way as is reflected in the workers’ compensation board’s employers 
assessment. This is the assessment the government has to pay, on behalf of its employees, to the 
workers’ compensation board. Certainly, I think it’s nothing other than a reason to commend our public 
servants and our managers for providing the kind of safety situation and guidance and so on which is 
reflected in a decrease in the assessment because of a substantial decrease in the accident rate in the 
public service. 
 
Item 16 agreed. 
 
Item 17 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Same answer, I suppose, for why that is the same amount? Last year was less 
than what you’re showing here? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the rate remains the same. The number of people who are 
covered under the plan remains the same. So, there is no need for a change in the amount of money. 
 
Item 17 agreed. 
 
Item 18 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That subvote was previously in the public service commission. You would 
have seen it reflected there. It is now a transfer to the Department of Finance and so the subvote is there; 
no change otherwise. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2332 

Item 18 agreed. 
 
Item 19 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The next one comes under 19? Shall I cover it now or do you want to  . . O.K. 
Where has that gone to? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The minister in charge is Mr. Smishek; it comes in the Department of 
Urban Affairs. 
 
MR. LANE: — Where is the cultural planning secretariat we read about/ 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That’s in the very capable hands of the Minister of Culture and Youth, and 
therefore is within the Department of Culture and Youth. 
 
Item 19 agreed. 
 
Item 20 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The $700,000 for Taylor Field, was that the actual amount spent? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The actual amount spent was $958,000. This is sort of the final payment 
and it was in the form of a supplementary estimate. The total figure is $958,000, for a good cause, I 
might add. 
 
Item 20 agreed. 
 
Item 21 agreed. 
 
Item 22 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I am sure the minister is going to be able to tell me why the members of this 
legislature are so well looked after from that point of view. Could you explain that 400 per cent 
increase? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the member may have forgotten but the act was changed in 
the previous session of the legislature which required the Minister of Finance to pay $350,000. It also 
provides for payments by the Minister of Finance to match contributions of members under The 
Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That will be continuous from now on? Is that what you are saying? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It will continue until the amount of the fund comes up to a level where it is 
then a funded plan, which apparently it is not now. After that it may very well change, yes. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Just a comment. The minister suggested I had forgotten what it was all about. 
Obviously you did too; you had to check with your officials to get the answer. 
 
Item 22 agreed. 
 
Item 23 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2333 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — On payments made by the provincial disaster financial assistance program, did 
you spend the $100,000 last year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Once again, I can’t give the precise figure for ’79-’80 because it’s not all 
completed. I am told (we’ll give you an estimate) we spent about $160,000, which is just about or 
around $60,000 more than was estimated. Once again, you can’t predict the disasters that come about 
but that’s the ball park figure we will be spending. 
 
Item 23 agreed. 
 
Item 24 agreed. 
 
Finance Vote 11 agreed. 
 

FINANCE 
INTEREST ON PUBLIC DEBT — GOVERNMENT SHARE 

ORDINARY EXPENDITURE 
VOTE 12 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Since your predecessor has been wrong so many times in that estimate, maybe 
the minister would like to indicate whether or not you’re going to be close this time or are you still going 
to be at half of what the actual is going to be? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, that is an estimate we project will be an accurate estimate. 
Once again there are some undefinables that happen from time to time. We have under the 
circumstances that face us today, no way of knowing what will happen from the point of view of the 
federal government (and I’m trying to get into a critical argument here) with regard to interest rates. If 
that changes then the figure here may very well change but that is our estimate as best as we are able to 
make it at the present time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Either you are much, much wealthier than what you were a couple of years ago 
when you estimated (and I can’t recall the estimate for 1979; I don’t have it in front of me) I recall, 
around $6 million, and you spent $17 million. In 1978 you spent $7.5 million and your estimate was $2 
million. Your interest rates are more than double what they were then — the prime rate. I’m at a loss to 
understand how you can arrive at a $16 million estimate taking those other accounts into consideration 
with the interest rates where they are. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, the changes that have taken place over time have 
happened for a number of reasons: (1) because of interest rates, and (2) because ewe have had to 
improve our cash position in order to operate the expenditures of the government on a monthly basis. As 
to the projection, we have an estimate of $16,321 million. That may be low depending on what happens 
to the interest rates, whether they remain high or whether in fact they increase. I hope they do not. There 
seems to be a trend developing the other way around. It may very well be lower if circumstances change. 
We try to estimate as closely as well can, and then the experience throughout the year will, I guess, rule 
as to what happens to it eventually. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Not a very good answer, Mr. Minister. Let me refresh you memory on interest 
rates back in 1977-78-79. In those years they went down, not up. They 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2334 

started going up in mid-1979. It has nothing to do with these costs I quoted to you from the public 
accounts. This estimate came out in late ’76-’77, when interest rates were reasonably high, and then they 
came down out in late ’76-’77, when interest rates were reasonably high, and then they came down from 
that point. Yet you went from a $2 million estimate to a $7.5 million actual, and again with the same rate 
of decline the following year, and you went from $6 million to $17 million. Now, when you’ve 
estimated $16 million, and the interest rates have skyrocketed, you’re saying you can live with it. Well, 
with a new finance minister, maybe you also have a new magician in the crowd, but I don’t know how 
you’re going to manage that, if historically you’ve gone that way, how can you justify this? And how 
can you justify a decrease from your 1979 actual with the interest rates the way they are? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, we went through a period between ’75-’76 
and ’79-’80 when we were running, on the consolidated fund some deficit budgets; that was a factor. 
Also, during that period of time, we decided to improve our cash position so we increased the amount of 
our treasury bills, I believe, and that made a major difference in our interest costs. In 1980-81, the 
simple fact we have a balanced budget has to be a positive aspect of how we can, other than what has 
happened to the  . . That’s one of the difficulties the federal government has right now; they let it get out 
of hand and out of control. We have not been prepared to do that. We do have a balanced budget, and 
that will reflect, from our point of view, on our interest costs. 
 
I think the member across asked, how much did we increase our cash position? I know that in one year, 
Lorry says we increased it by $53 million. We’ll work it out year by year and get it to you so you can 
have it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — On a $2 billion budget, that’s not going to put you into the position. On the 
comment you just made, I indicated you were trying to be a magician; you’re also trying to be a 
comedian. That is absolute nonsense! However, agreed on that estimate. One more comment, come next 
year I hope I don’t have to make you eat what you just said tonight. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want the member to mention that next year. If he can 
assure me what’ll happen with the interest rate next year, what I will assure him will be the difference, if 
there is any difference, in this subvote. That’s something we can’t predict with any accuracy. We have 
some tremendous suggestions to make to the federal government, which we have made over time, but 
unfortunately they wont listen to us. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — One comment you have all the experts. I don’t have any. I work by myself. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Vote 12 agreed. 
 

FINANCE 
CONSOLIDATED FUND 

LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
VOTE 60 

 
Item 1 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2335 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — What is it for? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The member will be interested in this. We put each year an estimated 
amount that may be needed for loans for seed grain and supplies. I guess that’s the jargon that’s used, in 
the LIDs. In LIDs it is a long-standing provision that’s there. The number of LIDs has been declining. In 
fact, I’m not sure whether there are any anymore but there may be because of the conversion to rural 
municipalities. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, $60,000 in your words doesn’t seem like an awful lot of money, 
but your answer is absolutely ridiculous. If they’re not there any more, what’s the estimate doing there? 
Why is it in your department when it should be municipal? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I guess it’s a little broader than just the way I defined it by using the 
example. I am informed that if under any act there are provided some loans and advances which are not 
provided for elsewhere in the estimates, then it would be done out of this particular subvote and under 
this authority. My staff cannot recall it being used last year, in fact, it’s for unforeseen contingencies or 
unforeseen circumstances that may come about. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I don’t know how many places you want to estimate or allow for unforeseen 
expenditures. That is the second one now. Secondly, you say you didn’t spend any money there last year 
and you have the nerve to come to this legislature to ask for $60,000 this year because it was there last 
year. That is absolute nonsense! You just said you didn’t spend anything last year on Vote 60. Isn’t that 
what you just said or did I misunderstand? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I think you have to read the subvote. It has nothing to do necessarily with 
expenditures. It is for loans and advances that may be authorized. So no expenditures are made, but 
loans and advances may be made, these would be repayable. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Historically, when you have, and I don’t know how many years I would have to 
go back now to find out whether you have, used this subvote, were they repaid? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — How far back are you going when you last used that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We are going as far back as the provision has existed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, you misunderstood my question. Have you used it recently? You said one 
minute ago that you didn’t use it last year. Well when did you use it last? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — My officials offhand can’t tell me when it was last used. We will do some 
checking to be able to give you the information. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, the reading here, I’d just like to clear it in my own mind. Item 1 
says to provide for loans and advances authorized. Then when it goes down below, it says, total for 
finance loans, advances and investments. Now, why is the word investments in there when it is not 
above? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told it is standard wording provided in some acts. If you 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2336 

look on page 106 you will see the title in the blue book, under this area, is consolidated fund loans, 
advances and investments. In some of the acts it is written up that way. That is why it is stated this way 
in the subvote. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Could you give me an example of where you would use that $60,000 in 
investments? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, I cannot. It has not been used for investments. It, in here, just carries 
the title as is required for it to be carried. The actual thing that happens is indicated under subvote 1 
which reads, loans and advances authorized. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Supplementaries Vote 60 agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
CONSOLIDATED FUND DEBT REDEMPTION, SINKING FUND AND INTEREST 

PAYMENTS — VOTE 55, VOTE 56, VOTE 57 
 
Vote 55 agreed. 
 
Vote 56 agreed. 
 
VOTE 57 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Just a quick question on that. Was your calculation on the interest based on the 
interest rates as of last fall or is it the terms established over the years? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m told that most of this is fixed long-term debt. So I guess your final 
comment is correct. 
 
Mr. Chairman, maybe you did it intentionally but I think we missed Vote 51, loans, advances and 
investments, municipal finance corporation on page 110. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — That’s correct, we haven’t done that one yet. Sorry I missed it. We’ll come back 
to that one in a second. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Vote 57 agreed. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN 
MUNICIPAL FINANCING CORPORATION — VOTE 51 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Why is that here now, is it under your department and covered now? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I happen to be the minister in charge of the municipal finance corporation 
and these are loans and advances provided to the municipal finance corporation. 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2337 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, just one other question then. Why is there a 50 per cent increase in it? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We’re anticipating that in urban areas, because of capital construction 
which is either taking place or expected to take place, there will be a requirement for more money to be 
provided by the municipal finance corporation to municipalities at their request. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 51 agreed. 
 

FINANCE— SUPPLEMENTARY — ORDINARY EXPENDITURE 
VOTE 11 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Supplementary Vote 11 agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE — SUPPLEMENTARY — HERITAGE FUND 
VOTE 72 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That makes it a total of what, $318 million or $308 million? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That makes it $338 million. It was estimated at $328 million. 
 
Supplementary Vote 72 agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE — ORDINARY EXPENDITURE — HERITAGE FUND 
VOTE 12 

 
Vote 12 agreed. 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR — ORDINARY EXPENDITURE 
VOTE 28 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. Did you want to introduce your staff? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I would like to introduce 
the staff from the provincial auditor’s office who are here. Mr. Lutz, who is seated beside me, is our 
provincial auditor. Mr. Wendel, Mr. Bucknall, and Mr. Hunt, who are deputy provincial auditors, are 
seated over here. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Mr. Minister, in the provincial auditor’s report this year, you 
raised some concern as to the independence of that office bearing in mind the fact his salary is now 
being set by the cabinet. I believe he issued a suggestion that the salary of the provincial auditor in the 
future should be tied, let’s say, to the chief justice of the court of appeal. Would you not agree that is 
perhaps a reasonable request? Would you be prepared to make recommendations that that be followed? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as the member indicates it is something he 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2338 

has brought up apparently in public accounts committee. I am prepared to await the deliberations of the 
public accounts committee, therefore determine what it may recommend on it, and then consider the 
recommendation. I might remind the member opposite the reason there was a change made in the first 
place was because of requests made by the member for Thunder Creek. When the legislation was 
brought in last year, rightfully or wrongfully, at the request of members opposite, it received approval 
without dissent either by voice or by vote. I think it’s fair to assume that it received the support of this 
House. Now, if it is the wish of the public accounts committee to reconsider it and to recommend certain 
changes, I would be prepared to look at whatever the public accounts committee might recommend. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, I take it from what you’ve said that last year you acted upon the 
question advanced by the member for Thunder Creek, and as a result made a change in the way in which 
that salary was arrived at. At that point in time, I take it you didn’t refer it to the public accounts 
committee. In view of that, are you now prepared to consider, as is done in most other jurisdictions (in 
the case of the ombudsman) trying the salary of the provincial auditor to that of the senior judge in the 
Court of Queen’s Bench? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, I’m prepared to consider any suggestion the 
member opposite brings forward. I’m not sure we want to change the way we determine the salary of the 
provincial auditor every year. It seems that’s what we have done in the past. As the member indicates, 
he has a point of view and a suggestion. I’m prepared to entertain that. At the same time, I think my 
personal point of view is that we have a public accounts committee which has done a commendable job 
over the years — I might add, in some ways probably better than in some other jurisdictions. Our public 
accounts report and the auditor’s report, I think, are scrutinized; I think it’s a tribute to members who 
have served on the public accounts committee from all sides of the House over the years. But it is a job 
which is done pretty effectively, and I’m sure it will continue to be done in that manner. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Still relating to the salary of the provincial auditor — and I’m not concerned as to 
exactly what it is — could you tell me how it stacks up with other provinces? How many provinces have 
a higher salary for their provincial auditor and how many have a lower salary? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We don’t have with us the salaries of all the other provinces. Obviously, 
there will be some provinces ahead of what our provincial auditor gets paid, there will be other 
provinces providing remuneration which is less than that. But we don’t have each province with us. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Would you agree, Mr. Minister, that in fact the salary of the province auditor in 
Saskatchewan is second or third lowest, I think after Prince Edward Island and one of the other maritime 
provinces? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It may very well be in that area but I think at the same time, it’s fair to say 
(and once again I’m not going to argue the provincial auditor’s salary here) the provincial auditor’s 
salary in Saskatchewan compares reasonably well with other heads of other agencies in other 
departments within the province. But as is the case with senior people in the government it is under 
continuous review in the same way other agency heads are. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, as you’re perhaps aware, an in-depth study into the 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2339 

Office of the Auditor General of Canada was conducted (the Wilson Report) and came up with various 
recommendations. One of those recommendations was what is commonly referred to as value for money 
auditing. Would you (and this would of course require an amendment to The Department of Finance 
Act) advise this Assembly as to whether or not your department is considering implementing value for 
money auditing or comprehensive auditing into the office o f the provincial auditor? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I can’t respond definitively because that’s a matter which we have not 
spent a great deal of time giving consideration to. I know that it has been talked about in other 
jurisdictions, as a matter of fact (I am going from memory now and I may be corrected to some degree) 
in Manitoba either in the last session or the session before last, there were some amendments in the 
legislation dealing with that which were later withdrawn by the present government there because they 
were concerned about how in fact it would operate and would work. I’m not going to argue with him 
because I have not studied the discussion there or the debates which took place there but we have not 
considered the matter which the member opposite raises in any great depth and so I am not in a position 
to respond one way or the other to his suggestion. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, reading from the report of the Auditor General of Canada, fiscal 
period, March 31, 1979, and what Mr. Macdonell says with regard to that question is this, and I think it’s 
worthy to read it into the record. 
 

The most important recommendation was that the auditor general should report to the House annually 
on whether the government expenditures have been made with due regard to economy and efficiency 
and whether the procedures to measure program effectiveness which were in place were reasonable to 
expect that they should be. In short he should conduct value for money audit. The extension of the 
auditor general’s scope and mandate to include value for money audit is having an enormous effect on 
the work of the office and ultimately will have a big impact as well on the economy, efficiency and 
effectiveness of government at all levels of the public service in managing money and resources. 

 
Now, those are the statements with regard to that idea of value for money and auditing advanced by the 
federal auditor general. It is also in place in the province of Ontario, the province of British Columbia, 
the province of Alberta and one or two of the maritime provinces. 
 
Now, you indicate that you haven’t given any consideration to this particular view, and yet it’s the 
common view held by many of the auditors throughout Canada. Are you prepared as the Minister of 
Finance, to look at this concept of post audit and the procedures by which post audit is done? 
 
MR. LANE: — I would just like to raise a matter of privilege. It strikes me that we just talked about the 
independence of the provincial auditor and I don’t see the provincial auditor advising the minister. I see 
the deputy minister of finance. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. That isn’t a question of privilege. 
 
MR. LANE: — It sure as heck is. He’s supposed to be the independent provincial auditor, and it’s the 
deputy minister of finance who is answering the question. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. That is not a question of privilege. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2340 

MR. LANE: — You’re saying that the independence of the provincial auditor is not a matter of 
privilege to this House, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — No, I’m not saying that at all. I’m saying that your point is not a question of 
privilege. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I guess it’s a question of privilege that I shouldn’t comment 
on, because you have made your ruling but I, as a minister, think I should be using the advice of the  . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. You are out of order. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — May I respond to the question raised and the comments made by the 
member for Kindersley. Let me point out that we as a government cannot be easily compared to the 
operations of such as the federal government. That’s the major premise which has to be taken into 
consideration and be kept in mind. 
 
We take measures within our government services to assess programs and to make sure we establish 
operational efficiencies in the best way possible. We have the bureau of management improvement, Mr. 
Chairman, which does operational reviews of departments on a regular basis and on request, and that’s 
an ongoing function. We have PMIS, better defined as program-based management information system, 
which assures program efficiencies. That has proved to be a very effective internal government system 
to meet the needs as indicated by the member opposite. We are looking at other ways in which we might 
be able to do that even better. Certainly if it is thought we need to establish other avenues or other kinds 
of controls or other reviews, we’d be most prepared to look at that. Up till now these internal systems 
which are in place have been doing a particularly good job from the point of view of determining that 
programs and the delivery of programs are done very efficiently. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, would you not agree with me, however, there’s a very material 
difference between the provincial auditor’s office doing a post audit to determine whether or not moneys 
are being spent with economy and efficiency on the one hand, bearing in mind that the provincial auditor 
is an employee of the legislature as opposed to the Department of Finance. Surely there’s the 
independence of the office to ensure that the efficiencies or the inefficiencies are brought to the attention 
of the public. I’m sure the officials of your department are not going to bring them to the public. Do you 
not agree that there’s quite a distinction between the post audit and the control mechanisms put in by 
your department. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Indeed, there is a difference in the two approaches. I don’t deny that. It’s a 
question of point of view and a question of the measures which are there. I am saying to the members 
opposite that the measures which we have within our internal government operations have been 
effective, continue to be effective, and that does not in any way take away from the independence of the 
provincial auditor’s office which, as will be indicated by the auditor’s reports which members get every 
year, has done a pretty credible and commendable job in looking at the expenditures and the operations 
of various government departments. Where there are things which need to be brought to the attention of 
the legislature and then to the attention of the public accounts committee, this has been done and 
certainly will continue to be done. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — But, Mr. Minister, would you not agree with me that the present system in place in 
Saskatchewan is what is referred to as a test audit and not a 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2341 

comprehensive audit system which is in place in other jurisdictions. In other words, by way of example, 
if the legislature appropriated X number of dollars to go out and buy land, and you or some other person 
in the government went out and paid $1,000 an acre for that land when it was only worth $300 an acre. 
Of course you appropriated the money, but the auditor would not be allowed under the present 
legislation to comment on that overexpenditure or that wasteful expenditure of money — that you didn’t 
get the value for the dollar that you spent. Surely that is the function of a provincial auditor — to bring 
that to the attention of the public, to force corrective measures on the government, and not really rely on 
the people within your department to say, oh yes, we’re doing very well. Just trust us. We’re doing very 
well. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There will be examples, Mr. Chairman. If there is an example of a glaring 
situation, as the member opposite might be able to describe to this House, our provincial auditor would 
probably make some comment on it, and from time to time he has. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I take it then that you are not prepared to move in a way that other jurisdictions 
have moved: into the field of comprehensive auditing, of having the provincial auditor’s people look at 
whether or not programs are returning proper value for dollar spent. Do you not think that is an 
important thing for the people of Saskatchewan to know, whether or not their dollar is in fact being 
spent properly? And do you not think that it’s important for an independent branch (like the provincial 
auditor) to approve it or say whether or not they have reservations about this program or that program, 
that you’re not getting the proper money? Surely, that’s a function which modern government needs; 
that’s one of the main recommendations advanced by the Wilson report, which is a major report into the 
concept of post audit. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, as I have already indicated, we are evaluating the whole 
process. If it were decided that there should be changes, I would indicate that in due course. We are 
never completely locked into one particular practice or another, or one particular program or another, 
but I think a government, being responsible, needs to look at what it’s doing, needs to look at various 
legislation which is in place, needs to make evaluations. We are evaluating now. If we decide there 
should be changes, we will discuss it with the legislature. I want to leave no doubt, and want to make 
sure the member opposite doesn’t leave any doubt, that programs established within this government, 
because of the very effective evaluation which does take place, and because of the good, high quality of 
our managers within departments and agencies, and because of the outstanding co-operation between 
those mangers and the control agencies such as budget bureau and the Department of Finance, we get 
very effective value for dollars spent on various programs. Sure, there will be cases, as the provincial 
auditor reports from time to time, where errors are made. That’s why we have a provincial auditor who 
reports to this legislature, in order that that may be pointed out and corrections looked at and made as 
required. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — You indicate you are presently evaluating this. At what stage are your evaluations, 
Mr. Minister? Could you advise the Assembly whether you have done any cost projections as to what 
the additional cost would be to implement a system of comprehensive auditing, or a modified system of 
comprehensive auditing? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We haven’t gone that far yet, but it is indicated to me we are certainly 
studying systems which exist in other governments in Canada. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2342 

MR. ANDREW: — I’d like you to be a little more specific. What systems in other parts of Canada are 
you studying and with what in mind? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We are looking at all the things which exist in other provinces, what is 
done there. The purpose is to ask the question and get an answer, which deals with the same question the 
member opposite raises — a question of value for dollars spent. How can we improve efficiency and 
effectiveness? That is foremost in determining the purpose of evaluating what is happening, and 
carefully studying what is happening in other provinces of Canada. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Are you looking at the methodologies of other provinces to perhaps institute 
economies and efficiencies in your own department or are you looking at upgrading the office of the 
provincial auditor? Why are you looking for them? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The primary focus is to look at improving the efficiency of various 
departments. Secondly, we are looking at various legislation which provides certain powers and certain 
things for provincial auditors to do and we are addressing ourselves to that. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Minister, you seem to have at your fingertips what happened in the 
province of Manitoba last year with the introduction of a bill relating to comprehensive auditing. I 
understand it was not supported by the opposition, who, as I further understand, later resented that. Now, 
if you know the situation in Manitoba I am sure you’re also aware of the situation in Ontario and the 
situation in B.C. and Alberta. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, with no great precision. I’m not aware of precisely what exists there 
because I have not studied them. I am awaiting the review taking place and until that review is done, I 
am prepared to wait. As I indicated, I was making a comment on what happened in Manitoba from 
memory. I don’t have it at my fingertips. I can only recollect in a general way that there was indeed 
legislation, but specifics of what it was and what eventually happened to it, I cannot relate to the 
member opposite. I would be the first to admit it as I did when I made the comment initially. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, you pointed to Mr. Douglas. Is he the person or someone in your 
department who is doing this review? Are you open to submissions from interested parties in the 
systems to be developed? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Certainly I motioned over here because it is work being done within the 
Department of Finance. If the member is as free with his advice as he should be in the consideration of 
these estimates, if he wants to make some suggestions to me, I’ll look at them. At the present time what 
we are doing is an internal study within the Department of Finance to determine the things I pointed out 
in my earlier remarks. 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Minister, you heard me mention before (and 
maybe this is where we’ll get an answer) the fraud that took place in the Department of Social Services 
at the Lakeside Nursing Home, and the failure of your department to do an audit for a period of five 
years. Why haven’t you audited the expenditures at the Lakeside Nursing Home for a period of five 
years? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m told by my advisor that there are certain agencies such as court houses 
and nursing homes where the audit is done on a cyclical basis. Nursing homes are in that category where 
there would be an audit every so many years. Indications are that will probably continue and it will not 
likely be done every year in 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2343 

some of these categories. To do it every year there would need to be a major increase in staff and we are 
not sure whether it may be necessary to do it every year in some of these cases. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — But you say a cyclical nature. Is that common practice? Five years, is that  . . 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m informed this cyclical basis of auditing things like courthouses is 
something that has been done for many years, as long as our memory here can take us back. So it’s 
something that has been a practice for some time. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — One further question, Mr. Minister. It relates to the whole question of the auditor 
having a perception of being an independent person, and his office being independent, which I think is 
very important. Has your department given consideration to taking the provincial auditor part out of The 
Department of Finance Act, and introducing a total act to cover the provincial auditor much in the same 
way that The Ombudsman Act is covered, or something like this? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — There’s been no decision made in that respect. I’m told the department has 
looked at it from time to time, but it has not been thought that would change things substantially. I know 
the member opposite talks about the perception. I agree that’s important, except I have yet to hear from 
the public or people out there who are concerned about the operations of government where there is a 
perception that the provincial auditor’s office is not independent. In fact, I would venture to say that I 
think in the public mind, which the member opposite and I represent, it is the other way. There is a 
perception of the independence of the provincial auditor’s office. I have no doubt about that at all. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, sometimes the scrutiny of the provincial auditor’s report doesn’t 
captivate the media, let’s say. But going back to several of the reports of the provincial auditor, and 
some of the recommendations of the provincial auditor in the past three or four years, the provincial 
auditor has called for an independent act, for an act covering the provincial auditor as is the case in most 
other jurisdictions of this country. So it’s not a question of simply me raising the point. The provincial 
auditor has raised the point. And the point is agreed to by most other provincial auditors in the country. 
The provincial auditor has called on various occasions for an independent act. Would you agree with 
that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It’s certainly one aspect of the broader review within which we can 
consider that. The member indicates there has been a recommendation in the provincial auditor’s report 
that there should be a separate act. That’s something that the provincial auditor at some time may want 
to consider. But I can’t recollect such a recommendation. I think, as I am informed very quickly, there 
has been an assessment made of what is happening in other jurisdictions. But as far as a specific 
recommendation for that, I am not aware of any. If the member is, he might want to remind me. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, would you agree that perhaps the proper analogy would be that the 
provincial ombudsman office and his responsibilities are under the Attorney General, as opposed to 
being independent. Do you not think that it’s very important that the ombudsman be not only 
independent, but perceived to be independent? Do you not think that equally applies for the provincial 
auditor? He should not only be independent, but appear to be independent? 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2344 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes, indeed, Mr. Chairman, I agree with that wholeheartedly. I think the 
provincial auditor should not only be independent, but should appear to be independent, and should be 
perceived to be independent, as I think is the case at the present time. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Would you not agree than, Mr. Minister, arising out of that, to have an independent 
act entitled the provincial auditors act would be a step toward that perception of independence. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Not necessarily, Mr. Chairman, because I think the sense of perception is 
already there. I don’t think there’s any doubt about it. In the overall review that takes place, if it is 
thought there may be some merit in going through the removal of the provision there now and putting it 
in separate legislation, that’s something which will be decided on. I would not want to leave the 
impression I agree with the suggestion that somehow the office of the provincial auditor is not perceived 
to be or, in fact, is not independent, because I think I think it’s just completely to the contrary. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I have no further questions relating to this. I would like to commend the provincial 
auditor for his work. His independence is because of his own personality and independence. I suggest 
the members of this House would be well served if we did bring in an independent provincial auditors 
act, and in that act have value for money auditing. 
 
I hear the Minister of Finance talking there and it strikes me that he says we’ll do it ourselves behind 
closed doors to make sure there are no problems with it. That’s the big dilemma I have. Obviously the 
Minister of Finance is not going to move on this. 
 
I think that’s too bad because the provincial auditor in this province has been a strong office for a long 
time. But we must get into the twentieth century with comprehensive auditing systems. It’s too bad the 
Minister of Finance is not prepared to move on this, and instead is holding back our provincial auditor 
from advancing in step with many of the other jurisdictions. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan would be very well served to make an independent act and to give 
him the power, the money and the staff to do the job. If we did this I’m sure the whole question of 
effectiveness and efficient use of money in the province would be well served. In the end the people of 
Saskatchewan would be the big gainers. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, very briefly, I agree with the member’s comments that the 
provincial auditor’s office in Saskatchewan has been strong. I’m glad we share this point of view. It 
certainly is true historically. It’s true today. 
 
I also appreciate the difficulties which sometimes are faced because of situations where there may be 
staff vacancies and so on. But in spite of those difficulties I think it’s fair to say the provincial auditor’s 
office in this province deserves commendation for the kind of diligence applied. The nature of the work 
is such that there is a great deal of travelling and some of the personnel spend a considerable amount of 
time away from home. That’s not the ideal situation for most people. In spite of that I think the work 
done is worthy of commendation and I certainly would be the first. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I had one further question. Does the provincial auditor in this 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2345 

province conduct audits on all departments of government and all Crown corporations? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Some auditing is done by the private sector for some agencies. The audit 
report then comes in and is reviewed by the provincial auditor. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Is that a decision made by the provincial auditor’s office or a decision made by 
cabinet — going to outside auditors for Crown corporations? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m informed that relative to the Crown corporations, the administration of 
the corporation may make the decisions. With regard to the legal-aid clinics, the provincial auditor 
advises me he made the appointments. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The Crown corporations make their own determination as to whom they are going 
to have as their auditor and not the provincial auditor? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It can be one of two ways, either the administration of the Crown or the 
executive council may make a designation of a private auditing firm to do it and then have the report 
reviewed by the provincial auditor’s office. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Does that not, Mr. Minister, seem to take away from the office of the provincial 
auditor, when the cabinet or the board of a Crown corporation can unilaterally say, well, now we don’t 
want the provincial auditor on this one. We are going to get another accounting firm to do that for us. 
Now, surely, that should be a decision of the provincial auditor, not a decision of the cabinet. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, I don’t think it takes away at all. I think if the member has any 
examples of firms he would suggest are not adequate in the audit they do. I would be most pleased to 
hear which they may be. I am not suggesting he is suggesting if. I am sure he is not. The firms that have 
done the audits are credible, very reputable firms. In the final analysis the report they provide and the 
audit they do is reviewed by the provincial auditor when it is done. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Yes, but Mr. Minister, should it not be the provincial auditor’s decision as to 
whether he wants to farm something out. If he doesn’t have enough staff that he, in fact, arranges for the 
accounting firm or the auditing firm as opposed to the government? It seems to me what you are saying 
is if we have some problems in the given Crown corporation the provincial auditor could zero in on it in 
his provincial auditor’s report. This is not necessarily the case with a firm of accountants being hired. 
You can circumvent the harsh words that might come down on you by the provincial auditor. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, the designation is in the legislation. It is legislation which passes 
through this House, so it is written into legislation. In order for some of that to change one would have 
to change the legislation. 
 
MR. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to address a question to the 
minister if I might. Would he know who audits the federal Crown corporations by any chance? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — They have even more flexibility than we have. I am told in some cases it is 
done by private firms; in some cases it is done jointly by Mr. Macdonell or his staff and a private firm. 
In other cases it is done by the federal auditor. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2346 

MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Minister, would the auditor’s department consider relinquishing some of the 
control over the Crown corporations you now have in terms of the audits in the fashion of the federal 
Crown corporations? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, that is a matter of legislation. It is in the legislation. In order 
for different means to be put in place it is something that would have to be a decision of the government 
and this legislature ultimately to change the particular instances of legislation in which it is written. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Vote 28 agreed. 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR — SUPPLEMENTARY — ORDINARY EXPENDITURE 
VOTE 28 

 
Supplementary Vote 28 agreed. 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
VOTE 61 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. LARTER: — This $87,000 wouldn’t be money for auditing Crown corporations, would it? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, it’s money for payment of other auditors to do certain work 
for Crown corporations for the provincial auditor’s office. 
 
MR. LARTER: — This is charged out, Mr. Minister, to each of the Crown corporations so they would 
be separated and sort of charged to these firms? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — It’s all charged to CIC. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Vote 61 agreed. 
 

PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — ORDINARY EXPENDITURE 
VOTE 33 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’ll call on the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce 
my officials. The chairman, David Bock, is seated at my right; Ernie Bereti back here is the director of 
administration; Jim Penrod, staff relations; director of staffing, Nola Seymoar, immediately behind me; 
and Rick McKillop, the director of classifications. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have a series of questions I would like to ask on 
the public service commission. I don’t think it should take too long. Could you indicate the number of 
moves involved in your public service commission? In other words, how many moves did the public 
service commission pay for from employees 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2347 

moving from one province, or within the province, or from outside? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, within the public service commission I am told only about 
two or three. As it applies to other departments, we would have to sort of do some work to determine all 
that. I think we can do that. We can put it together and have it for the member some time tomorrow. I 
think it’s available. It’s a matter of pulling it altogether. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, within the public service commission, you mentioned two or three. Can 
you tell me who they are where they came from and what moving costs were involved? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — As I said, two or three. The only people we can recollect are a Mr. Bill 
Adams, who came from Toronto, and Mary Gemmell who came from somewhere in Ontario. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You will provide us with that list? Will you also provide us with a list of the 
number of orders in council, the list of the names of those over $30,000? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — You want that for the public service commission? O.K., we will provide 
that as well. It’s all on record. Orders in council are all open for public scrutiny. It’s just a matter of 
putting the list together for you and helping you out. We’ll get it to you. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, my colleague has just indicated he would like to have it for other 
departments as well. Could you provide that, please? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Yes. Same process. Every week at a certain day they all show up 
somewhere and people from the press go to look at them. I would be surprised if some of the research 
people from the opposition caucus don’t go look at them. But we will be able to draw them together to 
provide them for you. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, does the public service commission do any hiring for Crown 
corporations? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, Mr. Chairman, it does not. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, another question to the minister. How many job descriptions were 
there for new positions in the past year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I’m told, Mr. Chairman, that as a result of changes in programs and 
because of positions moving from the unclassified to classified and so on, that the number was 226. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would the minister provide us with a list of the names of people who were 
successful for these positions? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I am told we could probably get that together. It will take a fair amount of 
clerical work to do it because it’s not something that is put away on a computer or a microfilm or 
handily kept. But my staff advises me that to the best of their ability they will try to co-ordinate the 
position number or the job description number of whatever it’s called and try to match them up to get 
you the information. It may take a little while to do that because it’s a pretty massive job. 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2348 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I don’t know whether you understand what I’m asking for, but I can’t see where 
your problem is. If you have a job description and someone is successful in that application, then you 
know who the applicant was for the job description established. I don’t know where your problem is. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The problem is that I am told we do over 2,000 job competitions every 
year. It’s not as if it’s all categorized neatly into new job positions and existing job positions and so on. 
In order to gather the information the staff has to go through all those 2,000 things I am talking about. 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2349 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I still don’t think you understand. I’m asking for new positions created, not the 
2,000 you already have in place. You mentioned 200 and some that were successful in their applications. 
I’m talking about where you create a new job and fill out a job description for the job. Are you saying 
you had over 2,000 new jobs created this year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — No, Mr. Chairman, the process and the job competitions are done in the 
same way for the new positions as they are done for positions that existed last year or the year before for 
the last umpteen dozen years. Because it’s all done in the same process, all of it is located en masse. In 
order to determine the individual new positions and individuals who occupied them after the 
competition, we would have to go through the 2,000-plus competitions which took place in the past 
year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Wouldn’t it be a simple procedure to pull out the new 200 and some job 
descriptions? Oh, it wouldn’t be  . . I see the young lady shaking her head there. She says, no it can’t be. 
Well, I still want it. So you’ll provide it. She doesn’t like me now. She’s mad at me now. I don’t like 
making young ladies mad at me, but somehow I made her made at me. 
 
One other question and I think maybe we’ll move on. I’m not sure. How many employees did you hire 
last year from other governments? I don’t mean municipal governments. I am talking about other 
provincial governments and the federal government. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — My information is that we only keep records on an in-province and 
out-of-province basis. So we can provide you with the information on the number of people who came 
from out of province. As to which individual province, that is not available. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I said governments. Does that still apply? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We don’t keep the records by government. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Is it possible to get that information? It isn’t Carry on, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Item 3 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I have two questions. What exactly is a classification department? 
Secondly, why the increase of three employees in that one? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, the classification plan in existence now is some 35 years 
old. We’re in the process of reviewing it and overhauling it. I quite frankly have to say I think it’s long 
overdue. In order to be able to do that we have to have an increase in people who will be able to 
accomplish the task. 
 
In response to the member’s first question, the classification branch is responsible for providing a 
service to departments through the development and administration of a positive classification plan for 
positions in the public service and for labor service 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2350 

positions. Just in a general sense, without going into an elaborate description, that’s what it’s all about. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — In other words you don’t know what it is either and that’s why it needs an 
overhaul. I’d agree with you. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The same question again, why the increase in that staff from 9 to 12? Secondly, 
will you provide us with a detailed accounting of the $172,700 in other expenses? And why is it 70 per 
cent higher than it was last year? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Chairman, I can give that to the member. As for the other expenses, 
$172,700, you want a breakdown of that? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes. 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We will put it together and send it to you. On the increase in staff, it is as a 
result of an approval of two new personnel administrative positions for the Affirmative Action 
programs. The other one is just a transfer of a management training position from the department of 
Finance to the public service commission. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Item 6 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I realize it is not a large amount but why all of a sudden are you doubling the 
other expenses there and can you provide a detailed accounting of that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We’ve got that handy so maybe I can just give it to the member now. 
Mostly that is for an increase of funds for computer services for compensation research and that’s an 
additional $9,000 which just about covers most of the increase. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
Item 7 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What are you anticipating in that department — doubling your staff? What is the 
reason for that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We are attempting to improve our contract administration services to the 
various departments to better administer the agreement between the public employees and the public 
service commission as it is administered by the individual departments to handle the grievances that are, 
from time to time, brought forward and so on. In order to improve the ability to do that kind of thing we 
find that we need to increase our staff component and that is why the increase. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2351 

Employees’ Group Life Insurance — Employer’s Contribution 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I noticed you dropped from $275,000 to $250,000. What 
happened there? Employees’ Group Life Insurance, last year, was $275,000 and under finance, this year, 
is $250,000. What is the reason for that? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The member will be glad to know after telling me that we often 
underestimate, that this is a case of an overestimation last year and, therefore, it is estimated that we 
don’t need that amount in the 1980-81 fiscal year. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Who is your carrier? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The carrier is Excelsior Life. 
 
Public Service Commission Vote 33 agreed. 
 

DEPARTMENT OF CO-OPERATION AND CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT — 
ORDINARY EXPENDITURE — VOTE 6 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials to the committee. 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development): — Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. Sitting to my left (and I always like to have people on my left) is the deputy minister of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development, Jack Reed; directly behind him is Lloyd Warkentin; this 
gentleman is Winston Ho Fatt; and the gentleman to my right is Art Nogue. 
 
Before I get going I want to ask the page to hand out a letter with a small pin on it. You’ll note the letter; 
I’m not going to read it. The pin says ‘Winning Through Co-operation.’ This evening It think that bodes 
well. Things have been going well, so the pin will help you out. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Minister, firstly I’d like to congratulate you for your 
efforts in the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development and as well to welcome your 
staff here this evening. Although it’s going to be a relatively short evening, I’m sure my welcome will 
extend to your staff the next time we get back to the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development estimates. 
 
There are a number of, at least as I see it, fundamental concerns we as an opposition have and I would 
suspect, or at least hope, all members of the legislature have with regard to co-operation and 
co-operative development. 
 
One of the concerns, certainly, is the local autonomy of the co-operative movement in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Any time an organization becomes affiliated or connected in any way, shape or form 
with a political party it is usually the beginning of the end of that particular organization. I think that is 
the first observation I want to spend some time on this evening. It’s a matter I feel quite strongly about. 
 
I have witnessed over the last decade a number of organizations, all kinds of various interest 
organizations, particularly in the agricultural sector which have from time to 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2352 

time aligned themselves with certain political parties, or certain political parties which have aligned 
themselves with particular interest organizations. Grave problems developed as a direct result. There’s 
no great organization which represents a broader spectrum of Saskatchewan citizens than the 
Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development. 
 
When you think about it — the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool handling about 80 per cent of this province’s 
grain, credit unions with approximately half the population of this province as members; Federated 
Co-operatives, I suspect likely one of the largest, if not the largest, retail outlets of the province of 
Saskatchewan — just those three elements of the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development, and consider the input that Saskatchewan residents have, direct input as individuals 
regardless of their political stripes, regardless of their political interests, you have to realize the 
importance of the co-operative institution or institutions of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I suppose they epitomize the Saskatchewan resident, if you relate it to other parts of the country. The 
Saskatchewan people have been known as people who can work together in the spirit of co-operation 
and have an understanding of the problems and work together as a group to solve those problems. I 
suppose the old adage that united we stand and divided we fall is something I support very strongly with 
the cooperative movement. I think that in itself is something to be considered where I say co-operative 
movement. We don’t want the co-operative movement to stop moving. It is very important that it 
continues to move and continues to epitomize the character of Saskatchewan citizens for the benefit of 
those individual Saskatchewan citizens. We wholeheartedly support, and all members do I know, 
co-operative organizations. 
 
I personally was somewhat disturbed when the former premier of our province, Tommy Douglas, 
suggested that we are going to have to look to our young people to strengthen our party and that we had 
better be developing the co-operative movement. I say that’s a sad day for the province of Saskatchewan 
when a political party appears to be attempting to tie the foundation of their party to the co-operatives, 
that the co-operatives are in some way a block or two, or a number of blocks of their foundation. 
 
That’s my concern and that’s the very point I am making now. That’s the first point that I want to make 
with regard to the future development of the co-operative movement in this province; that is the concern 
I have. Now, when I see the co-operative movement itself and its own individual members and its own 
organization taking initiatives to develop in the way they see fit, that’s entirely a different mater. But to 
see that reversed as Tommy Douglas appeared to do, concerns me. Because when we (as I have 
suggested and stated here in the House and I understand it to be a fact) look at the numbers of people 
who are involved in just the credit unions alone, certainly a lot of those people have to be members of a 
political party other than the New Democratic Party. Certainly it has to be an affront to those particular 
members to see a former premier, a prominent member of an opposing party, at least opposing to them, 
attempting to tie the Department of Co-operative Development to their political party. I think that has to 
be an insult to people who are members of the credit union and not members of the NDP, to people in 
Saskatchewan who are members of the Wheat Pool but are not members of the NDP and do not support 
them. It has to be an insult as well to members who are part of the Federated Co-operative retail chain in 
this province, and are not a member of the NDP. So that’s the concern I have and I suppose that’s 
something I caution your department about and I caution 



 
April 28, 1980 

 

 
2353 

co-operatives generally speaking in the province of Saskatchewan — to maintain your local autonomy 
and local identity. That in itself will ensure the co-operative movement, and it can continue to move if it 
adopts that particular philosophy. But when you look at the stated philosophy of the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development, it recognizes the co-operative form of organization as an 
effective way in which the control and benefits of enterprise will remain with the people it serves. 
Co-operatives provide opportunity for the involvement of people. Co-operation of peoples, and their 
co-operatives, can aid in the development and retention of communities, and result in a better quality of 
life. Those are good philosophical views for any organization to hold. And they certainly are in keeping 
with our democratic way of life here in Saskatchewan. So for any political party to attempt to take 
advantage of the strong and very vital co-operative organization we have in this province, to attempt to 
tie it in and take political advantage of it, has to be an affront not only to the members of co-operatives 
who are not members of the NDP, but I suspect to a number of NDP members as well who have a great 
respect for the Department of Co-operation and Co-op Development. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, having outlined what I feel to be a valid concern, a very valid concern, for this 
department, I must take a look at the actions of the government. I have to say that if you’re in support of 
co-ops in this province, then it’s incumbent on you as a government to in a very impartial way assist 
them in their growth. They assisted the people of Saskatchewan when they were in troubled times. In 
fact, that is the founding of the co-ops; that’s how they got going, out of need during tough times, and 
the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development became very effective in particular as it 
related to the agriculture industry. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we have come full circle now. I suppose the second point I want to make is that we 
are now looking at history repeating itself. We are now in economically troubled times. Our agricultural 
industry is in trouble, with low net farm income for the first time in 75 years — lower than Alberta’s. 
Farm numbers are decreasing in rural Saskatchewan. Over half of our towns and villages are declining. 
We have asked, Mr. Chairman, for this government to assist the people of Saskatchewan through the 
institutions founded by the people of Saskatchewan — the co-ops. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we ask for assistance through the credit unions. And I see by looking at the 
estimates that in fact grants have been made to credit unions for assistance to low income borrowers. 
What more appropriate assistance from a government for the co-operative movement? When I look at 
the figures I see $52,000 estimated for 1980-81. That isn’t even  . . Well, I guess it might be 
approximately one house. Certainly that is not going to offset, in any meaningful way, in any real way, 
the problems the people of Saskatchewan are facing as home-owners, as farmers faced with rising costs 
and falling prices of commodities like grain, beef, the hog industry that is in deep trouble right now in 
this province. Those are the concerns we have. Those are the areas, Mr. Chairman, in which we see the 
co-operative movement in the province of Saskatchewan taking a very meaningful hand, with the active 
co-operation of the present government and administration. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, having outlined two of my concerns, firstly, the concern that the co-op does need to 
maintain its local and independent identify to maintain its success in years to come, secondly, that this 
government in co-operation with the co-operative movement identify the problems we face in this 
province rather than saying, well it is a federal problem. I say they are not. We live in this province, the 
federal government has refused any assistance. The Minister of Agriculture — well, he sent a telegram 
and has 



 
April 28, 1980 
 

 
2354 

had meetings with the federal government. There is no assistance coming from the federal government 
in the immediate future, so we as a people in this province have to look at what we can do to help 
ourselves. That, Mr. Chairman, is where the Department of Co-operation can come into full play. That is 
my second main point I want to make here, tonight. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I see that it is a bit after 10:00 p.m. and I wonder if I might just call it 10:00 p.m. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:06 p.m. 


