






















































Hansard: April 09, 1980


1549 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 9, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2:00 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to take this opportunity to opportunity to introduce a visitor to the 
Speaker’s gallery to the members of the Assembly. He is the Minster of Justice of the province of 
Newfoundland and he is here to address the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association’s annual 
meeting and dinner this evening. I know all members will join with me in welcoming Mr. Gerald 
Ottenheimer to the province of Saskatchewan. He was a former speaker in the province of 
Newfoundland and has had a long and distinguished career in government in the province of 
Newfoundland. I wonder if Mr. Ottenheimer would rise and be recognized. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with you, Sir, on behalf 
of the government to extend our welcome to Mr. Attorney Gerry Ottenheimer has recently joined the — 
I don’t know if I can describe it, Mr. Ottenheimer — club of attorneys general but he is there and I very 
much enjoyed our association on AG matters and on constitutional matters. Newfoundland, as everyone 
knows, with offshore resources and fishing rights and the provincial control and interests therein is very 
much involved in the constitutional issues of the day. To that extent, we find ourselves very much on 
common ground and I welcome him to the province of Saskatchewan. His predecessor, Mr. Justice Alex 
Hickman wanted to come to Saskatchewan frequently. He only got to Saskatoon. I shouldn’t say only 
got to Saskatoon. I could never figure out why he wanted to come to Regina but he didn’t make it. I’m 
very glad that Mr. Ottenheimer did make it to Regina and we all look forward to his address tonight. 
Welcome. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Attorney General in 
welcoming Mr. Attorney. The Attorney General somehow indicates that Newfoundland and 
Saskatchewan and the AGs have something in common. We, of course, don’t quite see it that way in that 
we would hope the member from Newfoundland looks to Alberta on how to win court cases when it 
comes to resources instead of the lack of success we have managed to have in Saskatchewan. I’m sure, 
however, the dialogue will be fruitful to both provinces. All parties are concerned and the provinces with 
retention of control of their resources and we wish you well in the future. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to members of the Assembly, 
through you, some members of the provincial junior ladies curling champs from Kronau, Saskatchewan. 
Kronau, of course, is rapidly becoming known as the curling capital of Saskatchewan although it has a 
population of approximately 100. In the last four years, the community of Kronau has had four 
provincial junior curling champions and I think that indicates the interest and the support of the 
community of Kronau. This particular rink last year was runner-up in the provincial final and lost to 
what became the Canadian champions. This year, they came third at the national 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1550 

championships, one game behind the leaders. They are accompanied today by Jeannette Ell, the 
chaperone, two men, Harvey Forner and Art Flett, who have been very, very instrumental in the program 
and the success of the Kronau program. It’s my pleasure to introduce them and I would ask them to 
stand as I call out their names, if they would: Kathy Fahlman, the skip; Joan Herauf, third; Carolyn 
Forner, second; Lorrie Hanna from Richardson, lead. I ask all members to join with me and 
acknowledge their achievements. We wish them a very interesting day and thanks for the contribution 
they made to curling. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too, on behalf of the government side, would like to 
congratulate the curling champions. I think this has really been a vintage year for Saskatchewan with 
respect to curling. I think it will continue to be that way, especially to have a fine bunch of young curlers 
such as we have had introduced today by the member for Qu’Appelle constituency. We all wish you 
continued success and congratulations on a job well done. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SPC Profits 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker. A question to the minister in charge of SPC. Mr. 
Minister, your party and your government have stated many times that public utilities must be operated 
for public benefit. How then can you justify this public utility making a profit of $40.7 million in 1979? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, one has to take a look at what 
is really happening within the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We are growing very rapidly in order 
to meet increasing demands in the province of Saskatchewan. For electricity we look at expenditure on a 
yearly basis up to something approximating $0.25 billion. Our assets are well in excess of $1.3 billion 
now When you look at those circumstances it’s not unreasonable to expect a return on investment of 
something in the neighborhood of $30 million to $40 million a year. 
 
In percentage terms on investment, it’s something only slightly over 3 per cent. I don’t believe that 
Saskatchewan people would expect us to want to operate that corporation at anything less than that. That 
money goes toward offsetting ongoing costs, as I have already mentioned, of something in the 
neighborhood of $0.25 billion a year. 
 
I think one test that one should try in looking at what the corporation is doing for Saskatchewan people 
is what the real cost is to Saskatchewan consumers, the real cost of electricity. If we look at 1970, out of 
the residential per capita personal income, electricity costs were taking 3.7 per cent of the disposal 
income. Today that has dropped by more than 1 percentage point to just slightly over 2.5 per cent. I 
think that substantively answers the question for the member for Estevan. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I believe the Manitoba government is 
being a little more humane in thinking of their people. They have put a five year freeze on power rates. I 
would like to ask the minister, are you going to raise either Sask Power electric rates or gas rates in 
1980? 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1551 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, I will not answer that question because it’s purely hypothetical. But in 
reference to the consumers of power in Manitoba Hydro, if he will look at the residential per capita 
income and where it is directed on electricity he will find in percentage terms that Manitoba is much, 
much higher than the province of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is servicing consumers of power cheaper 
on average than they are in Manitoba, and for that matter in the province of Alberta. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the minister. How 
do you justify — looking at your profits for the year of $40 million which is really a 100 per cent 
increase, the highest in your history and over any year you’ve had almost — a 15.5 per cent increase in 
the price of natural gas last year, in the government’s fiscal year, particularly in the fact that the 
corporation has guaranteed to the people of Saskatchewan a maximum of a 7.5 per cent increase in those 
rates? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the member knows full well that he’ll have an opportunity to dwell on 
this in greater detail in Crown corporations. I do want to give the member a general response to the 
question he raises. 
 
We’re talking about the 1979 fiscal year. He knows that we have to establish in advance what we think 
the circumstances will be for the demand on power and the capabilities of producing that power at the 
beginning, if not before the beginning of that fiscal year. We did not know that we were going to be able 
to take advantage of cheap hydraulic power from our own facilities and from the province of Manitoba. 
We assume we would have to generate more power through thermal production. That turned out not to 
be the case because of excess power through our own facilities and Manitoba’s in the hydraulic sense. 
We also had a very severe winter last year, and there was a much larger volume of power used, which is 
unusual, and that drove up the profit figure. 
 
Now in order to be fair we have to look at the averages. In another year we may have a lower water 
flow. We may have to generate more power through thermal, which is going to cost us two or three 
times as much, and that profit figure will drop. You have to look at the average, and to do anything other 
than that is misleading the people of this province and the Assembly. 
 

Premier Blakeney’s Support for Ryan Proposal 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current): — A question for the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, 
during the interview on Monday in central Canada, Premier Blakeney stated his support for Claude 
Ryan’s proposals for constitutional change in Canada. As I understand it the Ryan proposal will 
guarantee health and social services in English and French; the right to demand radio and television 
services in either language; and criminal trials as well as education in both languages. What steps are 
you taking to institute these changes now or are you planning any major policy changes to accommodate 
the Ryan proposals? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure of the interview the hon. 
member refers to but I do know the government’s position with respect to the Ryan paper. It is broadly 
acceptable as the basis for further discussion and negotiations. We must keep in mind that the question 
of the referendum is coming up in the next several weeks — perhaps Premier Levesque will be 
announcing the date of the referendum shortly. We will have to await the outcome of the referendum 
result and of 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1552 

course there will be the outcome of the general election which is slated to follow very closely thereafter. 
There may or may not be a new premier. There may or may not be a position which governments will 
have to respond to. Accordingly, at this stage of the game, the only thing that can be adopted is general 
support for the beige paper (so-called, as Premier Blakeney has described it); it just looks a heck of a lot 
better to us. The details the hon. member is directing his question to will have to be negotiated by all the 
provinces and the parties in constitutional discussion in the future. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My concern, Mr. Attorney General, is Saskatchewan’s 
point of view. Do you believe we can hold confederation together if we are not instituting changes 
sought under Ryan’s proposals or are you prepared to make these changes in the future? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat again the general thrust of my answer, 
which is that we indicate the beige paper is — when you compare it to the alternative — a basis of 
discussion and negotiation. Saskatchewan can do very little unilaterally to adopt provisions of the Ryan 
report even if we wanted to adopt it in total. Obviously the preferred way to go would be to have the 
matter carried out around a constitutional table with full discussions involving the various other 
governments. That is the policy we have taken and that is the approach we will continue to pursue. 
 

Freeze on Power Rates 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — A question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. In 
light of the high interest rate and the pinched conditions in Saskatchewan at present facing people on 
fixed incomes and many of the people in the province, will you follow the lead of Manitoba and put a 
five year freeze on power rates in this province? 
 
MR. MESSER: — No, we will not follow the lead of Manitoba by putting a freeze on power rates but 
we will continue to service our consumers with electrical power cheaper than does the province of 
Manitoba, freeze or no freeze. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPC Profits 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, could you tell the Assembly how much additional revenue the 
natural gas rates last year contributed SPC’s profits? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out to the member for Regina South a few moments 
ago, he will have an opportunity to be specific in his questioning when this corporation goes to Crown 
corporations I don’t think it should be unusual for me not to know with precision the percentage 
increase, or the amounts of money that were generated through the increase in natural gas last year. I'd 
be more than happy to give some consideration to answering that question in crown corporations. I’ll 
take notice of it here. 
 

Assistance to Farmers 
 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minster of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
in light of your statements last night to the press about your concern 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1553 

about the young farmers in Saskatchewan being burdened by extra debt regarding the higher interest 
rate, what is your department planning to do right now, today, in bringing in a new program or programs 
to help out the plight of these young farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
member, the FarmStart program is in place and I don’t think I need to talk to the members of the 
legislature, nor to the hon. member opposite, about the benefits of that program. 
 
My statements last night were directed out of the meeting held with the federal Minister of Agriculture, 
where the issue of interest rates was an item for discussion. The issue of interest rates was put on the 
table for discussion by myself to find out from the federal minister what the federal government policy 
is with respect to interest rates, whether the Minister of Agriculture, whether the Speech from the 
Throne, will contain programs to assist in the broad sense the problem of interest rates, but additionally 
to assist the farming community, the agricultural community, with respect to interest rates. 
Unfortunately, during our discussion there were no program proposals put forward to me, nor was there 
anything coming forward from the press conference with respect to a federal program although I think 
we could hope for some announcement in the Speech from the Throne, or perhaps early in the session 
some announcement from the federal government with respect to an interest rate policy. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I think you’re very much aware that 
cattle prices are down in Saskatchewan; hog prices are at an all-time low, wheat prices are to go down in 
the new crop year; interest rates are higher. My question to you is, Mr. Minister, can you not bring forth 
some short-term financial aid to help these young farmers, and all farmers, through this period of crisis 
right now? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I think clearly interest rates are a matter of federal responsibility. 
Mr. Speaker, I say that just as I believe that stabilization is a matter of federal responsibility, just as I 
believe marketing is a matter of federal responsibility. I say to the hon. member I was alarmed at the 
statements at the press conference by the federal Minister of Agriculture making reference to the 
possibility of provincial governments, which are in a good financial position, introducing programs 
provincially in order to cushion such problems. Mr. Speaker, there are provinces who are not in that 
financial position. This says to me that it’s a job of the federal government to bring forward programs in 
this area, and we will continue to direct our attention to the federal government in terms of resolving 
problems relating to interest rates because, after all, the Bank of Canada is an institution of the federal 
government. They are setting the interest rates, and therefore they should deal with the policy federally. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — It is alarming, Mr. Speaker, to find a federal government who doesn’t assume 
its responsibilities there. It’s alarming to find a federal government that’s continuing the policies of the 
former government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

High Interest Rates 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — My question will be to the Attorney General in the absence of the 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1554 

minister responsible for Sask Housing. We have tried on numerous occasions to bring to the attention of 
this House the problems being faced by homeowners in this province. They are faced with very high 
interest rates. My question is, what immediate plans are you willing to institute in this province to keep 
people from losing their homes? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again, the answer here has to be of the same thrust as the answer 
given by the Minster of Agriculture. The primary responsibility of interest rates is the federal 
government’s. I think a political party which advocates relief for interest rates on a provincial 
government basis really advocates a series of varying interest rates, depending upon the wealth from 
province to province. The job of this country’s government is to make sure there is equality of economic 
opportunity and burdens fairly distributed among all of us. Saskatchewan may or may not be able to this, 
I don’t know. But I do indicate that when you advocate this kind of policy you are saying the heck with 
the rest of the country. That may be good for us this year but if we ever run the pinch and cannot afford 
it economically then the policy really comes home to roost. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Is this government telling me that you have no obligation to the people of the 
province who are facing drastic interest rates and at the same you can loan money, interest free to the 
Crown corporations for capital buildings? Is that what you are telling me? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I am saying that in the hon. member’s description of loaning money to Crown 
corporations, he doesn’t know what he is talking bout That is an equity contribution and that’s clearly a 
difference. I think the hon. member should know, if he does not know. The simple fact of the matter is 
that I invite the hon. member to indicate to the House where any province at all in Canada has a program 
of the kind he advocates. 
 
If a province does come forward with this, given the ramifications of the finances which are tied into it, 
we’ll certainly take a look at it. The fact of the matter, because no other province is able to provide this 
kind of solution, gives credibility and strength to the position of the government, that is, interest rates are 
the firm responsibility of the federal government. They were dangerously escalated by the PC 
government of Joe Clark. It was the Clark administration who put interest rates on the high rise and they 
are maintained by Prime Minister Trudeau’s government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

High Interest Rates for Landlords 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I would like to direct a question to the minister responsible for the 
Office of the Rentalsman. I think we have all seen articles and press statements that the landlords are 
facing great problems because of the high interest rates and the rapidly increasing interest rates. The 
government has indicated that rent controls will stay on. Will the government consider an immediate 
short-term financial program for the landlords so they may weather the inflationary storm and the high 
interest pressures which they are facing today? 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a flip-flop 
political party in Saskatchewan, it has to be on that side of you. 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1555 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — The hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley was just crying the blues for the people 
who own homes, the consumers of the province. Now the other gentleman is crying the blues for the 
landlords of the province. I think the two should get together — whom do they really want us to help, 
the tenants of the landlords? We certainly can’t help them all, that’s for sure! 
 
With regard to rent controls, if the members would look at the legislation they would find that the 
retaining of rent controls in this province doesn’t mean anything with regard to what the landlords can 
receive. It means absolutely zero. It means nothing, because the controls are on housing which is there 
since 1975 and prior, not which is after that. So, leaving the controls on means absolutely nothing. 
 
With regard to programs for people in housing, we have more programs in Saskatchewan than they have 
in any other province in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — We have residential rehabilitation programs. We have senior citizens’ housing 
programs We have section 40 housing programs. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. 
 
MR. LANE: — Obviously the minister is not listening to the question. Do you not feel in the light of 
your stated policy — and the Attorney General was quite wrong when he said it was strictly an equity 
position — whereby your government loans money to the resource industries interest-free, that you have 
a moral obligation to the people of this province to give some short-term financial aid so they can 
weather the inflation crisis and the high interest crisis they are facing today? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why the hon. gentleman would be asking me. I just 
look after the mediation board and the rentalsman. I don’t have very much to do with handing out 
low-interest loans and that kind of thing but again I want to stress that in the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation we do have programs. There is a co-operative housing program which allows for a $150 per 
month subsidy, a program which can be taken up by any resident in this province on low income. I’m 
sure that’s the kind of people we are looking at. There is little question that the programs the hon. 
members opposite are asking for are now in place. All they have to do is go to their people, tell them 
what the programs are and I am sure the people will be able to partake of them. 
 

Interest Rates re Farmers 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture, Mr. Minister, in light of your statements in the question period today indicating clearly that 
in your view interest rates are a federal matter — and of course that was substantiated by the Attorney 
General — is it your position that regardless of what conditions may exist in the province of 
Saskatchewan with reference to our farmers and their high costs in particular because of high interest 
rates, small 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1556 

businesses as well being affected, is it your position as Minister of Agriculture just to sit on it and let 
them decline in numbers in this province? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not my position as outlined by the hon. member opposite. 
Our position is that clearly there is a federal responsibility here with respect to interest rates and it’s not 
our intention at this point in time or down the road to let that federal government off the hook with 
respect to interest rates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — My question to the federal Minister of Agriculture is, what is the federal 
government’s policy with respect to interest rates? He did not put forward any policy and therefore I was 
disappointed. I will continue to ask the federal government what its policy is with respect to interest 
rates. Now, there may be room for co-operation by provincial governments and the federal government 
in dealing with the issue of interest rates but clearly it’s time to ask the federal government what is its 
policy. I suggest to the hon. members opposite that they do the same as the Government of 
Saskatchewan is doing and ask the federal government —what’s its policy with respect to interest rates? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LARTER: — A supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, in this interview last 
evening, you made reference to the possibility the provinces with heritage funds could help themselves 
out better than the federal government. I would like to know what business you had in implying to the 
federal government that we had any cash in our heritage fund. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll respond to the hon. member as positively as I can. At no time 
did I make any reference to Saskatchewan in my statements to Mr. Whelan or to the press with respect 
to interest rates. I took issue with Mr. Whelan, the federal Minister of Agriculture, that he should infer 
they remove their responsibility by saying that there are some provinces which can introduce programs 
provincially to cushion the problem of interest rates. I object to that. The Deputy Premier, the House 
Leader objects to that. That’s our position — you have economic chaos across this country when you let 
provinces get involved in these kinds of programs. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we retain our position that it’s 
a federal responsibility. I don’t think we should at any moment in time let them off the hook with respect 
to their responsibilities. We ask them to introduce and announce their policies with respect to interest 
rates as we ask ministers in Ottawa to introduce other policies with respect to as I pointed out, 
transportation, stabilization and marketing which are clearly federal jurisdictions. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Water Supply Board 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, the last day the hon. 
member for Rosthern raised a question with respect to the water supply board. I’m sorry the member is 
not in his seat today but I’ll place it on the record for his information as I said I would take it under 
advisement. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has approved an increase for the volume of water for the towns 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1557 

and villages on the north water supply system. The water allocations were based on population. I could 
give the hon. member the population increases as approved by the city of Saskatoon. I’ll not do it here, 
Mr. Speaker, other than to indicate to the member that there have been population increases approved by 
the city of Saskatoon which will increase the volume of water supply to the communities in his area. 
 

Department of Education Grants 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Minister of Education. In 1979 the 
Rosetown School Division took a cut in grants of $47,000. If the grants are adjusted to take into account 
underpayments carried forward and the employment of a locally appointed director of education, in 
1980 their grant cut will amount to something like $93,836. Are you aware of the costs of these being 
passed on directly to the local property tax base? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I regret that I was not able to hear 
the whole of the question because of the intervention of the member for Qu’Appelle whom I was better 
able to hear. I understand the member has a serious question and wanted to ask with respect to grants to 
a particular school division. I must indicate to the hon. member I am not aware and do not have the 
information here on the specific amounts of grants that have gone to each individual school board. But I 
will indicate to the hon. member, as I think he well knows, that we have in this province a system of 
grant payments to school boards, which is an equalization payment system, which takes into account the 
local assessment in the area. It also takes into account the student population in the area. Through these 
mechanisms we provide an equalized revenue to all school boards in the province. I think in the case of 
the board he is mentioning, there will be mitigating factors in terms of student number decline or 
perhaps an increase in local assessment that might have the results he is pointing out. However, I will 
undertake to get further detailed information on that particular school division and provide the 
information to the member. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Opening of a Saskatchewan Government Office in Ottawa 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
inform the hon. members of the House of the decision by the Government of Saskatchewan to open a 
Saskatchewan office in Ottawa. This office will hopefully commence its operations In June, 1980 and 
will be directly responsible to the Ministry of Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is evident that a substantial part of the impetus toward progressive development in 
Canada today comes from the West and, if I may say so, from Saskatchewan in particular. By 
progressive, I mean not only the shift in economic influence but also the important initiatives in social 
policy. We in Saskatchewan have a long tradition of going toward developing a society based on the 
sound principle of concern for both community and individual. As a result, we have programs and 
agencies which continued to be emulated throughout the western world. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the success or failure of western Canada endeavours, whether economic or social, 
depend a great deal on federal government action. A review of the regional make-up of the new federal 
cabinet is rather sobering — four western cabinet ministers, three of whom have no so-called 
western-oriented portfolios. Quite frankly, 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1558 

the western representation in Ottawa leaves much to be desired. The new federal cabinet only highlights 
the growing need on the part of the western provinces to develop additional ways of ensuring that our 
interests are fully represented in Ottawa. Action is required now to illustrate both symbolically and 
practically, Saskatchewan's concern with the lack of representation in Ottawa from the West and to 
improve liaison between our government and the federal administration. 
 
This decision by the Government of Saskatchewan to locate an on-site provincial office in the nation’s 
capital is not unique. The province of Alberta has had a provincial office in Ottawa since the 1930s and 
British Columbia’s Ottawa office, only recently announced, should be functioning fairly shortly. 
 
Briefly, Mr. Speaker, the functions of our Ottawa office will be as follows: 
 
1. To establish a continuing liaison with the offices of federal cabinet ministers on issues of major 
importance to Saskatchewan; 
 
2. To develop a special liaison with federal ministers who are directly involved in Saskatchewan affairs; 
 
3. To monitor political developments in Ottawa and in the province of Quebec and to advise the 
government on these matters; 
 
4. To provide federal departments and agencies with information on Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
government policies to ensure our provincial points of view are fully considered in the development of 
federal policy initiatives. 
 
We have not yet made a decision as to who shall be responsible for this office. That will be made in due 
course. I might add, finally, that the Ottawa office will complement, not replace, the direct 
communications between Saskatchewan departments and Ottawa and will assist, whenever and however 
possible, in communications between senior government people and their counterparts in Ottawa. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — The House Leader’s announcement is a little like shutting the barn 
door after the horse has escaped. Alberta, of course, attempted since the 1930s to have some direct 
liaison. Saskatchewan was years behind in following Alberta and attempting to get that direct liaison. I 
suggest two things. The government opposite will be following a highly dangerous course if the 
individual it places in that office is a political partisan appointment such as the deputy minister of 
intergovernmental affairs. I suggest, as well, that the government opposite would be better advised to 
have offices in each of the other western provinces — Quebec has done it in the province of Alberta — 
and improve the liaison with our western neighbors instead of the confrontation policy followed by the 
government opposite against our western neighbors and our western allies. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. What is the purpose? . . . (inaudible) . . . Order. I can’t allow the member to 
proceed. There are no bills to introduce. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day, I want to reinforce the direction for the 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1559 

members this evening that are attending the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association annual dinner 
and meeting. It’s at the Jubilee Theatre, which is entered from the southwest corner of the Centre of the 
Arts. So the members may keep that in mind and attempt to be there at 6:30. I want to take this 
opportunity to also reinforce the memo that I sent around to members’ desks a couple of days ago about 
tomorrow at noon and the viewing of two items in the MLAs’ dining room downstairs. And if the 
members could be there sharp at 12:10 we could get under way for those that are interested. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. We’re dealing with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, item 1. Is 
item 1 agreed? The member for Moosomin. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I was just waiting for things to settle down. It looks more 
like a shopping mall in here right now than a legislature, with people wandering around. I thought, Mr. 
Chairman, in light of the events of the last few days in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and 
what has been considered by everyone involved in the discussion and the subsequent reports, there were 
rather heavy charges made on the minister on a number of counts. I think that at this point in time, 
possibly to get the day off to a good start, the minister might want to respond to activities of the last few 
days. If he needs some examples, there were charges made with reference to the Wounded Knee incident 
in the Dakotas. There was your letter of 1973, which was read into the record, at least in part. It certainly 
has cast doubt in the Chamber, in the minds of the members of the opposition I am sure, and in the 
minds of the people of Saskatchewan. I feel at this time it would be very appropriate for you to put it all 
together, if you can — sum it up, and try to alleviate some of those questions that have been left 
hanging. There are a numbers of issues, I think that might be a good way to start and we’ll proceed from 
there. 
 
HON. J.A. HAMMERSMITH (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — Mr. Chairman, I want to be 
very brief in the interests of perhaps getting into the programs and policies and estimates of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I want to say I don’t think there’s any secret that in 1973 I was 
critical, and often sharply critical, of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, then in its infancy. In 
1973, I remind hon. members, the department was only a year old. Many people were critical and I was 
among the most vocal of those critics. I think there’s no secret that in 1972 and in 1973 the present 
member for Athabasca and myself had many differences of opinion. We had many private and public 
debates, and we did exchange, on occasion, strong words. I think there’s no secret that the former 
minister and I had many sharp differences of opinion and many debates privately and publicly. 
 
I think it’s not unusual in this House for members currently sitting here to hold opinions in 1980 that 
may be somewhat different from the opinions they held in 1973. I think that, at least, would appear to be 
the case with the member for Qu’Appelle. My understanding is that the opinions he at least appeared to 
hold publicly were somewhat different from the opinions he holds publicly in 1980. I think that’s also 
true of the member for Thunder Creek and it may be true for other members. 
 
I think it’s no secret that in 1973 I criticized my employer publicly, and my employer chose to not 
continue that relationship. I think that was the correct decision for the employer. I think it’s not peculiar 
to this situation or this government. I think all of us 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1560 

recall senior people in the Canadian Armed Forces who publicly disagreed with the then minister of 
national defence and that relationship was severed . . . 
 
I would point out that regardless of whatever sharp differences may have existed between me and the 
present member for Athabasca and the former minister for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, 
that I remain, from 1973 to this date, a member and supporter of the New Democratic Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I subsequently became a candidate for that party and was subsequently 
elected to this legislature. I’ve watched, unlike some people, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
closely, firsthand since 1973 when it was only a year old, and when some of us perhaps had expectations 
higher than they should have been with regard to the amount of change that should take place in one 
year. 
 
But I’ve watched the department since 1973. I’ve watched the former and first minister of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, watched the member for Athabasca, and the member for 
Cumberland. I’ve seen both members, Mr. Chairman, demonstrate unusual dedication, unusual courage 
in the face of widespread, and often vicious, criticism — some of it in the early days from myself. I’ve 
watched them persevere and I’ve watched them hold up under that criticism. I think that the record of 
the former minister, the record of the member for Athabasca and the record of the department speaks for 
itself. I have relayed to the hon. member for Moosomin and to other members on other occasions some 
of the details of that record. I want to emphasize just a few areas. 
 
Before doing that, I want to review for members, who may not have been here or been in northern 
Saskatchewan in 1971, just what some of the conditions were when approximately one-third of northern 
settlements were completely isolated in so far as land transportation was concerned. The majority of 
people in northern Saskatchewan didn’t have access to radio. Citizens from Montreal Lake north were 
not able to receive televisions broadcasts. La Ronge, Creighton, and Uranium City were the only centres 
with telephone service. Very few people, comparatively, had access to electrical power. Less than 
two-thirds of the school-age population attended school regularly. Of those who attended, 60 per cent 
dropped out before Grade 5; 40 per cent between Grades 4 and 8; and 96 per cent between Grades 8 and 
12. Approximately 50 per cent of Grade 1 students repeated that grade compared to an 8 per cent 
provincial average. Rates of major diseases were as much as 35 times the provincial rates, and those 
rates were on the increase. The number of infant deaths per 1,000 live births was 60, and in the years 
since 1973 that has been reduced to an average of 43. And that’s corruption? That is something to be 
attacked? 
 
Each public health nurse in northern Saskatchewan in 1973 served 2,000 people. That has been reduced 
to 1,100. And that’s corruption, that’s graft? In 1973 the percentage of students in Divisions III and IV 
in the schools was less than 20 per cent. That is now over 25 per cent. That’s corruption? The percentage 
of teachers who held a university degree was 18 per cent. That’s now over 60 per cent. And that’s 
corruption? 
 
We heard the department and people in the department attacked in blanket statements. I want to list the 
names of a few people I knew personally who served the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the 
people of the North. Paul John, pilot, killed in a plane 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1561 

crash near Cumberland House; Rod Morrisson, economic development worker, killed in a plane crash; 
Cliff Stanley, an economic development worker, killed in a plane crash; Tom Coughlin, killed in an 
airplane crash at La Ronge; Lorne Ziegler, employed by the construction branch, killed in a heavy 
equipment accident on the Besnard Lake road; Gilbert Ebert, killed in an airplane crash, Uranium City; 
Ann Ballantyne, social service worker, drowned in an aircraft accident at Channing while en route to 
Cumberland House; Allan Blythe, construction branch employee, killed in an aircraft crash at Emma 
Lake; Jerry Pidborochynski, construction branch employee, killed by electricity while moving heavy 
equipment at Green Lake; Benjamin Heggedus, construction branch employee, killed by a pulp truck on 
the Besnard-Pinehouse road; Lionel Deschambault, first chairman of the northern municipal council, 
killed in an airplane crash. 
 
All of these people were killed while working for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan — 
providing service to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and to the people of the North. They 
gave their lives because they believed in a vision of some substance, in a vision of the future to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. They died in service to the ideas and the ideas that are now called 
corrupt — and that’s corruption? That’s corruption? 
 
I’m afraid, Mr. Chairman, I can’t agree. Presently, in 1980 employees of the department give up their 
evenings, give up their weekends, give up their vacations in service to the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and to the people of the North. I’m surrounded by six of them as we attempt to get on 
with considering the department’s estimates. And that’s corruption? Corruption? Mr. Chairman, I think 
when we consider and if we honestly reflect on the conditions as they were in 1971, and we recognize 
the magnitude of the task that was undertaken, a task, I remind you, that no other government in Canada, 
provincial or federal, has been prepared to undertake. We must recognize the achievements have been 
great, the achievements will go down in not only the history of this province but in the history of this 
country as a milestone in human endeavour. You know, it was once said that if you wish to launch great 
ships you have to go where the water is deep. And the member for Shellbrook and the member for 
Athabasca and the member for Cumberland and the people who died in service to these goals were 
courageous and strong and dedicated people. I am proud to serve in this House with them. 
 
I repeat, I think in this House I’m not alone in being a member whose views may be different from what 
they were in 1973. There have been some mistakes made and there have been some problems along the 
road but, you know, a mistake at least proves somebody stopped talking long enough to do something. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I want to say I have been very encouraged by the number of telegrams, 
phone calls and personal visits I have received from people from the North since this personal attack 
started. It is the people who make the issues. The opposition doesn’t make the issues and the media 
doesn’t make the issues. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — The people make the issues, and with regard to the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, the people of the North make the issues and the people of the North continue to 
be even more supportive of this government and of this department. 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1562 

The member for Qu’Appelle on Thursday last made a speech in this House. When I saw him afterward 
outside the House I congratulated him on a masterful performance because it was a masterful 
performance in the use of words and oratory. But I say to this House that a masterful verbal performance 
stands in insignificance beside the masterful performance of substance on the part of the former minister 
of northern Saskatchewan and on the part of the department. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — And I ask members to reflect in history on the performance of masterful 
orators in other places at other times. If you recall the McCarthy era of the early ’50s in the United 
States, the masterful oratorical performances were not unlike those we have heard here, but they had 
very little substance. People in other parts of the word, at other times have carried on masterful 
performances. 
 
On Thursday, April 3, on page 1468, the member for Qu’Appelle moved a motion calling for a royal 
commission into (and note the words) the operation of and administration of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. He said that’s different; that’s much more broad than the motion for the judicial inquiry 
moved by the member for Moosomin. 
 
I would like to read on page 1257, the motion by the member for Moosomin where he called for a 
judicial inquiry into the operations of and the administration of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. I fail to see how the operations of and the administration of, on March 28, is narrower 
than the operations of and the administration of, on April 3. I think it points to a weakness in the 
masterful performance. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, last night officials of the department and I were at a meeting in La Ronge 
with the northern municipal council, and they are anxious to get on with the issues of the 1980s in 
northern Saskatchewan, the issues of the 1980s reflected in the estimates of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. They are anxious to get on with planning the long-term role and structure of local 
government in northern Saskatchewan; they are anxious to get on with economic development; they are 
anxious to get on with education; they are anxious to get on with the new training programs and 
continuing education programs outlined in the budget and in the estimates. I wish to repeat that we too 
are anxious to get on with it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister a question. Mr. Minister, in my 
questioning on the Department of Northern Saskatchewan estimates, have I at any time cast any doubt as 
to your personal integrity. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — No, I think it is fair to say (and I appreciate this) that the member for 
Moosomin has not personally cast what I would interpret as such, doubts or aspersions. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just for the record, I would appreciate it very much if 
the Government Whip would mind keeping his place. If he can’t keep quiet, then remove himself from 
the Assembly or stand in his place and be well heard on the 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1563 

record. I think likely it would be appreciated by members of the House. I see we do have some people in 
the galleries; if the hon. member for Kelsey-Tisdale might take his foot off the desk. I don’t think that’s 
very parliamentary, Mr. Chairman, I think that would be a reasonable point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is item 1 agreed? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I raised that as a point of order. Are you going to rule on my point 
of order? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — What is your point of order? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I raised a very simple point of order. You heard my point of order and if you 
weren’t listening to what I was saying then maybe I should be raising another one. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, you state your point of order and do it quickly. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I did. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: —. Don’t cast aspersions on the Chairman. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I raised my point of order. Are you asking me now to repeat my 
point of order? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes, that’s what I’m asking. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, for your benefit I’m not going to bother repeating anything, Mr. Chairman. 
O.K.? 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan has set out in a very quiet 
toned-down manner to allay and waylay the charges that have been made in this Assembly, not on 
himself but on the administration and particularly prior to his becoming Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan. This subsequently leads the members of the opposition to be suspicious of the present 
administration. 
 
You use examples, and I don’t know how many you used but there must have been at least a half a 
dozen or eight or nine examples of people in northern Saskatchewan who were killed in the line of duty. 
I really don’t see, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, what that has to do with the question we raised here 
today when I asked you to comment and sum up and reply directly to the charges that had been made on 
the department, questioning its integrity and its honesty. It didn’t seem to relate at all to me. I have no 
doubt in my mind that there are many individuals — employees and people who live in the North and 
work there fore the benefit of other northern Saskatchewan residents who are doing a good job. We have 
no doubts about that whatsoever. So, for you to spend 15 or 20 minutes telling us of all the wonderful 
things they have done and how many died and so on in the line of duty is quite irrelevant to the 
estimates before us today. 
 
You talk about corruption. You say, is that corruption? You said that, I don’t know, four or five times. I 
think it’s very clear what is corruption. What seems to be corruption, Mr. Chairman, is the matter of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan’s supposed involvement in a fraud case. That seems to be 
corruption. The actions of the former minister of northern Saskatchewan, in your own words not in ours 
— we’re just looking at what you said. We were having some confidence in you that you were right at 
that 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1564 

time. We believe that the actions then, because of your letter with reference to the former minister of 
northern Saskatchewan, are corruption. Now that’s corruption. But today I see you very gently and 
softly attempting to back away from the issue and support the former minister of northern 
Saskatchewan. Very gently again, and softly attempting to tell this House that all is well between you 
and the former minister of northern Saskatchewan and the member for Athabasca. There are no 
problems there anymore. You even seem to be attempting to apologize for your letter in 1973, to 
withdraw those comments by way of your statements today in the legislature, that all you said then you 
didn’t believe, or if you did, you don’t now. So I think the obvious question is, when you made 
statements and then in fact actively involved yourself with regard to the Wounded Knee situation in the 
Dakotas, when you wrote this letter in 1973, it would follow you either have to be thinking the same as 
you were then or you have changed and you think differently now. 
 
That is basically what the opposition members were asking. We were asking what are your social views 
now as the minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan with the many social problems that exist in 
northern Saskatchewan. That’s what we were attempting to get. So I think that’s the question I want to 
ask now. Do you no longer hold the views today you did in 1973 with reference to the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan? Can you answer that question, Mr. Minister? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I think I answered the question. I answered it in my opening remarks. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, if I am to believe the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake now 
believes all of this to be untrue because he is a member for the NDP, ran under that banner, was elected 
under that banner, and was appointed as Minister of Northern Saskatchewan as a result of his adopting 
NDP policies (which we’re not too sure of as they relate to northern Saskatchewan), I feel it’s incumbent 
for you to be more specific, more specific as to what you believe your role is as Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Do you believe the same things you did seven years ago? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, now, for the first time the Minister of the Environment, the former minister 
of Northern Saskatchewan, has come into debate — not by, of course, taking his place. He is now 
attempting to support the concept I believe to be true today, that you in fact do not believe today what 
you believed seven years ago. The Minster of the Environment now feels that is the case as well. So, Mr. 
Minister, if you wouldn’t mind just elaborating very briefly on that and being somewhat more specific, I 
would appreciate it. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I think I said in my opening remarks the situation in 1980 is considerably 
different that the situation in 1973. I think I listed (and I have on previous occasions in this House, in a 
great deal of detail) the very specific difference in the situation. I think I said in my opening remarks that 
perhaps in 1973 some of us were expecting too much to have happened in one year, that we were hasty 
in our judgments. I think the motives the member attributes could just as well be attributed to members 
of this House. I think I remember not too many days ago, the member for Qu’Appelle exhibiting 
considerable distress when he had read back into the record his remarks in this House in 1973. I think 
that he and his colleagues would agree that in 1980 his opinion and position on certain matters is 
different than it was in 1973. I think that all members opposite, including the member for Moosomin 
campaigned, and campaigned hard (in the case of the member for Moosomin with considerable success) 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1565 

under the leadership of the member for Nipawin in 1975 and 1978. I think in the first session in which I 
was a member, when the member for Nipawin was still leader of the party, that the member for 
Moosomin supported his views. I think that two years later he does not support those views. I think that 
is reasonable. 
 
I would remind the member that I sought office as a member of and candidate for the New Democratic 
Party. In 1973, I was a member of the New Democratic Party as I was in 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1978, 
1979 and 1980. I became a member of this Assembly representing the New Democratic Party. As a 
member of the government, I represent the party and subscribe do the policies, philosophies and 
principles of the Blakeney government. As a member of the cabinet I share in the making of policy. It is 
my responsibility to administer the policy of that government through the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan in the northern administration district. My views are clearly part of and supportive of the 
views of this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. J.L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is with a great deal of 
reluctance that I participate in this discussion on the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. But I am 
more than willing to participate considering the fact that the opposition members have continued to 
display huge amounts of ignorance about northern Saskatchewan and the operation of the department 
which is in charge of that area. 
 
I am also a little bit reluctant and I certainly will continue to be reluctant about lowering myself into the 
mud with members opposite in their continued effort to offer destructive criticism, not constructive but 
destructive criticism, of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. It is not only the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan but other government initiatives that they have berated since I was elected to 
this legislature on October 17. But I won’t lower myself to become involved with that. 
 
I wish to make a few comments about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I wish to make those 
comments tempered with the knowledge that I was an employee of the department for two and one-half 
years, from 1975 to 1978, under the former Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, Ted Bowerman. When I 
joined the Department of Northern Saskatchewan as the minister’s executive assistant in 1975, the 
turnover rate of the staff of the department was around 35 to 40 per cent per year. That was because the 
department was, in 1975, approximately three years of age. As many members of this House know and 
understand, when young babies are born and until they become a little experienced in life and go 
through life learning a number of things from their parents or their guardians, they have a few growing 
pains. There are always some problems. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan was not unlike any 
new department in government or any new department in business, if any of the members opposite have 
ever had experience with business (and I’m sure some of them have although I don’t know how 
successful they’ve been). But the opposition continues, Mr. Chairman, to offer unfounded and 
unsupported comments on all topics, not just DNS, in order to get the unwarranted and undeserved 
headlines which they are receiving from the more than co-operative media. 
 
Now it’s always easy to criticize something when you know nothing about it. Change is always difficult 
to handle for most people. But in particular, change is difficult to handle for those who do not know 
what has brought about this change or those who do not 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1566 

know what implications the changes will bring. The members opposite, the members of the Progressive 
Conservative Party (and I have problems pronouncing that term because I think the term should be the 
Regressive Conservative Party) know little about northern Saskatchewan. None of them across the floor 
has ever spent any time in northern Saskatchewan visiting the communities such as Pinehouse, Sandy 
Bay, Pelican Narrows, Black Lake, La Loche, Cumberland House or Ile-a-la-Crosse as I have. I’ve 
worked in all those communities in northern Saskatchewan. I saw developments occur between the years 
of 1975 and 1978 which would totally amaze the members opposite in the sense that they were very 
positive changes and very progressive changes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — All that the PCs know is that there is water and soil in northern Saskatchewan. 
They, therefore, attempt to convey to the public of Saskatchewan what little knowledge they have and 
they talk about their limited knowledge — of the water and the soil of the North. Everyone knows what 
happens when you mix water with soil. It turns to mud. That is exactly what the Tories are putting 
forward as their policies in northern Saskatchewan — mud — as far as I’m concerned. 
 
It’s the same tactic the PCs used in the Regina North-West by-election —statements based on hearsay, 
fear of change and ignorance. The electors of Regina North-West clearly indicated on October 17, 1979 
their indignation at those mud-slinging racist statements. They indicated on October 17 what their 
indignation was for the Progressive Conservative Party as they will do in the next election and I can 
assure them of that. Mr. Chairman, I am as indignant now as I was last October with regard to those 
racist statements and their attempts to decry the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Party, in my view, is rudderless in terms of leadership, knowledge and 
direction. I challenge the members opposite to perhaps grab hold of that rudder and take a trip up to 
northern Saskatchewan and see what kind of changes have evolved in the last number of years. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I take further exception to some comments made by the member for Qu’Appelle 
who is very conveniently absent this afternoon. He stated in Hansard, April 3, 1980, page 1466 and I 
quote him: 
 

We know, Mr. Chairman, there were serious problems in DNS. We also know there were serious 
administrative problems in DNS from the outset. 

 
He goes on to talk about what he thinks are serious problems but he doesn’t clearly indicate what the 
problems are. His problem, as he perceives it with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, is a public 
letter which was written and distributed to all newspapers and to anyone who wished to read it in 1973. 
That’s the tremendous research the caucus office and the new talent brought in from Ontario are 
producing for these pathetic members opposite in terms of their research in constructive criticism — 
totally irrelevant, totally irrelevant to the estimates of this departments, totally irrelevant to new policies 
and new initiatives. Completely bankrupt is all I can say about the members opposite. 
 
The member for Qu’Appelle goes on, and I quote (referring to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1567 

He wants some positive and constructive suggestions. He says the government has always acted. 
I have here releases going back to 1973 where every time a problem becomes public the minister 
of the day covers up and refuses to bring the problems out so they can be resolved. Don’t blame 
the opposition for the mess in DNS, blame the government. 

 
Well, that is the feeble attempt of the member for Qu’Appelle at putting forward policy supported, 
constructed, and promoted by the members opposite, by the members of the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan. Unbelievable! That’s the enlightening policy. The enlightening policy is to dig 
up a letter from 1973 — reinvent the wheel. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, when I was first hired on in 1975, had a few 
problems even then — as all departments and all people usually have problems throughout their lives. I 
would like to give a little history to the members opposite about northern Saskatchewan and perhaps 
allow them a clear perception of what, in fact, is actually going on in the North. Northern Saskatchewan, 
the area which we refer to as the northern administration district, consists of 100,000 square miles of 
timber, lakes, rock, soil and rivers. Twenty-eight thousand people live in northern Saskatchewan 
approximately, with a breakdown of the population as one-third of the people being of white extraction, 
one-third treaty Indian, and one-third Metis. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan, even though our province is this year celebrating our 75th anniversary of being 
a province of Canada — which I am very proud of — is over 100 years older than southern 
Saskatchewan. The communities of Cumberland House and Ile-a-la-Crosse, in 1973 and 1974 
respectively, celebrated their bicentennial — 200 years of age over six years ago. The point I am trying 
to make, Mr. Chairman, is that the northern part of the province, and the settlements in the North, are 
over 100 years older than the settlements in the South. But when DNS was created in 1971, it was 
created for a specific purpose; that purpose was to attempt to bring northern Saskatchewan into the same 
sort of economic and social time frame as southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The life of people in northern Saskatchewan in 1971 was one of hardship. There were no sewer and 
water systems in any of the communities outside of La Ronge. Uranium City, and Creighton. People 
lived in tar paper shacks, terrible housing conditions. There was no comprehensive health care program, 
no dental care, no local government. There was chronic unemployment among all peoples including the 
whites, poor education facilities: the NAD (northern administration district) was run almost by 100 per 
cent southern people — which is similar to the way the government of the Northwest Territories is still 
run. It is run by 99 per cent of people who live in the South or have lived in the South for most of their 
lives. 
 
In 1972 the government of Allan Blakeney had the foresight to create a department which would pull 
together all of the government services and produce many new services to alleviate the problems that 
were being created in northern Saskatchewan. The DNS was formed and they had a number of growing 
pains, as we have discussed and the opposition had difficulty in really finding out what they were. But 
over the years most of the problems have been resolved. In eight short years northern Saskatchewan has 
come from the communities I have just described to communities where people are proud of their North, 
and are proud to be working in the North. 
 
I would like to enlighten some of the members opposite with some very interesting 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1568 

statistics about the accomplishments of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in addition to what 
the minister has already provided to them. 
 
The welfare dependency in 1972 was 47 per cent; as of 1978 it had declined to 16 per cent — a pretty 
significant development by the department. The percentage of people who were involved with local 
government or controlled by local government was 63 per cent in 1972, and by 1978, 100 per cent of the 
population of northern Saskatchewan was participating in local government: local advisory councils, 
local community authorities and villages and towns. Grants to local governments went from $31,000 in 
1972 to $4.3 million in 1978. That’s a 13 times increase — a pretty significant development but 
absolutely necessary and even more money is necessary than that. 
 
Let’s take northern employment in mining for example. In 1972, almost no northern people were 
involved with mining opportunities in terms of employment. By 1978, 52 per cent of the employees in 
AMOK were native northerners. They earned, including AMOK and other mining operations, $3.7 
million in wages in 1978 and had $8.7 million in contracts. That in my opinion is a pretty impressive 
statistic. Grants to schools increased in the same time period six times from $2.1 million to $13.5 
million. Road inventory: 540 kilometres to 1,769 kilometres. Airfields: 12 airfields upgraded and 
constructed. 
 
The member for Meadow Lake who sitting behind the bar should take note of these because the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan works in the area just on the northern boundary of his riding. He 
will know better than anyone in this Assembly can tell him that the people in northern Saskatchewan are 
very pleased with the operation of the department and the operation of this government under Jerry 
Hammersmith. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Chairman, with many more details to illustrate my point but I would like to provide a 
final illustration of what I believe to be a legacy of this government in northern Saskatchewan and of 
course the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. That is a trip I made up to Deschambault Lake in 
1977. Deschambault Lake at one time in 1972 was not accessible by road. People had to fly in or come 
by canoe or overland with a lot of portages. 
 
In 1977, I was in Deschambault Lake and I talked to the community leader. The community leader was a 
member of the Peter Ballantyne Band who was a council member of that band whose chief comes from 
Pelican Narrows I understand. But that individual was participating for the first time in any sort of 
government outside of his own Indian government. Cornelius Ballantyne is the gentleman I am referring 
to. I was there, not as an executive assistant to the minister but as a traveller on holidays because I am 
very fond of the North. I asked him what his honest impression was of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and he told me that his involvement with his local advisory council (he was the chairman 
of the local advisory council; it was a local advisory council set up through the efforts of the DNS) was 
more productive for him than his involvement and his father’s involvement and his family’s 
involvement with the federal Department of Indian Affairs for over the last 100 years. 
 
What he was telling me, Mr. Chairman, was that they actually had an input into running their own 
community. They made their own decisions and they made their own decisions for their own people. 
They didn’t have people from outside of the community coming in and making those decisions. And that 
in my opinion, Mr. Chairman, is what makes my involvement with DNS one of the most satisfying 
experiences that I have ever 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1569 

had and I have had quite a few. 
 
In my address and reply to the speech from the Throne last October for which I was honoured and the 
people of my constituency were honoured, I talked about a thumbs-up approach to government and a 
thumbs-up approach to the people of Saskatchewan from this government and there are countless actions 
to support this statement. Look at the record and you will see. I went over it in great detail on December 
3. but the message of DNS for northerners, in my opinion, in this province is also a thumbs-up message, 
not just because of the by-election victory but also for those people it serves. It is not the thumbs-down 
message which people are now saying is being conveyed by the phantom Leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party, Grant Devine, who encourages his colleagues by example. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to make one final remark in support of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. It is a follow up to what the minister has already suggested, that many people in northern 
Saskatchewan — almost all of the people I’ve spoken to — are supportive of this department, are 
supportive of the minister now in charge and are supportive of the government’s direction in northern 
Saskatchewan and have gone to the bother of telexing some messages. I’d like to read these messages 
into the record. I have one from 14 native and non-native DNS staff in la Ronge. I quote, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Staff in the department sincerely hope that the obviously racist tirades of the opposition will only 
strengthen your resolve to continue moving the department towards the goals which were 
originally set forth in 1971. 

 
These are addressed to the minister, Mr. Hammersmith. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — I continue. 
 

The progress which has been made in the last eight months is very encouraging, and any 
disruption of it will severely damage the future of the North and its residents. 

 
That’s one of the concerns of a group of 14. They are seriously concerned about the damage the 
department and the people of the North are suffering as a result of the continuation of the mudslinging 
by the members opposite, and degradation without facts. If you have facts, let’s have them; produce 
them; table them; make them public — don’t just make your accusations public. 
 
I have another telex from the executive of the native women’s organization in La Ronge. 
 

We wish to express our support for your endeavours to achieve meaningful changes for the 
betterment of the people in northern Saskatchewan. We strongly condemn the actions and verbal 
attacks directed at you by the members of the Conservative opposition. We request that you 
continue to champion the cause for social and economic development of northerners. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — . . . an additional 16 members of Department of Northern 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1570 

Saskatchewan, and I quote: 
 

We have heard the racist and personal attacks which Conservative MLAs have made against you 
in the House. We want to reaffirm our support for you and the direction you have set for DNS 
during the past eight months. Our hope is that these tirades will only strengthen your resolve to 
lead the department in directions which ensure the benefits. 

 
That was from the non-native and Metis staff. I have another one from the Association of Metis and 
Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan. There are two of them. Here is a very short one. 
 

Hang in there, Jerry. We support your ideas and we need you to ensure that the people of the 
North get a fair deal. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — That’s from AMNSIS local. There’s another one from the native staff committee, 
and if the chairman permits me I will continue. I’ll leave it to him to judge. 
 

On behalf of the native staff committee we would like to assure you that we agree in the 
direction that you have moved the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in trying to assure 
native northerners have first opportunity in working in the department and ensuring that the 
department moves towards giving more local control to northern communities. 

 
That is a pretty progressive and supportive telex in my opinion. I have another telex from the people of 
northern Saskatchewan who the Conservatives opposite allege are being harmed and being put down by 
this government. And this is a good one, a couple of paragraphs: 
 

The northern board of directors of AMNSIS fully support the position we have taken rejecting a 
public inquiry into the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — According to the Prince Albert Herald April 2, 1980 you stated: 
 

There are four individuals awaiting trial on charges connected with DNS and to engage in a 
public inquiry now could well prejudice their right to a fair trial. 

 
I’ve heard those comments before. 
 

We feel your decision to reject an inquiry at this time is a courageous and a responsible one. In a 
democratic society every citizen is entitled to a fair trial. It makes us feel proud to have a good 
working relationship with a minister with such high calibre and courage. 
 
We need more cabinet ministers that can stand up and fight for the democratic rights from the 
people they represent in the legislature like Jerry 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1571 

Hammersmith has. Your 1973 letter brought into the legislature by Graham Taylor is a crystal 
clear indication that racism is still rampant within the Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative 
Party. We believe a political party that will bring out in public seven year old letters of a private 
citizen for the purpose of discrediting that individuals is repugnant. The Saskatchewan Tories 
must be desperate for issues and lack good party leadership. 

 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, the final quotes: 
 

We must never forget that the Indian and Metis people once owned and controlled all the land 
and the rich resources of this country. Once they lost control their culture also started to 
disappear as did their self-respect. We must all work as a team and help the Indian and Metis 
rebuild and develop their cultures. Only then will they not be a tax burden to the Euro-Canadians 
of this province. Walk tall and keep up the good work. 
 

And that is from the northern board members of the Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve made my point and all I can finalize my remarks with is, I 
support Jerry Hammersmith in his endeavours as Minister of Northern Saskatchewan as do all of my 
colleagues. We are prepared (the ones who have had experience in the North) to stand up and debate any 
time, anywhere, the positive attributes of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. That can only be 
witnessed by the results of the last provincial election in delivering Norm MacAuley, right in front of 
me, and Fred Thompson as New Democrats to this legislature. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.N. NELSON (Yorkton): — Mr. Chairman, I must say I too am rather saddened and appalled at 
the level to which debate in this House has descended. The continued attack on the minister even after 
he has withdrawn is not worthy of this House, is not worthy of parliamentary procedure. I have been 
long convinced our freedoms and the style of government we have and are privileged to enjoy in this 
land, can last only as long as the people of this land want it. But it also can be lost, Mr. Chairman, if the 
members of this legislature and members of parliament conduct themselves in a way that is not in 
keeping with the long history of British parliamentary democracy. I cannot believe, Mr. Speaker, name 
calling is a very elevated form of debate or any other parliamentary procedure. I cannot believe, Mr. 
Chairman, constant searching for muck and dirt constitutes any elevated form of debate or any other 
form of parliamentary procedure. I cannot believe it adds to parliamentary procedure to talk about 
wrongdoing where there is none, and if you call a person an insurrectionist, and an anarchist or what else 
have you, certainly that is talking of evil where none exists. It is a real McCarthy-type activity. Certainly 
if there is wrongdoing with government, it is the duty of an opposition to bring wrongdoing to the fore. 
But to concentrate on a search for wrongdoing alone, to imply that there is wrongdoing when there is 
none at all, at the expense of challenges to policy directions, is muckraking, Mr. Chairman. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1572 

MR. NELSON: — If an opposition can do nothing but muckrake (and name-calling is certainly the 
worst form of muckraking) then the government process deteriorates. It deteriorates because no 
department is given cause to rethink its policies. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’m sure Judge Noble didn’t write your speech. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Do you want to repeat that again? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You brought out the same attitudes you have toward the judiciary. You 
showed it right there. 
 
MR. NELSON: — No department is challenged . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll get to that later. No 
department is challenged in its day-to-day activity on policy, and government deteriorates. If the 
opposition only muckrakes, the government process deteriorates because we on this side of the House 
have to spend time on defence of our members. If the whole parliamentary debate is defence and attack 
of personalities instead of defence and attack of policy, then parliament, Mr. Chairman, is as good as 
dead. 
 
Both Mr. Devine and the member for Indian Head-Wolseley know that the rule of law depends on 
law-abiding citizens. If citizens in general disobey the laws we have a lawless society. Both Mr. Devine 
and the member of Indian Head-Wolseley know that if parliamentary government is to succeed, the 
members of the legislature or the members of parliament must have the will to see that it shall succeed. 
If the debate here degenerates to name-calling this legislative process cannot go ahead. Then, Mr. 
Chairman, we would have the anarchy which the member for Indian Head-Wolseley talked about. 
 
Teachers who have been in the classroom know what happens when a teacher allows anarchy to develop 
within his classes. Teachers like Mr. Devine and the member opposite, the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley, cannot be ignorant of the results of name-calling in a classroom or in this Assembly. 
The member for Indian Head-Wolseley (just imagine the member for Indian Head-Wolseley was the one 
who aspired to be the leader of his party and sought to be the premier of this province), a teacher, stoops 
to name-calling in the legislature. Mr. Chairman, in a free system of government, for which our schools 
try to teach people respect, this man comes from these schools and lowers himself to name-calling. Just 
imagine, Mr. Chairman, the cries of dismay that would come from the opposing side if we applied 
similar epithets to them. 
 
All we need is to go back, Mr. Chairman, and look at the remarks that have been made from time to 
time. Let’s take some of the remarks made such as, farmers are not efficient, or the remark the member 
for Moosomin made when he said that bigger is better in farming. We could apply, Mr. Chairman, all 
sorts of epithets, all sorts of names to people like that who attempt to bring about and propose such 
policies. But it is beneath our dignity. We have too much respect, Mr. Chairman, for this parliamentary 
democracy, too much respect for the long history of parliamentary democracy. It is obvious, Mr. 
Chairman, the new Devine Leader of the PCs approves. I give you in evidence — almost one hour the 
bells rang before the members opposite returned on the challenge to the Chair when the member was 
required to retract — almost one full hour! Obviously the Devine leader was contracted, and agreed with 
the process. 
 
Further evidence of the Devine approval — no repudiation of the member for such name calling. And 
his retraction was made grudgingly, very, very grudgingly. Only on 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1573 

threat of expulsion did he retract his statement. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I would like to compare the conduct of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley with 
that of the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. Certainly the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
wrote letters — rather damning letters that he agrees were damning — wherein he attacked the policy of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the people who were there, an attack which he himself 
today said in effect was overzealous. He was not ready to wait for actions to be carried out. Of his own 
free will, Mr. Chairman, he made that statement. No one demanded he should make it. Of his own free 
will he made it. Of his own free will he ran for this party, he won the election for his constituency. He 
didn’t run for the Liberals; he didn’t run for the Conservatives. He ran for the New Democratic Party. Of 
his own free will he stood up in this House, as I said before, and said the things he had to say today with 
regard to that letter he had written. But it is not good enough for the members opposite; it is not good 
enough. 
 
Out of his great desire to work for the people of the North, the member for Prince Albert- Duck Lake 
became the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, the department he had damned before. But here Tories 
again can see only evil, something evil and sinister. They can see nothing worthwhile. They look for evil 
coming out from around every corner. It is evidence in every move they make within this House. You 
can go through Hansard and find this whole policy of looking for evil under every bush — looking for 
something sinister where none exists. 
 
Mr. Chairman, rather than some . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order I would ask all hon. members to allow the member for Yorkton to 
speak, uninterrupted. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Mr. Chairman, thank you for calming the members opposite down. Instead of 
something evil and sinister, why not look for something positive for a change? Instead of something evil 
and sinister, look on the fact that he has run for this party; look at the fact that he is now the minister of 
that department which he criticized, that is now a vindication of that whole department. Here is an 
intelligent man who has made his criticisms, who saw what was developing in that area and who said 
this now is the way to go. It is a vindication. With all the warts, wrinkles and problems that are there, 
that have been there and, yes, that will be there, this man has decided to go with that party. But it’s not 
good enough for the Tories opposite. It’s not good enough. We have to have something evil. There has 
to be something sinister. 
 
Certainly we need a great deal more work and a great deal more work will be done. That’s why we have 
a Department of Northern Saskatchewan, to deal with the special problems there. There is nothing evil 
or sinister about it. Look on the positive. Talking of the positive and the negative, Mr. Chairman, I think 
a thing that typifies the attitude of Conservatives opposite as much as anything is the actions of the 
member for Moosomin whenever I wish to speak. He saw I had difficulty with my speech. He chuckled 
and laughed. He thought it was a great joke. 
 
I just wonder what would have happened if I had come in, in a wheelchair. He would have rolled in the 
aisle. He would have rolled in the aisle, Mr. Chairman. That’s typical of Conservative reaction, typical 
of what they’re like. It doesn’t bother me, really. You take it only from the source from which it comes. 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1574 

A further proof of vindication, I think as has been mentioned before, from the North is the election and 
the re-election of the member for Cumberland and the member for Athabasca. But not only that, it is 
indicated by telegrams sent to that minister (telegrams of admiration and support) that nobody can deny. 
That shows he is loved and respected in the North - -the North that he serves. 
 
Let us compare that again with the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, a school teacher who knows, 
who has to know that name-calling and this sort of activity is certainly undesirable to put it in the least. 
He grudgingly gives his withdrawal. He withdraws only because he is forced to. Compare that to the 
Minster of Northern Saskatchewan, who of his own free will, arises. I think all on our side will say the 
Minister of Northern Saskatchewan is a man. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — But let’s go right back again to the letter which the opposition members made so 
much of. Does it relate to the present? No. Back to 1973, Mr. Chairman, way back to 1973 when the 
department was one year old. It was just getting off the ground — 1973, when the problems of the North 
were barely being touched. 
 
The member for Qu’Appelle brings another document in which he purports to deal with the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. If you look on page 1467, I believe, of Hansard of April 3, he said: 
 

As I say, here’s a headline from a 1973 editorial in the P.A. Herald. 
 

In 1974 — no modern evidence. He continues to go back. Not today’s problems. — they don’t want to 
deal with today’s problems. They will make vague generalities about the new direction in the North. 
Nothing specific. The only thing they have to pin their hopes on is one person’s statement, the statement 
of one judge. The man who made so much of that statement is himself a lawyer and he knows, at least 
he should know, that you do not destroy a man’s case in court by . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There 
are more trials to come that are connected with it. And you don’t bring in a public inquiry. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s public information. Don’t misconstrue the facts, now. 
 
MR. NELSON: — Mr. Chairman, these gentlemen wouldn’t know anything about facts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — Mr. Chairman, obviously I’m not trying to criticize the judge’s decisions or his 
facts. What I am saying and what I did say, and the record will prove it so, is that there are other court 
cases tied to that and it would prejudice those court cases if you have a public inquiry. You make so 
much of this because there’s got to be something evil here. Everywhere you go, there’s got to be 
something evil. 
 
Mr. Chairman, these Devine Tories are showing the people of Saskatchewan what they can expect in the 
future politics of Saskatchewan. This is the new Progressive Conservative order of the day — slander, 
falsehood and muckraking emanating from the PC mouths and minds as a substitute for philosophical 
and policy debates. This is a complete break with parliamentary practice, a complete break with the rule 
of law. Mr. Chairman, I’m appalled that any member of this legislature should stoop to this level. 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1575 

I’m appalled that two fellow teachers should be so ill-informed concerning the parliamentary procedures 
and practices that have been in existence in this parliamentary system for hundreds of years. I can only 
express my sorrow that it should come to pass. I shall be solidly supporting the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been hearing a lot of remarks about 
what’s been going on here this last week over northern affairs. The remarks I hear from the members 
opposite make me feel very sad. How could such a thing possibly happen in this province? Now you 
reverse it onto us? Now how could such a thing be? We’re not the government; you are. You’d think we 
were the ones who made all the flip-flop mistakes. You would think that you people were the judges. 
 
Now, I have some questions that I’m going to ask the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan but first I 
want to make a few remarks regarding the Minister of Education. He said the other day, when he got up 
to speak — I used to follow the activities of this Assembly perhaps because of influence by my parents. 
My father took a very lively interest in politics. Let me tell you that the father of that gentleman was a 
man of the soil. He was a man of toil. He was a man who wouldn’t go for the tactics that you are doing 
over there, hiding things. He was man who would want things laid out on the table. He would be 
ashamed of you people over there wanting to hide . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, sir. You people 
are hiding and hiding and hiding. If you had nothing to hide, why didn’t we get an inquiry? Why didn’t 
we? 
 
I’m just going to read you something out of Hansard, page 1463, where the Minister of Education says: 
 

What kinds of policies does this government have? Are they good? Are they bad? What is the 
matter with them? If they are lousy what’s the matter with them? Get up and debate and say so. 
Criticize the government . . . 

 
Well, I’m man enough to stand up and say you’re a lousy government. And if you want to give us some 
answers we’ll give you a good education in criticism if you’ll just give us the facts. But we can’t get 
them. We’ve had a real good example in Crown corporations — you wouldn’t let the TV come in. You 
didn’t want them there. I’ve been here one year in this House and tried to get answers . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . you bet. We put on the order paper, the Attorney General gets very excited about all 
these questions we’ve got on here — they shouldn’t be here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, and 
they’re going to need some profit — Service printers — to help you win that next election too. That’s 
where it goes and you know full well. 
 
Going back to the Minister of Education, I’m going to say a little bit about his father. I’m sure his father, 
if he spoke, didn’t believe in hiding the facts; he wanted everything in front and on the table. We will 
not only criticize, we will offer valid solutions to the citizens of this province, if we can get the facts 
from you people, particularly to the citizens of the North — if you will allow the best education facilities 
we have, the televisions and radio, to beam the actions of this House and Crown corporations 
committee. You give us the facts, we’ll give you some solutions to the problems. But we can’t get the 
facts from you people. You talk about education. If you haven’t got anything to hide, then send us the 
information in the most clear and comprehensive manner which is afforded by TV and radio. Let the 
population of the North get out from under the clutches of your socialist propaganda machine, which has 
proven in the 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1576 

last couple of weeks to be of very questionable quality. 
 
I’m going to ask the minister a few questions, Mr. Minister, when you sent this letter to the Premier in 
1973 did you get a reply, verbal or otherwise? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’ll call on the hon. member for Moosomin. I think he wants leave to introduce 
some students. Is that O.K.? Agreed? 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — I appreciate the Attorney General’s apology in allowing me 
to take some time in the House, Mr. Chairman, to introduce a group of students from my constituency, 
from the town of Kipling, the school of Kipling of course. This group of students, 80 in number seated, 
is in the Speaker’s gallery, as you can see. The students are accompanied by their teachers, Mike 
Coderre, and Sylvain Pre’Mont. I would just take a moment to indicate to the students in the galleries 
that we are in committee of finance. We are in review of the policies and estimates of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. I would just like to advise the students that I will be meeting with you later at 
4:30, and I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in wishing the students a 
good afternoon here, an educational afternoon and of course a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I’ll answer the question very briefly. As I recall, I don’t have a copy of it 
nor do I have a copy of my original letter. However, as I recall I did get a reply. I don’t recall the details 
of it. I wouldn’t like to depend on recollection, particularly for the hon. member for Arm River because 
he is particularly concerned with the recollection of ministers and does not wish to be misled. I won’t try 
to recall it from memory except to answer the question in the affirmative. 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Chairman, on adding a few words on Vote 1, I 
would like to make immediate reference to the statement, or the questions supposedly being asked of the 
minister by the hon. member for Arm River. I don’t know whether those opposite, the Conservatives in 
this particular case, can remember back a few short years ago to ’76-77 in public accounts, which are 
made available after the report is tabled in this House, in regard to the amount of subsidy paid to those 
fishermen in the North. 
 
But I notice the hon. member is saying nothing is made available in response to questions asked by 
themselves. At that particular time it was adequately drawn out and explained in its entirety, exactly 
what payments were made to the people of the North in regard to subsidies for those fishermen. But still 
they tried to drag that in, Mr. Chairman — tired to drag it in to the debate. They don’t want to debate nor 
do they want to ask questions on anything significant in so far as the accounts of that department are 
concerned. They want to completely make disrespectable the minister of that department for their own 
selfish reasons. All I can say is, Mr. Chairman, it is disgusting; 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1577 

it is despicable; it’s degrading. It is immoral the way the opposition are trying to handle estimates in this 
House. 
 
I have had a little bit of experience in the opposition at another level of government. At least at that level 
of government the opposition did ask questions in the House. They did not go for character assassination 
as I have seen in this House in this last number of days. If that’s the new look — the new Devine look of 
the Conservatives — then I think everything should be televised so those people opposite could be 
shown for what they are — and that is disgusting. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — There is no question in my mind, Mr. Chairman, that there are still a number of 
those members over there who still do have some degree of integrity but it is becoming less and less and 
less. When I actually listened to the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley the other day, who is 
reportedly a superintendent of schools, it is almost impossible to believe that hon. member would stoop 
to the gutter sniping that he stooped to. And it is also unimaginable to believe a superintendent of 
schools would try to move what he did in this House and try to go after the character of individuals in 
this House. 
 
I would also like to say, Mr. Chairman, they may say they are not attacking the entire civil service in this 
province, but all you have to do is read the orders for returns. All you have to do is read what they are 
saying in this House at this particular time and you know it is character assassination of the highest 
degree. They can use any camouflage they may wish but the fact remains, that is exactly the intent of all 
of their questions at this time. 
 
There is no question in my mind that anyone, no matter who he may be, can make mistakes. There is no 
question in my mind that we in our party at least, when we do go to conventions yearly, allow for open 
dissent and open discussion. We do not need the balloons and the bands to try to cover up ineptitude of 
the party you people happen to belong to. We do go to our conventions and we do discuss. We have 
some bitter discussions about points of view, of where we are going, morally, socially or economically, 
but I cannot say that for those people opposite. 
 
Listen to them on the radio — not very difficult to listen to the leadership convention — not one thing 
was discussed at that convention that I could hear that even remotely resembled a platform or a program, 
whether it be morally, socially, or economically. I had to really laugh when I heard their leader, Mr. 
Devine, speak about the family. And all I hear from those opposite is talk about the family I listened to 
that gentleman on the radio talk about how in Saskatchewan the mothers are circling the days, waiting 
for their families to come back from Alberta to visit them. I can tell those opposite, my mother lives in 
Alberta and she circles the date to wait to see when I come back from Saskatchewan to visit her. All of a 
sudden I look across the way and I look at those people who are suggesting they are the only great 
friends of the people in this province who are suggesting they are the only great friends of the people in 
this province. Their record speaks for itself without hesitation in the debate going on at this particular 
time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I always thought Vote 1 really dealt with the guts of the department. But these people 
opposite aren’t worried about getting into the guts of the department or asking questions that will then 
bring out to the public any questions they may have on their minds. If they think that letters back in the 
early 1970s signify magnificent, monumental problems to the people of this province, they are badly 
mistaken. I  



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1578 

personally have made many contributions to causes which I believe are worthy in so far as this country 
is concerned and as far as the international area is concerned. 
 
All I am suggesting, Mr. Chairman, is that if we are really interested in trying to go ahead in this 
Legislative Assembly, then it’s not a case of trying to attack the personal integrity of individual people. 
It’s a case of trying to find out, in the estimates of this House, exactly what’s going on. That doesn’t 
appear to be the new Conservative look. It doesn’t appear to be their look — other than to go after, 
degrade, and make it so disgusting for the people listening to this type of debate, that they have little 
respect for the members of this House no matter what area they come from. 
 
I am asking, Mr. Chairman, whether or not it might be possible for members opposite to realize what the 
integrity of the people who sit as members of this Legislative Assembly is all about. 
 
I couldn’t help but listen to the other day when the Speaker ruled a motion out of order. I couldn’t help 
but listen to the member for Qu’Appelle say, phoney. Too bad it didn’t appear in Hansard. But that’s the 
disrespect they have for the rules of this House, the disrespect they have for the departments of 
government and the disrespect they have for parliamentary procedure. 
 
I am suggesting, Mr. Chairman, it would be a marvellous situation if those people opposite would go to 
the churches of this country, the churches of this province. To try to substantiate the position they’re 
putting before the people of Saskatchewan. I think the council of churches will tell them that they have 
respect for our parliamentary procedure. They will tell them ministers are elected for a purpose. They 
will tell them we do have a democracy in this country. The hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley, 
being a superintendent of the school, should have told his students that we do have a parliamentary 
procedure here that is still the best in the world. It’s slow, and sometimes it’s burdensome. But the fact 
remains things do happen no matter how slow they may be. They happen in a democratic fashion 
without defamation of character. 
 
I would say to those opposite — and I listen to the member for Arm River, talking about and screaming 
over there about hiding things — if they want to find out what’s in the estimates, why don’t they ask the 
minister then instead of going back to that letter and to things that have no significance at all for the 
people of this province? 
 
As I suggest to you opposite, and I’ll finish the way I started, Mr. Chairman, the actions of those 
opposite (some of those opposite, not all of them) — it’s despicable; it’s degrading; it’s immoral. I think 
they will wake up some morning and realize it and wonder what type of new leadership they have under 
the Devine leadership of Mr. Devine! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — I’m glad to hear the remarks from the member for Moose Jaw 
North that we should get to the topic of estimates. What more questions could you get from this letter? 
That’s what it’s all about. We’ll stick to the letter. It’s very important. It’s all about the department. 
 
I am also very glad, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the minister for putting it on the record that the Premier 
(we know now) received a copy of that letter. We know he replied. I 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1579 

think you made a very smart statement. You made a very clever statement because it maybe clears you 
and puts the blame back on the captain of the ship — right back where it started from. It proves now to 
this House, and we have it on record, that the Premier received that letter and since 1973 has done 
nothing to clean that mess up. 
 
Now if I were the minister of northern affairs it would take me 24 hours to clean up that mess you have 
— 24 hours! Fire the whole lot of them. Start over again; what’s the matter with you guys over there. 
You are the bunch of lame brains I have ever seen in my life! 
 
Nobody in this province of Saskatchewan is going to go against Judge Nobel saying that the department 
has run amuck. Now when you get there and try to throw it back on us, what kind of gentlemen are you 
anyway? Run amuck, Judge Noble says so. You all go against him, everyone of you. You sit there and 
smile and smile and smile. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Ask the Attorney General what he thinks of the decision. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — The Attorney General is a very clever man and knows the situation right at hand. 
He knows that we’re right. He knows that we would be some opposition if we didn’t persist for all we 
have. We wouldn’t’ be doing our job for the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. It’s not us who 
need to know this information; it’s Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan have to know the 
information and what is going on. You have been trying to hide it. 
 
I admire the minister of northern affairs for writing this letter. He had something you people haven’t got. 
The people up there elected him to come back to clean up this mess in northern affairs which the 
Minster of the Environment made. He put it in that mess. But you have gone wrong, Mr. Minister; you 
have been there almost a year and you’ve done nothing. This court order proves it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Complete flip flop. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Complete. I have never seen such carryings on in my life. Get out to the 
boondocks in Saskatchewan and talk to the people on the street. I’ll guarantee if you go to your seat, Mr. 
Minster of the Environment and Mr. Moose Jaw over there, the first 100 people you ask on the street 
will say, yes, we want the answers. I’ll challenge you any place in the next election. I’ll challenge you in 
Arm River. I’ll go up and challenge you in your own seat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I have another question. I have so many questions to ask it’s going to take 
several days. Did you receive any reply from any other officials of the government when you wrote this 
letter to the Premier? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I don’t recall, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Now if you are a smart enough man to be the Minster of Northern 
Saskatchewan, you should be able to remember. You should be able to remember if you got a reply or if 
you didn’t. Did you get any replies, verbal or otherwise, from the NDP people in Saskatchewan? Did 
you or did you not? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’ll call on the member for Regina Wascana. 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1580 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Come on, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Have you a point of order? State your point of order. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The practice of this House has been, when a member is on his feet asking 
questions back and forth to a minister, he is allowed to continue his questioning without being 
interrupted. Are you now suggesting you are starting a new policy and therefore trying to close off . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I want to thank you very much for your comments but your comments 
are out of order. The practice of this House is the practice that is carried on by the Chairman and the 
Chairman has carried on, as long as I’ve been Chairman, by going back and forth if people have 
questions, comments, etc. If you have another comment on something you wish to make I’ll certainly 
get back to you. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — I just have one more short question to ask. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — That’s not a point or order. I’ll call on the member for Wascana. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to raise a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’m going to state the point of order. I would like to know where the Chairman gets way 
from the basis of estimates, which is government accountability by the opposition, to the Chairman 
encouraging debate on a particular matter. Would you tell me where you get the basis for your ruling? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! This House and this committee belong to all the members, regardless of 
opposition or government. It’s my responsibility . . . order! It’s my responsibility to give every member 
an opportunity to participate and it certainly isn’t my job to cut off debate. As I mentioned, I’ll be 
getting back to the member over here after we hear from the member for Regina Wascana. 
 
MR. LANE: — Speaking to the point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There’s no speaking to the point of order. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’ll raise a new point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, it better be a new point of order. 
 
MR. LANE: — It will be a new point of order. I’m asking you where you make the decision that 
estimates become a debating forum and not a government accountability forum which is a basis of 
estimates? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — That isn’t a point of order. I’ll call on the member for Regina Wascana. 



 
April 9, 1980 

 

 
1581 

MR. LANE: — Oh, you’re biased. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! I demand you take that statement back. 
 
MR. LANE: — I won’t take that back. 
 

Ruling by Mr. Deputy Speaker 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. 
 
MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, during consideration of the estimates of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, the member for Qu’Appelle accused the Chair of being biased. 
The member has refused to withdraw the remarks. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I call on the hon. member for Qu’Appelle to withdraw the remarks he 
made about the Chair. 
 
MR. LANE: — First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like you to show where in the record my 
statement is and secondly, I don’t . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order, order. I call upon you to . . . No point of order. I call upon the 
hon. member for Qu’Appelle to withdraw the remarks that he directed towards the Chair in the 
committee of finance. 
 
MR. LANE: — You show me in the record where it is. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I’m going to give the hon. ember for Qu’Appelle one more chance. He 
knows the consequences for refusing. I’ll be forced to name you unless you withdraw those remarks 
unqualifiably. 
 
MR. LANE: — I want you to show me in the record where that statement is. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I name you, Mr. Lane. One moment please. State your point of order. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — My point of order is that we challenge your ruling. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — You can’t challenge my ruling. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Can you explain to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how you can sit in there and be 
involved within the situation, then make the ruling there? 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order, order. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Would you answer that? 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. I want to reply to the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
The reason I am here is because I’m the Deputy Speaker of this legislature. Unfortunately, and I feel 
badly about it as you can appreciate my position, the Speaker of the House is not available. So it’s my 
duty to take the Chair and to enforce the rules of the House. I personally would much rather not have 
been put in this position, but that’s the position I’m in and I’m enforcing the rules of the House. 



 
April 9, 1980 
 

 
1582 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Would it not have been possible for the member for Weyburn to take the 
Chair? 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — No, it would not. I call on the Attorney General. 
 

MOTION FOR SUSPENSION 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move in my capacity as House Leader, seconded by the Hon. 
Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacMurchy): 
 

That the member for Qu’Appelle be suspended from the service of this House for the remainder 
of today’s sitting. 

 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 32 
 
Pepper 
Bowerman 
Romanow 
Messer 
Snyder 
Kramer 
Robbins 
Baker 
Skoberg 
Gross 
Shillington 

MacMurchy 
Mostoway 
Kaeding 
Hammersmith 
Kowalchuk 
Dyck 
MacAuley 
Feschuk 
Byers 
Vickar 
Rolfes 

Tchorzewski 
Koskie 
Lusney 
Long 
Johnson 
Nelson 
Engel 
Poniatowksi 
Lingenfelter 
White 
 

 
 

NAYS — 11 
 
Birkbeck 
Larter 
Taylor 
Rousseau 

Swan 
Pickering 
Garner 
Muirhead 

Katzman 
Duncan 
McLeod

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:05 p.m. 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	QUESTIONS
	Premier Blakeney’s Support for Ryan Proposal
	Freeze on Power Rates
	SPC Profits
	Assistance to Farmers
	High Interest Rates
	High Interest Rates for Landlords
	Interest Rates re Farmers
	Water Supply Board
	Department of Education Grants
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
	ANNOUNCEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN — VOTE 26

